PHYSICS
Boundless
Boundless

Physics
Boundless

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/09/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19035TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: The Basics of Physics
1.1: The Basics of Physics
1.2: Units
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
2: Kinematics
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
2.2: Speed and Velocity
2.3: Acceleration
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
2.5: Free-Falling Objects
3: Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
3.2: Vectors
3.3: Projectile Motion
3.4: Multiple Velocities
4: The Laws of Motion
4.1: Introduction
4.2: Force and Mass
4.3: Newton’s Laws
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
4.5: Problem-Solving
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5: Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
5.8: Energy Conservation
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/190356: Work and Energy
6.1: Introduction
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
6.6: Power
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
6.8: Further Topics
7: Linear Momentum and Collisions
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
7.3: Collisions
7.4: Rocket Propulsion
7.5: Center of Mass
8: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque
8.1: Introduction
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
8.3: Stability
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
8.5: Applications of Statics
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
8.7: The Center of Gravity
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9: Rotational Kinematics, Angular Momentum, and Energy
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
9.2: Angular Acceleration
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
9.4: Dynamics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
9.8: Problem Solving
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
10: Fluids
10.1: Introduction
10.2: Density and Pressure
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
10.5: Fluids in Motion
10.6: Deformation of Solids

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1903511: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications
11.1: Overview
11.2: Flow in Tubes
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
11.4: Other Applications
Index
12: Temperature and Kinetic Theory
12.1: Introduction
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.3: Thermal Expansion
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
12.5: Kinetic Theory
12.6: Phase Changes
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
12.8: Thermal Stresses
12.9: Diffusion
13: Heat and Heat Transfer
13.1: Introduction
13.2: Specific Heat
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
13.5: Global Warming
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
14: Thermodynamics
14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
15: Waves and Vibrations
15.1: Introduction
15.2: Hooke’s Law
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
15.5: Waves
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
15.7: Waves on Strings
16: Sound
16.1: Introduction
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1903516.5: Further Topics
17: Electric Charge and Field
17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
18: Electric Potential and Electric Field
18.1: Overview
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
18.5: Applications
19: Electric Current and Resistance
19.1: Overview
19.2: Electric Current
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
19.4: Electric Power and Energy
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the World
20: Circuits and Direct Currents
20.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.4: Voltmeters and Ammeters
20.5: RC Circuits
21: Magnetism
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
21.2: Magnets
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and Conductors
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
22: Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.2: AC Circuits
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited

5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1903523: Electromagnetic Waves
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
24: Geometric Optics
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
24.3: Lenses
24.4: Mirrors
25: Vision and Optical Instruments
25.1: The Human Eye
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26: Wave Optics
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.2: Diffraction
26.3: Further Topics
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
27: Special Relativity
27.1: Introduction
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
28: Introduction to Quantum Physics
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
29: Atomic Physics
29.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
30: Nuclear Physics and Radioactivity
30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics

6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19035Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65423Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: The Basics of Physics
This page titled 1: The Basics of Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.1.1: The Basics of Physics
1.2: Units
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
1.4: Solving Physics ProblemsTopic hierarchy

1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144311.1: The Basics of Physics
Introduction: Physics and Matter
Physics is a study of how the universe behaves.
Apply physics to describe the function of daily life
Physics is a natural science that involves the study of matter and its motion through space and time, alon g with related concepts
such as energy and force. More broadly, it is the study of n ature in an attempt to understand how the universe behave s.
What is Phy sics?What is Phy sics?
What is Physics?: Mr. Andersen explains the importance of physics as a scien ce. History and virtual examples are used to give the
discipline context.
Physics uses the scientific method to help uncover the b asic principles governing light and matter, and to d iscover the implications
of those laws. It assumes that there are rules by which the universe functions, and that those laws can be at least partiallylearning objectives

1.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14431understood by humans. It is also commonly believed that those laws could be used to predict everything ab out the universe’s future
if complete information was available about the present st ate of all light and matter.
Matter is generally considered to be anything that ha s mass and volume. Many concepts integral to the stud y of classical physics
involve theories and laws that explain matter and its motion. The law of conservation of mass, for example, states that mass cannot
be created or destroyed. Further experiments and calc ulations in physics, therefore, take this law into accou nt when formulating
hypotheses to try to explain natural phenomena.
Physics aims to describe the function of everything ar ound us, from the movement of tiny charged particle s to the motion of
people, cars, and spaceships. In fact, almost everyth ing around you can be described quite accurately by the laws of physics.
Consider a smart phone; physics describes how electri city interacts with the various circuits inside the device. This knowledge
helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building the smart phone. Next, co nsider a GPS system;
physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, an d the time it takes to travel
that distance. When you use a GPS device in a vehicle, it utilizes these physics equations to determine th e travel time from one
location to another. The study of physics is capable of making significant contributions through advances in new technologies that
arise from theoretical breakthroughs.
Global Positioning System: GPS calculates the speed of an object, the distance over whi ch it travels, and the time it takes to travel
that distance using equations based on the laws of physic s.
Physics and Other Fields
Physics is the foundation of many disciplines and contr ibutes directly to chemistry, astronomy, engineering, an d most scientific
fields.
Explain why the study of physics is integral to the study o f other sciences
Physics and Other Disciplines
Physics is the foundation of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry deal s with the interactions of
atoms and molecules, so it is rooted in atomic and molecular physics. Most branches of engineering are app lied physics. In
architecture, physics is at the heart of structural st ability and is involved in acoustics, heating, lighti ng, and the cooling of buildings.
Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as the radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, a nd heat transfer in the Earth.
Some disciplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hyb rids of physics and other disciplines.learning objectives

1.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14431
Physics in Chemistry: The study of matter and electricity in physics is funda mental towards the understanding of concepts in
chemistry, such as the covalent bond.
Physics has many applications in the biological scienc es. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the pro perties of cell walls and
cell membranes. On the macroscopic level, it can expl ain the heat, work, and power associated with the human body. Physics is
involved in medical diagnostics, such as X-rays, magne tic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasonic blood flo w measurements.
Medical therapy sometimes directly involves physics: cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation, for in stance. Physics can also
explain sensory phenomena, such as how musical instrum ents make sound, how the eye detects color, and how laser s can transmit
information.
The boundary between physics and the other sciences i s not always clear. For instance, chemists study atoms and molecules, which
are what matter is built from, and there are some scie ntists who would be equally willing to call themselves phy sical chemists or
chemical physicists. It might seem that the distinctio n between physics and biology would be clearer, since physics seems to deal
with inanimate objects. In fact, almost all physicists would agree that the basic laws of physics that apply to molecules in a test tube
work equally well for the combination of molecules th at constitutes a bacterium. What differentiates phys ics from biology is that
many of the scientific theories that describe living things ultimately result from the fundamental laws o f physics, but cannot be
rigorously derived from physical principles.
It is not necessary to formally study all application s of physics. What is most useful is the knowledge of t he basic laws of physics
and skill in the analytical methods for applying th em. The study of physics can also improve your prob lem-solving skills.
Furthermore, physics has retained the most basic aspe cts of science, so it is used by all of the sciences. T he study of physics makes
other sciences easier to understand.
Models, Theories, and Laws
The terms model, theory, and law have exact meanings in relation to their usage in the stu dy of physics.
Define the terms model, theory, and law
Definition of Terms: Model, Theory, Law
In colloquial usage, the terms model, theory, and law are often used interchangeably or have different in terpretations than they do
in the sciences. In relation to the study of physics, howeve r, each term has its own specific meaning.
The laws of nature are concise descriptions of the universe around us. T hey are not explanations, but human statements of the
underlying rules that all natural processes follow. They are intrinsic to the universe; humans did not create them and we cannot
change them. We can only discover and understand them. The cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observat ion; science must
describe the universe as it is, not as we may imagine i t to be. Laws can never be known with absolute certaint y, because it is
impossible to perform experiments to establish and co nfirm a law in every possible scenario without excepti on. Physicists operate
under the assumption that all scientific laws and theo ries are valid until a counterexample is observed. I f a good-quality, verifiable
experiment contradicts a well-established law, then the law must be modified or overthrown completely.learning objectives

1.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14431Models
A model is a representation of something that is often too d ifficult (or impossible) to display directly. While a model’s design is
justified using experimental information, it is only accurate under limited situations. An example is the commonly used “planetary
model” of the atom, in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets o rbit the Sun. We cannot
observe electron orbits directly, but the mental ima ge helps explain the observations we can make, such a s the emission of light
from hot gases. Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For example, models can help physicists a nalyze a scenario and
perform a calculation, or they can be used to represent a s ituation in the form of a computer simulation.
Planetary Model of an Atom: The planetary model of the atom in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous
to the way planets orbit the Sun
Theories
A theory is an explanation for patterns in nature that is s upported by scientific evidence and verified multip le times by various
groups of researchers. Some theories include models to help visualize phenomena, whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of
gravity, for example, does not require a model or men tal image, because we can observe the objects directl y with our own senses.
The kinetic theory of gases, on the other hand, makes u se of a model in which a gas is viewed as being compos ed of atoms and
molecules. Atoms and molecules are too small to be ob served directly with our senses—thus, we picture them m entally to
understand what our instruments tell us about the beha vior of gases.
Laws
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by scientific e vidence and repeated
experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and theories are similar in that
they are both scientific statements that result fro m a tested hypothesis and are supported by scientif ic evidence. However, the
designation law is reserved for a concise and very g eneral statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that
energy is conserved during any process, or Newton’s sec ond law of motion, which relates force, mass, and accelera tion by the
simple equation. A theory, in contrast, is a less co ncise statement of observed phenomena. For example, the Theory of
Evolution and the Theory of Relativity cannot be ex pressed concisely enough to be considered a law. The biggest difference
between a law and a theory is that a law is much more c omplex and dynamic, and a theory is more explanatory. A law describes a
single observable point of fact, whereas a theory expl ains an entire group of related phenomena. And, where as a law is a postulate
that forms the foundation of the scientific method, a th eory is the end result of that process.
Key Points
Physics is a natural science that involves the study of matt er and its motion through space and time, along with related c oncepts
such as energy and force.
Matter is generally considered to be anything that has mas s and volume.
Scientific laws and theories express the general truths of nature and the body of knowledge they encompass. Thes e laws of
nature are rules that all natural processes appear to foll ow.

1.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14431Many scientific disciplines, such as biophysics, are hybri ds of physics and other sciences.
The study of physics encompasses all forms of matter and i ts motion in space and time.
The application of physics is fundamental towards signific ant contributions in new technologies that arise from t heoretical
breakthroughs.
Concepts in physics cannot be proven, they can only be s upported or disproven through observation and experiment ation.
A model is an evidence-based representation of somethi ng that is either too difficult or impossible to display d irectly.
A theory is an explanation for patterns in nature that i s supported by scientific evidence and verified multipl e times by various
groups of researchers.
A law uses concise language, often expressed as a mathema tical equation, to describe a generalized pattern in natu re that is
supported by scientific evidence and repeated experim ents.
Key Terms
matter: The basic structural component of the universe. Matte r usually has mass and volume.
scientific method: A method of discovering knowledge about the natural wo rld based in making falsifiable predictions
(hypotheses), testing them empirically, and developing pe er-reviewed theories that best explain the known data.
application: the act of putting something into operation
Model: A representation of something difficult or impossible to display directly
Law: A concise description, usually in the form of a math ematical equation, used to describe a pattern in nature
theory: An explanation for patterns in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by v arious
groups of researchers
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
scientific method. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scientific_method. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Physics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
matter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/matter. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/application. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-

1.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14431ShareAlike
Covalent bond. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Covalent_bond. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/model. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/theory. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Covalent bond. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Covalent_bond. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 1.1: The Basics of Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144321.2: Units
Length
Length is a physical measurement of distance that is fund amentally measured in the SI unit of a meter.
Distinguish SI and customary units of length
Length can be defined as a measurement of the physica l quantity of distance. Many qualitative observation s fundamental to physics
are commonly described using the measurement of leng th. The distance between objects, the rate at which ob jects are traveling,
and how much force an object exerts are all dependen t on length as a variable. In order to describe lengt h in a standardized and
quantitative manner, an accepted unit of measurement mus t be utilized.
Many different units of length are used around the wo rld. In the United States, the U.S. customary units operat ionally describe
length in terms of the basic unit of an inch. Varying lengths are thus described in relation to the inch, such as a foot equaling 12
inches, a yard equaling three feet, and a mile equaling 1,7 60 yards.
Though regional use of different measurement units is not generally problematic, it can raise issues of co mpatibility and
understanding when working abroad or collaboratively with international partners. As such, a standard unit of measurement that is
internationally accepted is needed. The basic unit of length as identified by the International System of Un its (SI) is the meter. The
meter is expressed more specifically in terms of speed of l ight.
One meter is defined as the distance that light travel s in a vacuum in of a second. All lengths are measur ed in terms
related to the meter, where its multiples are devised around the convenience of the number 10. For example, a centimeter is equal to
of a meter (or meters), and a kilometer is equal to 1,00 0 meters (or meters).
Meter Defined by Speed of Light: The meter is defined to be the distance that light trave ls in of a second in a vacuum.
Distance traveled is speed multiplied by time.
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemlearning objectives

1.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432Metric System – Length: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conv ersions.
Mass
Mass is the quantity of matter that an object contains, as m easured by its resistance to acceleration.
Explain the difference between mass and weight
Mass
Mass, specifically inertial mass, is a quantitative meas ure of an object’s resistance to acceleration. It i s an intrinsic property of an
object and does not change because of the environment. Th e SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg).
The kilogram is defined as being equal to the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram (IPK), which is alm ost exactly equal to
the mass of one liter of water. It is also the only SI un it that is directly defined by an artifact, rather th an a fundamental physical
property that can be reproduced in different labora tories. Four of the seven base units in the SI system are defined relative to the
kilogram, so the stability of this measurement is crucial for accurate and consistent measurements.
In 2005, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) recommended that the kilogram be red efined in terms of a
fundamental constant of nature, due to evidence that the International Prototype Kilogram will vary in mas s over time. At its 2011
meeting, the General Conference on Weights and Measu res (CGPM) agreed that the kilogram should be redefine d in terms of the
Planck constant. The conference deferred a final decision until its next meeting in 2014.
Prototype Mass Drifts: A graph of the relative change in mass of selected kilo gram prototypes.
learning objectives

1.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432Mass and Weight
In everyday usage, the mass of an object in kilogram s is often referred to as its weight. This value, thoug h given in kilograms, is
actually the non-SI unit of measure known as the kilog ram- force. In scientific terms, ‘weight’ refers to t he gravitational force
acting on a given body. This measurement changes depen ding on the gravitational pull of the opposing body. For example, a
person’s weight on the Earth is different than a per son’s weight on the moon because of the differences in the gravitational pull of
each body. In contrast, the mass of an object is an in trinsic property and remains the same regardless of gravitational fields.
Accordingly, astronauts in microgravity must exert 10 t imes more force to accelerate a 10-kg object at the same rate as a 1-kg
object, even though the differences in weight are impercep tible.
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stem
Metric System – Mass: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conve rsions.
Time
Time is the fundamental physical quantity of duration an d is measured by the SI Unit known as the second.

1.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432Relate time with other physical quantities
Time is one of the seven fundamental physical quanti ties in the International System (SI) of Units. Time is used to define other
quantities, such as velocity or acceleration, and a s such, it is important that it be standardized and quantified precisely. An
operational definition of time is highly useful in the cond uct of both advanced experiments and everyday affairs of l ife.
Historically, temporal measurement was a prime motiva tion in navigation and astronomy. Periodic events and motion have long
served as standards for units of time. For example, the movement of the sun across the sky, the phases of t he moon, the swing of a
pendulum, and the beat of a heart have all been used as a standard for time keeping. These events and stan dards, however, are
highly dynamic in nature and cannot reliably be uti lized for accurate quantitative measures. Between 10 00 and 1960 the second
was defined as of a mean solar day. This definition changed between 1960 and 1967 and was defined in term s of the period of
the Earth’s orbit around the Sun in 1900. Today, the SI Unit o f the second is defined in terms of radiation emitted by cesium atoms.
The second is now operationally defined as “the durati on of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation correspo nding to the transition
between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state o f the cesium 133 atom.” It follows that the hyperfine splitting in the ground
state of the cesium 133 atom is exactly 9,192,631,770 hertz. In other words, cesium atoms can be made to vi brate in a very steady
way, and these vibrations can be readily observed and counted. The second is the time required for 9,192,63 1,770 of these
vibrations to occur.learning objectives

1.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432
NIST-F1 Cesium Clock: NIST-F1 is referred to as a fountain clock because it uses a fountain-like movement of atoms to obtain its
improved reckoning of time.

1.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stem
Metric System – Time: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conve rsions.
Prefixes and Other Systems of Units
SI prefixes precede a basic unit of measure to indicate a multiple or fraction of the unit.
Apply prefixes to units and distinguish between SI and custom ary units
Prefixes
A metric prefix, or SI prefix, is a unit prefix that precedes a basic unit of measure to indicate a multi ple or fraction of the unit. Each
prefix has a unique symbol that is prepended to the unit symbol. The prefix kilo-, for example, may be added to gram to indicate
multiplication by one thousand; one kilogram is equa l to one thousand grams (1 kg = 1000 g). The prefix ce nti-, likewise, may be
added to meter to indicate division by one hundred; one centimeter is equal to one hundredth of a meter (1 cm = 0.01 m). Prefixes
in varying multiples of 10 are a feature of all for ms of the metric system, with many dating back to the s ystem’s introduction in the
learning objectives

1.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144321790s. Today, the prefixes are standardized for use in the International System of Units (SI) by the Interna tional Bureau of Weights
and Measures.There are twenty prefixes officially specif ied by SI.
SI Unit Prefixes: The twenty prefixes officially specified by the Intern ational System of Units
It is important to note that the kilogram is the on ly SI unit with a prefix as part of its name and symbo l. Because multiple prefixes
may not be used, in the case of the kilogram the pref ix names are used with the unit name “gram” and the prefix symbols are used
with the unit symbol “g. ” With this exception, any SI prefix may be used with any SI unit, including the degree Celsius and its
symbol °C.
Other Systems of Units
The SI Unit system, or the metric system, is used by the majority of countries in the world, and is the stand ard system agreed upon
by scientists and mathematicians. Colloquially, howeve r, other systems of units are used in many countries. The United States, for
example, teaches and uses the United States customary units. This system of units was developed from the English, or Imperial,
unit standards of the United Kingdom.The United States cus tomary units define measurements using different sta ndards than those
used in SI Units. The system for measuring length using the United States customary system is based on the inch, foot, yard, and
mile. Likewise, units of area are measured in terms of square feet, and units of capacity and volume are m easured in terms of cubic
inches, cubic feet, or cubic yards. Units of mass are commonly defined in terms of ounces and pounds, rat her than the SI unit of
kilograms.Other commonly used units from the United Stat es customary system include the fluid volume units of the teaspoon,
tablespoon, fluid ounce, US cup, pint, quart, and gallon, as well as the degrees Fahrenheit used to measure temperature.
Some units that are widely used are not a part of the International System of Units and are considered Non-SI Units. These units,
though not officially part of SI Units, are generally accepted for use in conjunction with SI units. These ca n include the minute,
hour, and day used in temporal measurements, the lite r for volumetric measurements, and the degree, minut e, and second used to
measure angles.

1.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stem
Metric System – Prefixes: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conv ersions.
Converting Units
Converting between units can be done through the use of con version factors or specific conversion formulas.
Apply factor-label method for converting units
Translating Systems of Measurement
It is often necessary to convert from one type of un it to another. Conversion of units is the conversion of different units of
measurement for the same quantity, typically using c onversion factors. For example, if you are reading a Eu ropean cookbook, some
quantities may be expressed in units of liters; if yo u’re cooking in the US in a standard kitchen with stand ard tools, you will need to
convert those measurements to cups. Or, perhaps you ar e reading walking directions from one location to an other and you are
interested in how many miles you will be walking. In thi s case, you will need to convert units of feet to mile s. This is a bit like
translating a substitution code, using a formula that help s you understand what one measure means in terms of another system.
learning objectives

1.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432
Unit Conversion in the Metric Sy stem - CLEAR & SIUnit Conversion in the Metric Sy stem - CLEAR & SI
Unit Conversion in the Metric System: EASY Unit Conversion in the Metric System – This simple e xtra help video tutorial
explains the metric system and how to make simple metric co nversions.
Conversion Methods
There are several ways to approach doing conversions. One commonly used method is known as the Factor-label method for
converting units, or the “railroad method. ”
The factor-label method is the sequential application of conversion factors expressed as fractions and arr anged so that any
dimensional unit appearing in both the numerator an d denominator of any of the fractions can be cancelle d out until only the
desired set of dimensional units is obtained. For exam ple, 10 miles per hour can be converted to meters per second by using a
sequence of conversion factors.
Each conversion factor is equivalent to the value of one. For example, starting with 1 mile = 1609 meters and dividing both sides of
the equation by 1 mile yields, which when simplified yields. Physically crossing out the units that
cancel each other out will also help visualize what’s left o ver.
Converting 1 year into seconds using the Factor-Label Method: Physically crossing out units that cancel out helps visuali ze the
“leftover” unit(s).
So, when the units mile and hour are cancelled out and the arithmetic is done, 10 miles per hour converts to 4.47 me ters per second.

1.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432A limitation of the factor-label method is that it can only convert between units that have a constant ratio that can be multiplied, or
a multiplication factor. This method cannot be used between units that have a displacement, or differenc e factor. An example is the
conversion between degrees Celsius and kelvins, or bet ween Celsius and Fahrenheit. For these, it is best to use the specific
conversion formulas.
For example, if you are planning a trip abroad in Spai n and the weather forecast predicts the weather to be mostly cloudy and 16°C,
you may want to convert the temperature into °F, a un it that you are more comfortable interpreting. In o rder to do this, you would
need to know the conversion formula from Celsius to Fahren heit. This formula is:.
So you would then know that 16°C is equivalent to 60.8°F and be able to pack the right type of clothing to be comfortab le.
Key Points
The SI unit for length is the meter.
One meter is defined as the distance that light travels in a v acuum in of a second.
Derivatives of measurement units related to the meter are devised around the convenience of the number 10.
The kilogram is the only SI unit directly defined by the a rtifact itself.
Mass is a property that does not depend on gravitational fields, unlike weight.
One kilogram is defined as the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram (IPK), a platinum-iridium alloy cylinder.
One kilogram is almost exactly equal to the mass of one lit er of water.
Time is a physical quantity of duration.
The SI Unit for time is the second.
The second is operationally defined in terms of radiati on emitted by cesium atoms.
The twenty standardized prefixes for use in the Internatio nal System of Units are derived from multiples of 10.
The kilogram is the only SI unit with a prefix as part of its name and symbol; as such, SI unit prefixes are prepended to the unit
gram.
The United States customary units define measurements ba sed on the English, or Imperial, unit standards.
Conversion of units is the conversion between different unit s of measurement for the same quantity, typically throug h
multiplicative conversion factors.
The factor-label method is the sequential application of conversion factors expressed as fractions in which uni ts appearing in
both the numerator and denominator can be cancelled ou t, leaving only the desired set of units.
For conversions that have a difference factor, specific co nversion formulas should be used.
Key Terms
Length: How far apart objects are physically.
acceleration: the rate at which the velocity of a body changes with time
inertia: the tendency of an object to resist any change in its motion
Radiation: the emission of energy as electromagnetic waves or as mov ing or oscillating subatomic particles.
prefix: That which is prefixed; especially one or more letters or syllables added to the beginning of a word to modify it s
meaning; as, pre- in prefix, con- in conjure.
conversion: a change between different units of measurement for the same quantity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

1.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432Unit of length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_of_length. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kilogram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilogram. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Second. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Second. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/radiation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
United States customary units. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_customary_units. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
SI Unit Prefixes. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/SI_Unit_Prefixes. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
prefix. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prefix. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

1.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Metric prefix. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Metric System - Prefixes. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Units conversion by factor-label. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Units_conversion_by_factorlabel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/conversion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Metric prefix. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Metric System - Prefixes. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Unit Conversion in the Metric System. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEDVddQvimI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 1.2: Units is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144331.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is a way of writing numbers that are too big or too small in a convenient and standard form.
Convert properly between standard and scientific notat ion and identify appropriate situations to use it
Scientific Notation: A Matter of Convenience
Scientific notation is a way of writing numbers that ar e too big or too small in a convenient and standard form. Scientific notation
has a number of useful properties and is commonly used in calculators and by scientists, mathematicians a nd engineers. In
scientific notation all numbers are written in the f orm of (multiplied by ten raised to the power of), where the exponent)
is an integer, and the coefficient (is any real number.
Scientific Notation: There are three parts to writing a number in scientif ic notation: the coefficient, the base, and the exponent.
Most of the interesting phenomena in our universe are not on the human scale. It would take about 1,000,000, 000,000,000,000,000
bacteria to equal the mass of a human body. Thomas Y oung’s discovery that light was a wave preceded the use of scientific
notation, and he was obliged to write that the time re quired for one vibration of the wave was “ of a millio nth of a millionth of a
second”; an inconvenient way of expressing the point. Scientific notation is a less awkward and wordy way to write very large and
very small numbers such as these.
A Simple System
Scientific notation means writing a number in terms of a product of something from 1 to 10 and something e lse that is a power of
ten.
For instance,
, and so forth…
Each number is ten times bigger than the previous on e. Since is ten times smaller than, it makes sense to use the notation
to stand for one, the number that is in turn ten t imes smaller than. Continuing on, we can write to st and for 0.1, the
number ten times smaller than. Negative exponents are us ed for small numbers:
Scientific notation displayed calculators can take o ther shortened forms that mean the same thing. For exam ple, (written
notation) is the same as (notation on some calculators) and (notation on some other calculators).learning objectives

1.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14433Round-off Error
A round-off error is the difference between the calcula ted approximation of a number and its exact mathematical value.
Explain the impact round-off errors may have on calcula tions, and how to reduce this impact
Round-off Error
A round-off error, also called a rounding error, is the difference between the calculated approximation of a number and its exact
mathematical value. Numerical analysis specifically tri es to estimate this error when using approximation e quations, algorithms, or
both, especially when using finitely many digits to rep resent real numbers. When a sequence of calculations subject to rounding
errors is made, errors may accumulate, sometimes dominatin g the calculation.
Calculations rarely lead to whole numbers. As such, value s are expressed in the form of a decimal with infinit e digits. The more
digits that are used, the more accurate the calcula tions will be upon completion. Using a slew of digits i n multiple calculations,
however, is often unfeasible if calculating by hand a nd can lead to much more human error when keeping tr ack of so many digits.
To make calculations much easier, the results are often ’r ounded off’ to the nearest few decimal places.
For example, the equation for finding the area of a circle is. The number (pi) has infinitely many dig its, but can be
truncated to a rounded representation of as 3.1415926 5359. However, for the convenience of performing calcu lations by hand, this
number is typically rounded even further, to the nea rest two decimal places, giving just 3.14. Though this t echnically decreases the
accuracy of the calculations, the value derived is typica lly ‘close enough’ for most estimation purposes.
However, when doing a series of calculations, numbers ar e rounded off at each subsequent step. This leads to an accumulation of
errors, and if profound enough, can misrepresent calculat ed values and lead to miscalculations and mistakes.
The following is an example of round-off error:
Rounding these numbers off to one decimal place or to the nearest whole number would change the answer to 5.7 and 6,
respectively. The more rounding off that is done, the more errors are introduced.
Order of Magnitude Calculations
An order of magnitude is the class of scale of any amo unt in which each class contains values of a fixed rat io to the class preceding
it.
Choose when it is appropriate to perform an order-of-magn itude calculation
Orders of Magnitude
An order of magnitude is the class of scale of any amo unt in which each class contains values of a fixed rat io to the class preceding
it. In its most common usage, the amount scaled is 10, and the scale is the exponent applied to this amou nt (therefore, to be an
order of magnitude greater is to be 10 times, or 10 t o the power of 1, greater). Such differences in order of magnitude can be
measured on the logarithmic scale in “decades,” or fac tors of ten. It is common among scientists and technolo gists to say that a
parameter whose value is not accurately known or is k nown only within a range is “on the order of” some valu e. The order of
magnitude of a physical quantity is its magnitude in powers of ten when the physical quantity is expressed in powers of ten with
one digit to the left of the decimal.
Orders of magnitude are generally used to make very approximate comparisons and reflect very large diffe rences. If two numbers
differ by one order of magnitude, one is about ten t imes larger than the other. If they differ by two ord ers of magnitude, they differ
by a factor of about 100. Two numbers of the same ord er of magnitude have roughly the same scale — the la rger value is less than
ten times the smaller value.learning objectives
learning objectives

1.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14433It is important in the field of science that estimat es be at least in the right ballpark. In many situatio ns, it is often sufficient for an
estimate to be within an order of magnitude of the v alue in question. Although making order-of-magnitude estimates seems simple
and natural to experienced scientists, it may be completely u nfamiliar to the less experienced.
Some of the mental steps of estimating in orders of m agnitude are illustrated in answering the following e xample question:
Roughly what percentage of the price of a tomato comes fro m the cost of transporting it in a truck?
Guessing the Number of Jelly Beans: Can you guess how many jelly beans are in the jar? If you try t o guess directly, you
will almost certainly underestimate. The right way to do it is to estimate the linear dimensions and then estimate t he volume
indirectly.
Incorrect solution: Let’s say the trucker needs to ma ke a prot on the trip. Taking into account her beni ts, the cost of gas, and
maintenance and payments on the truck, let’s say the total cost is more like 2000. You might guess about 5 000 tomatoes would
t in the back of the truck, so the extra cost per t omato is 40 cents. That means the cost of transporti ng one tomato is
comparable to the cost of the tomato itself.
The problem here is that the human brain is not ver y good at estimating area or volume — it turns out t he estimate of 5000
tomatoes fitting in the truck is way off. (This is why p eople have a hard time in volume-estimation contests, such as the one
shown below.) When estimating area or volume, you are much better off estimating linear dimensions and co mputing the
volume from there.
So, here’s a better solution: As before, let’s say the co st of the trip is $2000. The dimensions of the bin a re probably 4m by 2m
by 1m, for a volume of. Since our goal is just an ord er-of-magnitude estimate, let’s round that volume off to the nearest
power of ten:. The shape of a tomato doesn’t follow linear dimensions, but since this is just an estimat e, let’s pretend
that a tomato is an 0.1m by 0.1m by 0.1m cube, with a volume of. We can nd the total number of tomatoes by
dividing the volume of the bin by the volume of one tomato: tomatoes. The transportation cost per tomat o is
per tomato. That means that transportation really d oesn’t contribute very much to the cost of a tomato.
Approximating the shape of a tomato as a cube is an e xample of another general strategy for making order -of-magnitude
estimates.
Key Points
Scientific notation means writing a number in terms of a prod uct of something from 1 to 10 and something else that is a power
of 10.
In scientific notation all numbers are written in the form of (a times ten raised to the power of b).
Each consecutive exponent number is ten times bigger tha n the previous one; negative exponents are used for sma ll numbers.
When a sequence of calculations subject to rounding er ror is made, these errors can accumulate and lead to the
misrepresentation of calculated values.Example:

1.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14433Increasing the number of digits allowed in a representation reduces the magnitude of possible round-off errors, but ma y not
always be feasible, especially when doing manual calculatio ns.
The degree to which numbers are rounded off is relative t o the purpose of calculations and the actual value.
Orders of magnitude are generally used to make very appr oximate comparisons and reflect very large differences.
In the field of science, it is often sufficient for an esti mate to be within an order of magnitude of the value in que stion.
When estimating area or volume, you are much better off est imating linear dimensions and computing volume from those l inear
dimensions.
Key Terms
exponent: The power to which a number, symbol or expression is to be raised. For example, the 3 in.
Scientific notation: A method of writing, or of displaying real numbers as a decimal number between 1 and 10 followed by an
integer power of 10
approximation: An imprecise solution or result that is adequate for a defined purpose.
Order of Magnitude: The class of scale or magnitude of any amount, where ea ch class contains values of a fixed ratio (most
often 10) to the class preceding it. For example, something t hat is 2 orders of magnitude larger is 100 times larger; so mething
that is 3 orders of magnitude larger is 1000 times larger; and something that is 6 orders of magnitude larger is one million times
larger, because and
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Scientific notation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_notation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Significant figures. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Significant_figures. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42120/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Scientific notation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific%20notation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
exponent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/exponent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Round-off error. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Round-off_error. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
approximation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/approximation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Order of magnitude. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_magnitude. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Order of Magnitude. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Order%20of%20Magnitude. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution

1.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14433This page titled 1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Boundless.

1.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144341.4: Solving Physics Problems
Dimensional Analysis
Any physical quantity can be expressed as a product of a co mbination of the basic physical dimensions.
Calculate the conversion from one kind of dimension t o another
Dimensions
The dimension of a physical quantity indicates how it rel ates to one of the seven basic quantities. These fundamenta l quantities are:
[M] Mass
[L] Length
[T] Time
[A] Current
[K] Temperature
[mol] Amount of a Substance
[cd] Luminous Intensity
As you can see, the symbol is enclosed in a pair of squ are brackets. This is often used to represent the dim ension of individual basic
quantity. An example of the use of basic dimensions is speed, which has a dimension of 1 in length and -1 in time;.
Any physical quantity can be expressed as a product of a co mbination of the basic physical dimensions.
Dimensional Analysis
Dimensional analysis is the practice of checking relat ions between physical quantities by identifying their dimensions. The
dimension of any physical quantity is the combinati on of the basic physical dimensions that compose it. Dimensional analysis is
based on the fact that physical law must be independ ent of the units used to measure the physical variab les. It can be used to check
the plausibility of derived equations, computations an d hypotheses.
Derived Dimensions
The dimensions of derived quantities may include few or all dimensions in individual basic quantities. In o rder to understand the
technique to write dimensions of a derived quantity, we consider the case of force. Force is defined as:
The dimension of acceleration, represented as [a], i s itself a derived quantity being the ratio of veloc ity and time. In turn, velocity is
also a derived quantity, being ratio of length and time.
Dimensional Conversion
In practice, one might need to convert from one kin d of dimension to another. For common conversions, you mi ght already know
how to convert off the top of your head. But for less comm on ones, it is helpful to know how to find the conversion fac tor:
where n represents the amount per u dimensions. You can then use ratios to figure out the conversion:learning objectives

1.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434Trigonometry
Trigonometry is central to the use of free body diagrams, which help visually represent difficult physics problem s.
Explain why trigonometry is useful in determining horizon tal and vertical components of forces
Trigonometry and Solving Physics Problems
In physics, most problems are solved much more easily when a free body diagram is used. Free body diagrams use geometry and
vectors to visually represent the problem. Trigonome try is also used in determining the horizontal and v ertical components of
forces and objects. Free body diagrams are very helpful in visually identifying which components are unknown and where the
moments are applied. They can help analyze a problem, wheth er it is static or dynamic.
When people draw free body diagrams, often not everyth ing is perfectly parallel and perpendicular. Sometim es people need to
analyze the horizontal and vertical components of f orces and object orientation. When the force or obje ct is not acting parallel to
the x or y axis, people can employ basic trigonometry to use the simplest components of the action to analyze it. B asically,
everything should be considered in terms of x and y, which sometimes takes some manipulation.
Free Body Diagram: The rod is hinged from a wall and is held with the help of a string.
A rod ‘AB’ is hinged at ‘A’ from a wall and is held st ill with the help of a string, as shown in. This exerc ise involves drawing the
free body diagram. To make the problem easier, the f orce F will be expressed in terms of its horizontal and ver tical components.
Removing all other elements from the image helps produc e the finished free body diagram.
Free Body Diagram: The free body diagram as a finished product
Given the finished free body diagram, people can use t heir knowledge of trigonometry and the laws of sine and cosine to
mathematically and numerical represent the horizontal a nd vertical components:
General Problem-Solving Tricks
Free body diagrams use geometry and vectors to visually r epresent the problem.learning objectives

1.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434Construct a free-body diagram for a physical scenario
In physics, most problems are solved much more easily wh en a free body diagram is used. This uses geometry and vectors to
visually represent to problem, and trigonometry is al so used in determining horizontal and vertical compo nents of forces and
objects.
Purpose: Free body diagrams are very helpful in visuall y identifying which components are unknown, where the moments are
applied, and help analyze a problem, whether static or dyn amic.
How to Make A Free Body Diagram
To draw a free body diagram, do not worry about drawing it to scale, this will just be what you use to help yo urself identify the
problems. First you want to model the body, in one of three wa ys:
As a particle. This model may be used when any turning effe cts are zero or have zero interest even though the b ody itself may
be extended. The body may be represented by a small symbol ic blob and the diagram reduces to a set of concurre nt arrows. A
force on a particle is a bound vector.
rigid extended. Stresses and strains are of no interest but turning e ffects are. A force arrow should lie along the line of force, but
where along the line is irrelevant. A force on an extende d rigid body is a sliding vector.
non-rigid extended. The point of application of a force becomes crucial and has to be indicated on the diagram. A force on a
non-rigid body is a bound vector. Some engineers use the tail of the arrow to indicate the point of application. Others use the
tip.
Do’s and Don’ts
What to include: Since a free body diagram represent s the body itself and the external forces on it. So you will want to include the
following things in the diagram:
The body: This is usually sketched in a schematic way depe nding on the body – particle/extended, rigid/non-rigid – and on what
questions are to be answered. Thus if rotation of the body and torque is in consideration, an indication of size and s hape of the
body is needed.
The external forces: These are indicated by labelled a rrows. In a fully solved problem, a force arrow is capable of indicating the
direction, the magnitude the point of application. The se forces can be friction, gravity, normal force, drag, tensio n, etc…
Do not include:
Do not show bodies other than the body of interest.
Do not show forces exerted by the body.
Internal forces acting on various parts of the body by othe r parts of the body.
Any velocity or acceleration is left out.learning objectives

1.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434
How T o Solve Any Phy sics ProblemHow T o Solve Any Phy sics Problem
How To Solve Any Physics Problem: Learn five simple steps in five minutes! In this epi sode we cover the most effective
problem-solving method I’ve encountered and call upon some fuzzy friends to help us remember the steps.
Free Body Diagram: Use this figure to work through the example problem.

1.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434Key Points
Dimensional analysis is the practice of checking relations am ount physical quantities by identifying their dimension s.
It is common to be faced with a problem that uses differen t dimensions to express the same basic quantity. The fol lowing
equation can be used to find the conversion factor bet ween the two derived dimensions:.
Dimensional analysis can also be used as a simple check to computations, theories and hypotheses.
It is important to identify the problem and the unknowns and draw them in a free body diagram.
The laws of cosine and sine can be used to determine the vertical and horizontal components of the different ele ments of the
diagram.
Free body diagrams use geometry and vectors to visually r epresent physics problems.
A free body diagram lets you visually isolate the probl em you are trying to solve, and simplify it into simple geo metry and
trigonometry.
When drawing these diagrams, it is helpful to only draw the body it self, and the forces acting on it.
Drawing other objects and internal forces can condense th e diagram and cause it to be less helpful.
Key Terms
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
trigonometry: The branch of mathematics that deals with the relationshi ps between the sides and the angles of triangles and the
calculations based on them, particularly the trigonometr ic functions.
static: Fixed in place; having no motion.
dynamic: Changing; active; in motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Dimensional analysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimensional_analysis. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Dimensional Analysis. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15037/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
trigonometry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trigonometry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_body_diagram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dynamic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dynamic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

1.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434Free Body Diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Free_Body_Diagram.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
How To Solve Any Physics Problem. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YocWuzi4JhY. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 1.4: Solving Physics Problems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Fluids
10.1: Introduction
10.2: Density and Pressure
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
10.5: Fluids in Motion
10.6: Deformation of Solids
This page titled 10: Fluids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449410.1: Introduction
Assess the distinguishing characteristics of the four state s of matter
There are a number of properties that can be observe d in a material that identify what state the matter i s in — solid, liquid, gas, or
plasma.
Solids
Solid: Solids are in a state of matter that maintains a fixed volume and shape.
A solid is in a state of matter that maintains a fixed volume and shape. A solid’s particles fit closely to gether. The forces between
the particles are so strong that the particles can n ot move freely; they can only vibrate. This causes a solid to be a stable, noncompressible shape with definite volume.
Liquids
Liquid: Liquids maintain a fixed volume, but their shape will mol d to the shape of the container they are being held in.
A liquid maintains a fixed volume, but its shape will mold to the shape of the container it is being hel d in. In, you can see that even
though the liquid’s shape is determined by the conta iner, it has a free surface that is not controlled by the container. The particles
are close together but not as close as in solids; the y are still able to move around, which causes the liqu id to flow. Liquids usually
have a higher volume than their solid counterparts, exce pt for certain molecules, such as H O (water).
Gases
Gas: The particles are much farther from each other, usual ly a farther length than the size of the particles, and mov e a lot
shows a gas, whose particles move around a lot and are much farther apart from each other, usually farther a part than the diameter
of the particles themselves. The gas behaves like a liquid; the particles are moving but are still attr acted to each other, so they still
flow. Unlike a solid or a liquid, the gas will try to fill whatever container it is in, adapting its volume accord ingly.learning objectives

10.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14494Plasma
Plasma is a gas that has been ionized. That is to say, sufficient energy has been supplied to the gas such t hat the electrons have
enough energy to escape their atoms or molecules. Plasm a contains ions and electrons that can move around fre ely. Matter in the
plasma state has variable volume and shape. Plasma is t he most common form of visible matter in the univers e. Lightning, sparks,
neon lights, and the sun are all examples of matter in the plasma state.
Plasma: Matter in the plasma state has variable volume and shap e, but as well as neutral atoms, it contains a significan t number of
ions and electrons, both of which can move around freely.
Phase Transitions
shows the different states of matter and how they can change from one to another as a function of enthalp y and pressure and
temperature changes. A solid can change to a liquid with an enthalpy increase. The process of a liquid g oing to a solid is known as
melting. A liquid can change into a gas when it hits its boiling point or can even enter a plasma state if the enthalpy is increased
enough. When the enthalpy is lowered, a liquid can tra nsform into a solid through freezing. Sometimes, a sol id can skip freezing
and go directly to a gaseous state; this process is called su blimation.
States of Matter: This figure illustrates the relationship between the en thalpy of a system and the state of matter that the system is
in.
What is a Fluid?
A fluid is a substance that continually deforms (flows) u nder an applied shear stress.
Explain the properties of substances under an applied she ar stress
A fluid is a substance that continually deforms (flows) under an applied shear stress. Fluids are a subset of the states of matter and
include three of the four states—liquids, gases, and plasma (shown in).learning objectives

10.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14494
Four Fundamental States of Matter: Four fundamental states of matter: 1) top left corner corr esponds to solid; 2) top right corner
corresponds to liquid; 3) bottom left corner correspond s to gas; 4) bottom right corner corresponds to plasma.
Liquids form a free surface (i.e., a surface not crea ted by the container) while gases do not. The distincti on between solids and fluid
is not entirely obvious. The distinction is made by evaluating the viscosity of the substance. Silly Putty can be considered to behave
like a solid or a fluid, depending on the time period over which it is observed. It is best described as a viscoelastic fluid.
Fluids display properties such as:
a) not resisting deformation or resisting it only lightly (viscosity), and
b) the ability to flow (also described as the ability to tak e on the shape of the container).
This also means that all fluids have the property of fluidity. These properties are typically a functio n of their inability to support a
shear stress in static equilibrium.
Solids can be subjected to shear stresses, and norma l stresses—both compressive and tensile. In contrast, i deal fluids can only be
subjected to normal, compressive stress (called pressu re). Real fluids display viscosity and so are capable of being subjected to low
levels of shear stress.
Although the term fluid includes both the liquid and gas phases, it is also c ommonly used as a synonym for liquid, with no
implication that gas could also be present. For exam ple, “brake fluid” is hydraulic oil and will not perf orm its required function if
there is gas in it. This colloquial usage of the ter m is also common in the fields of medicine and nutri tion (e.g., “take plenty of
fluids”).
Key Points
Solids are non-compressible and have constant volume and con stant shape.
Liquids are non-compressible and have constant volum e but can change shape. A liquid’s shape is dictated by th e shape of the
container it is in.
Gases do not have a constant volume or shape; they not only take the shape of the container they are in, they try to f ill the entire
container.
Matter in the plasma state has variable volume and shape. Plasma contains ions and electrons, both of which can move a round
freely.
Fluids are a subset of the states of matter and include liquid s, gases, and plasma.
Fluids display properties such as: not resisting deformati on or resisting it only lightly (viscosity), and the abilit y to flow (also
described as the ability to take on the shape of the conta iner).
Ideal fluids can only be subjected to normal, compress ive stress which is called pressure. Real fluids display vis cosity and thus
are capable of being subjected to low levels of shear st ress.
Key Items
plasma: a state of matter consisting of partially ionized gas

10.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14494enthalpy: the total amount of energy in a system, including both t he internal energy and the energy needed to displace its
environment
sublimation: the transition of a substance from the solid phase dire ctly to the vapor state such that it does not pass through t he
intermediate, liquid phase
fluidity: A measure of the extent to which something is fluid. The reciprocal of its viscosity.
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
shear stress: The component of stress that causes parallel layers of a material to move relative to each other in their own planes.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
sublimation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sublimation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
enthalpy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enthalpy. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
plasma. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plasma. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Physics matter state transition 1 en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Physics_matter_state_transition_1_en. svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron Sea (Plasma). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electron_Sea_(Plasma).jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Teilchenmodell Fluessigkeit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Teilchenmodell_Fluessigkeit.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Stohrem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stohrem.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fluids. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluids. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, What Is a Fluid?. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42186/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
fluidity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fluidity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
shear stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shear_stress. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Physics matter state transition 1 en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Physics_matter_state_transition_1_en. svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron Sea (Plasma). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electron_Sea_(Plasma).jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Teilchenmodell Fluessigkeit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Teilchenmodell_Fluessigkeit.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Stohrem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stohrem.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/de/Four_Fundamental_State s_of_Matter.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

10.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14494This page titled 10.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449510.2: Density and Pressure
Identify factors that determine the pressure exerted by t he gas
Pressure is an important physical quantity—it plays an essential role in topics ranging from thermodynamics to solid and fluid
mechanics. As a scalar physical quantity (having mag nitude but no direction), pressure is defined as the force per unit area applied
perpendicular to the surface to which it is applied. Pressure c an be expressed in a number of units depending on the cont ext of use.
AP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s Principle
Pressure and Pascal’s Principle: A brief introduction to pressure and Pascal’s Principle, i ncluding hydraulics.
Units, Equations and Representations
In SI units, the unit of pressure is the Pascal (Pa), whi ch is equal to a Newton / meter (N/m). Other important uni ts of pressure
include the pound per square inch (psi) and the stan dard atmosphere (atm). The elementary mathematical expression for pressure is
given by:
where is pressure, is the force acting perpendicular to the surface to which this force is applied, and is the area of the surface.
Any object that possesses weight, whether at rest or not, exerts a pressure upon the surface with which it is in contact. The
magnitude of the pressure exerted by an object on a given surface is equal to its weight acting in the di rection perpendicular to that
surface, divided by the total surface area of conta ct between the object and the surface. shows the grap hical representations andlearning objectives
2 2

10.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495corresponding mathematical expressions for the case i n which a force acts perpendicular to the surface of contact, as well as the
case in which a force acts at angle θ relative to the sur face.
Representation of Pressure: This image shows the graphical representations and corresp onding mathematical expressions for the
case in which a force acts perpendicular to the surface of contact, as well as the case in which a force acts at angle θ re lative to the
surface.
Pressure as a Function of Surface Area
Since pressure depends only on the force acting perpe ndicular to the surface upon which it is applied, onl y the force component
perpendicular to the surface contributes to the press ure exerted by that force on that surface. Pressure ca n be increased by either
increasing the force or by decreasing the area or ca n oppositely be decreased by either decreasing the force or increasing the area.
illustrates this concept. A rectangular block weighin g 1000 N is first placed horizontally. It has an area of contact (with the surface
upon which it is resting) of 0.1 m, thus exerting a pressure of 1,000 Pa on that surface. That same block in a different
configuration (also in Figure 2), in which the block is placed vertically, has an area of contact with the surface upon which it is
resting of 0.01 m, thus exerting a pressure of 10,000 Pa—10 times larger than the first configuration due to a decrease in the
surface area by a factor of 10.
Pressure as a Function of Surface Area: Pressure can be increased by either increasing the forc e or by decreasing the area or can
oppositely be decreased by either decreasing the force or increasing the area.
A good illustration of this is the reason a sharp kni fe is far more effective for cutting than a blunt k nife. The same force applied by a
sharp knife with a smaller area of contact will exert a much greater pressure than a blunt knife having a considerably larger area of
contact. Similarly, a person standing on one leg on a trampoline causes a greater displacement of the tra mpoline than that same
person standing on the same trampoline using two legs —not because the individual exerts a larger force when standing on one leg,
but because the area upon which this force is exerte d is decreased, thus increasing the pressure on the t rampoline. Alternatively, an
object having a weight larger than another object of the same dimensionality and area of contact with a g iven surface will exert a
greater pressure on that surface due to an increase i n force. Finally, when considering a given force of c onstant magnitude acting on
a constant area of a given surface, the pressure exer ted by that force on that surface will be greater th e larger the angle of that force
as it acts upon the surface, reaching a maximum when that forc e acts perpendicular to the surface.
Liquids and Gases: Fluids
Just as a solid exerts a pressure on a surface upon which it is in contact, liquids and gases likewise exert pre ssures on surfaces and
objects upon which they are in contact with. The pressu re exerted by an ideal gas on a closed container in which it is confined is
best analyzed on a molecular level. Gas molecules in a gas container move in a random manner throughout t he volume of the
container, exerting a force on the container walls u pon collision. Taking the overall average force of a ll the collisions of the gas
molecules confined within the container over a unit time allows for a proper measurement of the effectiv e force of the gas
molecules on the container walls. Given that the contai ner acts as a confining surface for this net force, the gas molecules exert a
pressure on the container. For such an ideal gas con fined within a rigid container, the pressure exerted by the gas molecules can be
calculated using the ideal gas law:2

10.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495where n is the number of gas molecules, R is the ideal gas constant (R = 8.314 J mol K), T is the temperature of the gas, and V is
the volume of the container.
The pressure exerted by the gas can be increased by: increasing the number of collisions of gas molecules per unit time by
increasing the number of gas molecules; increasing th e kinetic energy of the gas by increasing the temper ature; or decreasing the
volume of the container. offers a representation of the ideal gas law, as well as the effect of varying th e equation parameters on the
gas pressure. Another common type of pressure is that e xerted by a static liquid or hydrostatic pressure. Hydr ostatic pressure is
most easily addressed by treating the liquid as a co ntinuous distribution of matter, and may be considered a measure of energy per
unit volume or energy density. We will further discuss hy drostatic pressure in other sections.
Pressure of an Ideal Gas: This image is a representation of the ideal gas law, as wel l as the effect of varying the equation
parameters on the gas pressure.
Variation of Pressure With Depth
Pressure within static fluids depends on the properties of the fluid, the acceleration due to gravity, and the dep th within the fluid.
Identify factors that determine the pressure exerted by s tatic liquids and gases
Pressure is defined in simplest terms as force per unit area. However, when dealing with pressures exerted by gase s and liquids, it is
most convenient to approach pressure as a measure of energy per unit volume by means of the definition o f work (W = F·d). The
derivation of pressure as a measure of energy per un it volume from its definition as force per unit area is given in. Since, for gases
and liquids, the force acting on a system contributi ng to pressure does not act on a specific point or particular surface, but rather as
a distribution of force, analyzing pressure as a mea sure of energy per unit volume is more appropriate. For liquids and gases at rest,
the pressure of the liquid or gas at any point within the medium is called the hydrostatic pressure. At any such point within a
medium, the pressure is the same in all directions, as if the pressure was not the same in all directions, the fluid, whether it is a gas
or liquid, would not be static. Note that the following discussion and expressions pertain only to incompressi ble fluids at static
equilibrium.
Energy per Unit Volume: This equation is the derivation of pressure as a measu re of energy per unit volume from its definition as
force per unit area.
The pressure exerted by a static liquid depends only on the depth, density of the liquid, and the accele ration due to gravity. gives
the expression for pressure as a function of depth wit hin an incompressible, static liquid as well as the der ivation of this equation
from the definition of pressure as a measure of energ y per unit volume (ρ is the density of the gas, g i s the acceleration due to
gravity, and h is the depth within the liquid). For any given liquid with constant density throughout, pressure increases with-1 -1
learning obectives

10.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495increasing depth. For example, a person under water at a depth of h will experience half the pressure as a person under water at a
depth of. For many liquids, the density can be assu med to be nearly constant throughout the volume of t he liquid and, for
virtually all practical applications, so can the accel eration due to gravity (g = 9.81 m/s). As a result, pre ssure within a liquid is
therefore a function of depth only, with the pressure increasing at a linear rate with respect to increasin g depth. In practical
applications involving calculation of pressure as a function of depth, an important distinction must be made as to whether the
absolute or relative pressure within a liquid is desi red. Equation 2 by itself gives the pressure exerted b y a liquid relative to
atmospheric pressure, yet if the absolute pressure is desired, the atmospheric pressure must then be added t o the pressure exerted by
the liquid alone.
Pressure as Energy per Unit Volume: This equation gives the expression for pressure as a fu nction of depth within an
incompressible, static liquid as well as the derivation of th is equation from the definition of pressure as a measu re of energy per
unit volume (ρ is the density of the gas, g is the accelerat ion due to gravity, and h is the depth within the liquid).
When analyzing pressure within gases, a slightly differe nt approach must be taken as, by the nature of gase s, the force contributing
to pressure arises from the average number of gas m olecules occupying a certain point within the gas pe r unit time. Thus the force
contributing to the pressure of a gas within the medi um is not a continuous distribution as for liquids an d the barometric equation
given in must be utilized to determine the pressure e xerted by the gas at a certain depth (or height) wit hin the gas (p is the pressure
at h = 0, M is the mass of a single molecule of gas, g is the acceleration due to gravity, k is the Boltzm ann constant, T is the
temperature of the gas, and h is the height or dept h within the gas). Equation 3 assumes that the gas is i ncompressible and that the
pressure is hydrostatic.
Pressure within a gas: The force contributing to the pressure of a gas within the medium is not a continuous distribution as for
liquids and the barometric equation given in this figure m ust be utilized to determine the pressure exerted by the gas at a certain
depth (or height) within the gas (p0 is the pressure at h = 0, M is the mass of a single molecule of gas, g is the accele ration due to
gravity, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperat ure of the gas, and h is the height or depth within the gas)
Static Equilibrium
Any region or point, or any static object within a static flui d is in static equilibrium where all forces and torques are equal to zero.
Identify required conditions for a fluid to be in rest
Static equilibrium is a particular state of a physica l system. It is qualitatively described by an objec t at rest and by the sum of all
forces, with the sum of all torques acting on that obj ect being equal to zero. Static objects are in static equilibrium, with the net
force and net torque acting on that object being eq ual to zero; otherwise there would be a driving mecha nism for that object to
undergo movement in space. The analysis and study o f objects in static equilibrium and the forces and torques acting on them is
called statics—a subtopic of mechanics. Statics is par ticularly important in the design of static and loa d bearing structures. As it
pertains to fluidics, static equilibrium concerns the forces acting on a static object within a fluid medium.
Fluids
For a fluid at rest, the conditions for static equili brium must be met at any point within the fluid medi um. Therefore, the sum of the
forces and torques at any point within the static liqu id or gas must be zero. Similarly, the sum of the fo rces and torques of an object
at rest within a static fluid medium must also be zer o. In considering a stationary object within a liquid medium at rest, the forces
acting at any point in time and at any point in spa ce within the medium must be analyzed. For a stationar y object within a static1
learning obectives

10.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495liquid, there are no torques acting on the object so the sum of the torques for such a system is immediate ly zero; it need not concern
analysis since the torque condition for equilibrium is fulfilled.
Density
At any point in space within a static fluid, the sum of the acting forces must be zero; otherwise the condit ion for static equilibrium
would not be met. In analyzing such a simple system, c onsider a rectangular region within the fluid medium with density ρ (same
density as the fluid medium), width w, length l, and h eight h, as shown in. Next, the forces acting on this reg ion within the medium
are taken into account. First, the region has a force of gravity acting downwards (its weight) equal to its d ensity object, times its
volume of the object, times the acceleration due to g ravity. The downward force acting on this region due to the fluid above the
region is equal to the pressure times the area of c ontact. Similarly, there is an upward force acting on t his region due to the fluid
below the region equal to the pressure times the area of contact. For static equilibrium to be achieved, th e sum of these forces must
be zero, as shown in. Thus for any region within a flui d, in order to achieve static equilibrium, the press ure from the fluid below the
region must be greater than the pressure from the f luid above by the weight of the region. This force wh ich counteracts the weight
of a region or object within a static fluid is called the buoyant force (or buoyancy).
Static Equilibrium of a Region Within a Fluid: This figure shows the equations for static equilibrium of a region within a fluid.
Region Within a Static Fluid: This figure is a free body diagram of a region within a static fluid.
In the case on an object at stationary equilibrium within a static fluid, the sum of the forces acting on that object must be zero. As
previously discussed, there are two downward acting forc es, one being the weight of the object and the other being the force
exerted by the pressure from the fluid above the obj ect. At the same time, there is an upwards force exert ed by the pressure from
the fluid below the object, which includes the buoyant force. shows how the calculation of the forces acting on a stationary object
within a static fluid would change from those presente d in if an object having a density ρ different from that of the fluid medium is
surrounded by the fluid. The appearance of a buoyant force in static fluids is due to the fact that press ure within the fluid changes
as depth changes. The analysis presented above can furthermore be extended to much more complicated sy stems involving
complex objects and diverse materials.
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s Principle states that pressure is transmitted and u ndiminished in a closed static fluid.
Apply Pascal’s Principle to describe pressure behavior in sta tic fluids
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s Principle (or Pascal’s Law) applies to static fluids and takes advantage of the height dependency of pressure in static
fluids. Named after French mathematician Blaise Pascal, who established this important relationship, Pascal’s Pr inciple can be used
to exploit pressure of a static liquid as a measure of energy per unit volume to perform work in applic ations such as hydraulic
presses. Qualitatively, Pascal’s Principle states that p ressure is transmitted undiminished in an enclosed s tatic liquid. Quantitatively,
Pascal’s Law is derived from the expression for determin ing the pressure at a given height (or depth) within a fluid and is defined
by Pascal’s Principle:L
S
learning obectives

10.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495
AP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s Principle
Pressure and Pascal’s Principle: A brief introduction to pressure and Pascal’s Principle, i ncluding hydraulics.
where p is the external applied pressure, ρ is the densi ty of the fluid, Δh is the difference in height of the static liquid, and g is the
acceleration due to gravity. Pascal’s Law explicitly d etermines the pressure difference between two differen t heights (or depths)
within a static liquid. As, by Pascal’s Law, a change in pressure is linearly proportional to a change in he ight within an
incompressible, static liquid of constant density, d oubling the height between the two points of referenc e will double the change of
pressure, while halving the height between the two points wil l half the change in pressure.
Enclosed Static Liquids
While Pascal’s Principle applies to any static fluid, it is most useful in terms of applications when consi dering systems involving
rigid wall closed column configurations containing ho mogeneous fluids of constant density. By exploiting th e fact that pressure is
transmitted undiminished in an enclosed static liquid, such as in this type of system, static liquids can be used to transform small
amounts of force into large amounts of force for many app lications such as hydraulic presses.
As an example, referring to, a downwards force of 10 N i s applied to a bottle filled with a static liquid of constant density ρ at the
spout of cross-sectional area of 5 cm, yielding an a pplied pressure of 2 N/cm. The cross-sectional area of the bottle changes with
height so that at the bottom of the bottle the cross- sectional area is 500 cm. As a result of Pascal’s Law, the pressure change
(pressure applied to the static liquid) is transmitte d undiminished in the static liquid so that the appl ied pressure is 2 N/m at the
bottom of the bottle as well. Furthermore, the hydrost atic pressure due to the difference in height of the liquid is given by Equation
1 and yields the total pressure at the bottom surfac e of the bottle. Since the cross-sectional area at the bottom of the bottle is 100
times larger than at the top, the force contributing to the pressure at the bottom of the bottle is 1000 N plus the force from the
2 2

10.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495weight of the static fluid in the bottle. This exampl e shows how, through Pascal’s Principle, the force exer ted by a static fluid in a
closed system can be multiplied by changing the heigh t and the surface area of contact.
Pressure Applied to a Hydrostatic Fluid: A downwards force of 10 N is applied to a bottle filled wit h a static liquid of constant
density ρ at the spout of cross-sectional area of 5 cm2, y ielding an applied pressure of 2 N/cm2.
Pressure Transmitted Throughout an Entire Fluid
As stated by Pascal’s Principle, the pressure applied to a static fluid in a closed container is transmitted throughout the entire fluid.
Taking advantage of this phenomenon, hydraulic press es are able to exert a large amount of force requir ing a much smaller amount
of input force. This gives two different types of hydr aulic press configurations, the first in which there i s no difference in height of
the static liquid and the second in which there is a difference in height Δh of the static liquid. In the first configuration, a force F is
applied to a static liquid of density ρ across a surfa ce area of contact A, yielding an input pressure of P. On the other side of the
press configuration, the fluid exerts an output pres sure P across a surface area of contact A, where A > A. By Pascal’s Principle,
P = P, yielding a force exerted by the static fluid of F, where F > F. Depending on the applied pressure and geometry of the
hydraulic press, the magnitude of F can be changed. I n the second configuration, the geometry of the syste m is the same, except
that the height of the fluid on the output end is a height Δh less than the height of the fluid at the input end. The difference in height
of the fluid between the input and the output ends c ontributes to the total force exerted by the fluid. For a hydraulic press, the force
multiplication factor is the ratio of the output to the i nput contact areas.
Hydraulic Press Diagrams: Two different types of hydraulic press configurations, the first in which there is no difference in
height of the static liquid and the second in which there is a difference in height Δh of the static liquid.
Gauge Pressure and Atmospheric Pressure
Pressure is often measured as gauge pressure, which is defined as the absolute pressure minus the atmospheric pressure.
Explain the relationship among absolute pressure, gauge pressure, and atmospheric pressure
Atmospheric Pressure
An important distinction must be made as to the type of pressure quantity being used when dealing with pre ssure measurements
and calculations. Atmospheric pressure is the magnitude of pressure in a system due to the atmosphere, such as the pressure exerted
by air molecules (a static fluid) on the surface o f the earth at a given elevation. In most measurement s and calculations, the
atmospheric pressure is considered to be constant at 1 atm or 101,325 Pa, which is the atmospheric pressure un der standard
conditions at sea level.
Atmospheric pressure is due to the force of the mole cules in the atmosphere and is a case of hydrostatic pressure. Depending on the
altitude relative to sea level, the actual atmospher ic pressure will be less at higher altitudes and more at lower altitudes as the
weight of air molecules in the immediate atmosphere c hanges, thus changing the effective atmospheric pressur e. Atmospheric
pressure is a measure of absolute pressure and can b e affected by the temperature and air composition of the atmosphere but can1
1 2
1 2 2 1
1 2 2 2 1
learning obectives

10.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495generally be accurately approximated to be around s tandard atmospheric pressure of 101,325 Pa. Within t he majority of earth’s
atmosphere, pressure varies with height according to. In this equation p is the pressure at sea level (101, 325 Pa), g is the
acceleration due to gravity, M is the mass of a single molecule of air, R is the universal gas constant, T i s the standard temperature
at sea level, and h is the height relative to sea level.
Pressure and Height: Atmospheric pressure depends on altitude or height.
Gauge Pressure
For most applications, particularly those involving p ressure measurements, it is more practical to use gau ge pressure than absolute
pressure as a unit of measurement. Gauge pressure is a relative pressure measurement which measures pressur e relative to
atmospheric pressure and is defined as the absolute pressure minus the atmospheric pressure. Most pressur e measuring equipment
give the pressure of a system in terms of gauge press ure as opposed to absolute pressure. For example, tire pres sure and blood
pressure are gauge pressures by convention, while atm ospheric pressures, deep vacuum pressures, and altimete r pressures must be
absolute.
For most working fluids where a fluid exists in a closed system, gauge pressure measurement prevails. Pressure instruments
connected to the system will indicate pressures relat ive to the current atmospheric pressure. The situation changes when extreme
vacuum pressures are measured; absolute pressures are typicall y used instead.
To find the absolute pressure of a system, the atmos pheric pressure must then be added to the gauge press ure. While gauge pressure
is very useful in practical pressure measurements, most calculations involving pressure, such as the ideal gas law, require pressure
values in terms of absolute pressures and thus require gauge pressures to be converted to absolute pressures.
Measurements: Gauge Pressure and the Barometer
Barometers are devices used for measuring atmospheric and g auge pressure indirectly through the use of hydrostatic flu ids.
Compare design and operation of aneroid and hydrostat ic based barometers
Gauge Pressure
In practice, pressure is most often measured in terms of gauge pressure. Gauge pressure is the pressure of a system above
atmospheric pressure. Since atmospheric pressure is mostl y constant with little variation near sea level, wher e most practical
pressure measurements are taken, it is assumed to be approximately 101,325 Pa. Modern pressure measuring devic es sometimes
have incorporated mechanisms to account for changes in atmospheric pressure due to elevation changes. Gauge pressure is much
more convenient than absolute pressure for practical measurements and is widely used as an established m easure of pressure.
However, it is important to determine whether it is nec essary to use absolute (gauge plus atmospheric) pressur e for calculations, as
is often the case for most calculations, such as tho se involving the ideal gas law. Pressure measurements have been accurately taken
since the mid-1600s with the invention of the tradit ional barometer. Barometers are devices used to mea sure pressure and were
initially used to measure atmospheric pressure.
Hydrostatic Based Barometers
Early barometers were used to measure atmospheric pre ssure through the use of hydrostatic fluids. Hydrost atic based barometers
consist of columnar devices usually made from glass and filled with a static liquid of consistent density. T he columnar section is
sealed, holds a vacuum, and is partially filled with t he liquid while the base section is open to the atmosp here and makes an
interface with the surrounding environment. As the atm ospheric pressure changes, the pressure exerted by the a tmosphere on the
fluid reservoir exposed to the atmosphere at the bas e changes, increasing as the atmospheric pressure incre ases and decreasing as
the atmospheric pressure decreases. This change in press ure causes the height of the fluid in the columnar st ructure to change,
increasing in height as the atmosphere exerts greate r pressure on the liquid in the reservoir base and decreasing as the atmosphere0
learning obectives

10.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495exerts lower pressure on the liquid in the reservoir base. The height of the liquid within the glass colum n then gives a measure of
the atmospheric pressure. Pressure, as determined by hyd rostatic barometers, is often measured by determining the height of the
liquid in the barometer column, thus the torr as a u nit of pressure, but can be used to determine pressure in SI units. Hydrostatic
based barometers most commonly use water or mercury as the static liquid. While the use of water is much less hazardous than
mercury, mercury is often a better choice for fabrica ting accurate hydrostatic barometers. The density of mercury is much higher
than that of water, thus allowing for higher accuracy o f measurements and the ability to fabricate more co mpact hydrostatic
barometers. In theory, a hydrostatic barometer can be placed in a closed system to measure the absolute p ressure and the gauge
pressure of the system by subtracting the atmospheric pr essure.
Aneroid Barometer
Another type of barometer is the aneroid barometer, which consists of a small, flexible sealed metal box called an aneroid cell. The
aneroid cell is made from beryllium-copper alloy an d is partially evacuated. A stiff spring prevents the an eroid cell from collapsing.
Small changes in external air pressure cause the cell to expand or contract. This expansion and contraction is amplified by
mechanical mechanisms to give a pressure reading. Suc h pressure measuring devices are more practical than hydrostatic
barometers for measuring system pressures. Many moder n pressure measuring devices are pre-engineered to o utput gauge pressure
measurements. While the aneroid barometer is the un derlying mechanism behind many modern pressure measu ring devices,
pressure can also be measured using more advanced measuring mechanisms.
Hydrostatic Column Barometer: The concept of determining pressure using the fluid he ight in a hydrostatic column barometer
Variation of Pressure with Height: The density of the liquid is p, g is the acceleration d ue to gravity, and h is the height of the
fluid in the barometer column.
Pressure in the Body
Pressure plays an essential role in a number of critical b odily functions including respiration and blood circulati on.
Explain role played by pressure in the circulatory and r espiratory systems
The Role of Pressure in the Circulatory System
Pressure plays an essential role in various critical bodily systems that are necessary for survival. One su ch critical bodily system
which relies on pressure for functionality is the circ ulatory system, which is an example of a closed fluid system under pressure.
The circulatory system is responsible for transportin g oxygen and essential nutrients to all organs within the body as well as
removing waste materials from these organs. Blood can be regarded as a viscous liquid contained within the c irculatory system that
travels throughout this closed system as a result of pressu re and pressure differences within the circulatory system.
As the volume of blood within the circulatory system i s confined to the veins, arteries, and capillaries th ere is a pressure within this
closed system. Furthermore, through a complicated system of veins, arteries, and capillaries of varying diame ter as well as valves
and the heart acting as a continuous pump, pressure d ifferences arise within the circulatory system that r esult in the potential for
blood to circulate throughout the circulatory system, thus carrying out essential bodily functions for survival.learning obectives

10.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495Pressure within the circulatory system is referred to a s blood pressure, and is a primary and crucial vital s ign which can be used to
diagnose or indicate a number of medical conditions. Blood pressure varies throughout the body as well as f rom one individual to
another and depends on a number of factors such as he art rate, blood volume, resistance of the circulatory s ystem (veins, arteries,
and capillaries), and the viscosity of blood. Any medical conditions affecting any of these factors will have a n effect on blood
pressure and the overall health of the circulatory system.
Approximation for Mean Arterial Pressure: In practice, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) can be appr oximated from easily
obtainable blood pressure measurements.
The mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average pressu re over a cardiac cycle and is determined by, where C O is the cardiac
outputs, SVR is the systemic vascular resistance, and CVP i s the central venous pressure (CVP). In practice, the mea n arterial
pressure (MAP) can be approximated from easily obtain able blood pressure measurements in, where P is the mea sured systolic
pressure and P is the measured diastolic pressure. One particularly common and dangerous circulatory syste m condition is
partial blockage of blood vessels due to a number o f factors, such as plaque build-up from high cholesterol, which results in a
reduction of the effective blood vessel cross-section al diameter and a corresponding reduction in blood flow rate and thus an
increase in blood pressure to restore normal blood flow ac cording to Poiseuille’s Law.
Equation for Mean Arterial Pressure: The mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average pressure over a cardiac cycle and is
determined this equation, where CO is the cardiac outputs, SVR is the systemic vascular resistance, and CVP is the central venous
pressure (CVP).
The Role of Pressure in the Respiratory System
Pressure also plays an essential role in the respirato ry system, as it is responsible for the breathing m echanism. Pressure differences
between the lungs and the atmosphere create a potent ial for air to enter the lungs, resulting in inhalatio n. The mechanism resulting
in inhalation is due to lowering of the diaphragm, whic h increases the volume of the thoracic cavity surro unding the lungs, thus
lowering its pressure as determined by the ideal gas l aw. The reduction in pressure of the thoracic cavity, which normally has a
negative gauge pressure, thus keeping the lungs inf lated, pulls air into the lungs, inflating the alve oli and resulting in oxygen
transport needed for respiration. As the diaphragm res tores and moves upwards, pressure within the thoracic ca vity increases,
resulting in exhalation. The cycle repeats itself, r esulting in the respiration which as discussed is mecha nically due to pressure
changes. Without pressure in the body, and the corr esponding potential that it has for dynamic bodily processes, essential functions
such as blood circulation and respiration would not be pos sible.
Key Points
Pressure is a scalar quantity defined as force per unit ar ea. Pressure only concerns the force component perpendicul ar to the
surface upon which it acts, thus if the force acts at an ang le, the force component along the direction perpendicul ar to the
surface must be used to calculate pressure.
The pressure exerted on a surface by an object increases as the weight of the object increases or the surface area of contact
decreases. Alternatively the pressure exerted decreases a s the weight of the object decreases or the surface area of contact
increases.
Pressure exerted by ideal gases in confined containers is due to the average number of collisions of gas molecules with the
container walls per unit time. As such, pressure depend s on the amount of gas (in number of molecules), its temper ature, and the
volume of the container.
Hydrostatic pressure refers to the pressure exerted by a fl uid (gas or liquid) at any point in space within that fluid, assuming that
the fluid is incompressible and at rest.sys
dias

10.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495Pressure within a liquid depends only on the density of the l iquid, the acceleration due to gravity, and the depth with in the
liquid. The pressure exerted by such a static liquid increa ses linearly with increasing depth.
Pressure within a gas depends on the temperature of the gas, the mass of a single molecule of the gas, the acceleratio n due to
gravity, and the height (or depth) within the gas.
Hydrostatic balance is the term used for a region or statio nary object within a static fluid which is at static equilibriu m, and for
which the sum of all forces and sum of all torques is equal t o zero.
A region or static object within a stationary fluid experien ces downward forces due to the weight of the region or o bject, and the
pressure exerted from the fluid above the region or obje ct, as well as an upward force due to the pressure exerted fro m the fluid
below the region or object.
For a region or static object within a static fluid, the downwar d force due to the weight of the region or object is counter acted by
the upward buoyant force, which is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by the region or object.
Pascal’s Principle is used to quantitatively relate the pres sure at two points in an incompressible, static fluid. It s tates that
pressure is transmitted, undiminished, in a closed static fluid.
The total pressure at any point within an incompressible, static fluid is equal to the sum of the applied pressure a t any point in
that fluid and the hydrostatic pressure change due to a diffe rence in height within that fluid.
Through the application of Pascal’s Principle, a static liqu id can be utilized to generate a large output force using a much
smaller input force, yielding important devices such as hy draulic presses.
Atmospheric pressure is a measure of absolute pressure and is due to the weight of the air molecules above a certain he ight
relative to sea level, increasing with decreasing altitu de and decreasing with increasing altitude.
Gauge pressure is the additional pressure in a system relati ve to atmospheric pressure. It is a convenient pressure me asurement
for most practical applications.
While gauge pressure is more convenient for practical measurements, absolute pressure is necessary for most pressu re
calculations, thus the atmospheric pressure must be added t o the gauge pressure for calculations.
Gauge pressure is the pressure of a system above atmospheri c pressure, which must be converted to absolute pressure fo r most
calculations.
The barometer is a device which uses hydrostatic fluids to dir ectly determine atmospheric pressure and may be used to
indirectly measure the gauge pressure of systems.
The hydrostatic column barometer uses a liquid like wate r or mercury for functionality, while the aneroid baromet er uses an
evacuated flexible metal cell.
Pressure, along with the potential for work arising from dif ferences in pressure, plays an essential role in the functionality of
several critical bodily functions and systems necessary for survival.
The circulatory system relies on pressure differences fo r circulating blood, along with oxygen, necessary nutrien ts, and waste
products throughout the body.
Respiration is made possible as a result of pressure diffe rences between the thoracic cavity, the lungs, and the en vironment and
is largely regulated by movement of the diaphragm.
Key Terms
ideal gas: Theoretical gas characterized by random motion whose i ndividual molecules do not interact with one another and are
chemically inert.
kinetic energy: The energy associated with a moving particle or objec t having a certain mass.
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
Buoyancy: The power of supporting a body so that it floats; upwar d pressure exerted by the fluid in which a body is immersed.
torque: Something that produces or tends to produce torsion or r otation; the moment of a force or system of forces tendin g to
cause rotation.
equilibrium: A state of rest or balance due to the equal action of o pposing forces.
hydraulic press: Device that uses a hydraulic cylinder (closed static flu id) to generate a compressive force.
Gauge Pressure: The pressure of a system above atmospheric pressure.
Torr: A unit of pressure equal to one millimeter of mercury (760 torr = 101,325 Pa).

10.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495Aneroid Barometer: A device for measuring pressure, often specially cali brated for use as an altimeter, consisting of a box or
chamber partially exhausted of air, having an elastic t op and a pointer to indicate the degree of compression of the top caused by
the external air.
Thoracic Cavity: A hollow place or space, or a potential space, within th e body or one of its organs.
Poiseuille’s Law: The law that the velocity of a liquid flowing through a capillary is directly proportional to the pressure of the
liquid and the fourth power of the radius of the capillar y and is inversely proportional to the viscosity of the liq uid and the
length of the capillary.
Alveoli: Small air sacs or cavities in the lung that give the tissue a honeycomb appearance and expand its surface area for the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluid statics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluid_statics%23Pressure_in_fluids_at_rest.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hydrostatic equilibrium). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrostatic_equilibrium). License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

10.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pascal's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pressure measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure_measurement. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Atmospheric pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmospheric_pressure. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pressure measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure_measurement. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Barometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Barometer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

10.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14495Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/poiseuille-s-law--3.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Blood pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_pressure. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/alveoli--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thoracic-cavity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 10.2: Density and Pressure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449610.3: Archimedes’ Principle
Calculate the direction of the buoyancy force
When you rise from soaking in a warm bath, your arms may feel strangely heavy. This effect is due to the loss of the buoyant
support of the water. What creates this buoyant forc e? Why is it that some things float and others do not? Do objects that sink get
any support at all from the fluid? Is your body buoyed by t he atmosphere, or are only helium balloons affected?
Buoyant Force: Cause and Calculation
We find the answers to the above questions in the fac t that in any given fluid, pressure increases with dep th. When an object is
immersed in a fluid, the upward force on the bottom o f an object is greater than the downward force on the top of the object. The
result is a net upward force (a buoyant force) on any object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater than the object’s weight, the
object will rise to the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the buoyan t force
equals the object’s weight, the object will remain susp ended at that depth. The buoyant force is always prese nt in a fluid, whether
an object floats, sinks or remains suspended.
The buoyant force is a result of pressure exerted by t he fluid. The fluid pushes on all sides of an immerse d object, but as pressure
increases with depth, the push is stronger on the bottom surface of the object than in the top (as seen in).
You can calculate the buoyant force on an object by adding up the forces exerted on all of an object’s sides. For example, consider
the object shown in.
The top surface has area and is at depth; the pressure at that depth is:
where ρρ is the density of the fluid and is the gravita tional acceleration. The magnitude of the force on the to p surface is:
This force points downwards. Similarly, the force on the botto m surface is:
and points upwards. Because it is cylindrical, the net force on the object’s sides is zero—the forces on diff erent parts of the surface
oppose each other and cancel exactly. Thus, the net upwa rd force on the cylinder due to the fluid is:
The Archimedes Principle
Although calculating the buoyant force in this way is always possible it is often very difficult. A simpler method follows from the
Archimedes principle, which states that the buoyant fo rce exerted on a body immersed in a fluid is equal t o the weight of the fluid
the body displaces. In other words, to calculate the buoyant force on an object we assume that the submer sed part of the object is
made of water and then calculate the weight of that water (as seen in).
Archimedes principle: The buoyant force on the ship (a) is equal to the weight of the water displaced by the ship—shown as the
dashed region in (b).learning objectives

10.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496The principle can be stated as a formula:
The reasoning behind the Archimedes principle is that the buoyancy force on an object depends on the pre ssure exerted by the fluid
on its submerged surface. Imagine that we replace the submerged part of the object with the fluid in which it is contained, as in (b).
The buoyancy force on this amount of fluid must be th e same as on the original object (the ship). However, we also know that the
buoyancy force on the fluid must be equal to its wei ght, as the fluid does not sink in itself. Therefore, the buoyancy force on the
original object is equal to the weight of the “displaced flu id” (in this case, the water inside the dashed region (b)).
The Archimedes principle is valid for any fluid—not o nly liquids (such as water) but also gases (such as air). We will explore this
further as we discuss applications of the principle in subseq uent sections.
How to Solve a Buoy ant Force Problem - Simple ExaHow to Solve a Buoy ant Force Problem - Simple Exa
Archimedes’ Principle – Simple Example: We use Archimedes’ Principle to determine the number o f penguins an ice float can
dryly support.
Complete Submersion
The buoyancy force on a completely submerged object of volume is.
Identify factors determining the buoyancy force on a comp letely submerged object
learning objectivies

10.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496The Archimedes principle is easiest to understand and apply in the case of entirely submersed objects. In this section we discuss a
few relevant examples. In general, the buoyancy force on a c ompletely submerged object is given by the formula:
where is the volume of the object, is the density of the fluid, and is gravitational acceleration. T his follows immediately from
the Archimedes’ principle, and the fact that the obje ct is completely submerged (and so the volume of the fluid displaced is just the
volume of the object).
Cylinder
In the previous section, we calculated the buoyancy f orce on a cylinder (shown in) by considering the fo rce exerted on each of the
cylinder’s sides. Now, we’ll calculate this force using Archimedes’ principle. The buoyancy force on the cyli nder is equal to the
weight of the displaced fluid. This weight is equal to the m ass of the displaced fluid multiplied by the gravitatio nal acceleration:
Buoyant force: The fluid pushes on all sides of a submerged objec t. However, because pressure increases with depth, the upward
push on the bottom surface (F2) is greater than the downward push on the top surface (F1). Therefore, the ne t buoyant force is
always upwards.
The mass of the displaced fluid is equal to its volume mul tiplied by its density:
However (and this is the crucial point), the cylinder is entirely submerged, so the volume of the displaced fluid is just the volume
of the cylinder (see), and:

10.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496
Archimedes principle: The volume of the fluid displaced (b) is the same as t he volume of the original cylinder (a).
The volume of a cylinder is the area of its base multiplie d by its height, or in our case:
Therefore, the buoyancy force on the cylinder is:
This is the same result obtained in the previous section by co nsidering the force due to the pressure exerted by the flu id.
Helium Airship
Consider the USS Macon, a helium-filled airship (shown i n). Its envelope (the “balloon”) contained 184,059.5 cubic meters of
helium. Ignoring the small volume of the gondola, wha t was the buoyancy force on this airship? If the airsh ip weighed 108,000 kg,
how much cargo could it carry? Assume the density of air is 1.225 kg per meter cubed. The buoyancy force on an airship is due to
the air in which it is immersed. Although we don’t know t he exact shape of the airship, we know its volume and t he density of the
air, and thus we can calculate the buoyancy force:
Helium airship: The USS Macon, a 1930s helium-filled airship.
To find the cargo capacity of the airship, we subtract the weight of the airship from the buoyancy force:

10.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496The mass the airship can carry is:
Flotation
An object floats if the buoyancy force exerted on it by the fluid balances its weight.
Express the relationship between the buoyancy force and th e weight for a floating object
Why do some objects float, but others don’t? If you p ut a metal coin into a glass of water it will sink. Bu t most ships are built of
metal, and they float. So how is this possible?
Condition for Flotation
An object will float if the buoyancy force exerted on it b y the fluid balances its weight, i.e. if FB=mgFB=mg.
But the Archimedes principle states that the buoyant force is the weight of the fluid displaced. So, for a floating object on a liquid,
the weight of the displaced liquid is the weight of t he object. Thus, only in the special case of floating does the buoyant force acting
on an object equal the object’s weight. Consider a on e-ton block of solid iron. As iron is nearly eight ti mes denser than water, it
displaces only 1/8 ton of water when submerged, which is not enough to keep it afloat. Suppose the same iron block is reshaped
into a bowl. It still weighs one ton, but when it is pu t in water, it displaces a greater volume of water tha n when it was a block. The
deeper the iron bowl is immersed, the more water it di splaces, and the greater the buoyant force acting o n it. When the buoyant
force equals one ton, it will sink no further.
When any boat displaces a weight of water equal to it s own weight, it floats. This is often called the “pri nciple of flotation” where a
floating object displaces a weight of fluid equal to its own weight. Every ship, submarine, and dirigible m ust be designed to
displace a weight of fluid equal to its own weight. A 10,000-ton ship must be built wide enough to displace 10,000 tons of water
before it sinks too deep in the water. The same is true for vessels in air (as air is a fluid): A dirigible t hat weighs 100 tons displaces
at least 100 tons of air; if it displaces more, it r ises; if it displaces less, it falls. If the dirigible displaces exactly its weight, it hovers
at a constant altitude.
Flotation and Density
Density plays a crucial role in Archimedes’ principle. The average density of an object is what ultimately de termines whether it
floats. If its average density is less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. This is because the fluid, having a higher density,
contains more mass and thus more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which equals the weight of the fluid displaced, is
thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, a n object denser than the fluid will sink. The extent to which a floating object
is submerged depends on how the object’s density is re lated to that of the fluid. For example, an unloaded ship has a lower density,
and less of it is submerged compared with the same shi p loaded with cargo. We can derive a quantitative exp ression for the fraction
submerged by considering density. The fraction submerg ed is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
Density and Submersion: An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a lo aded ship (b).learning objectives

10.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid disp laced, which we call. Now we can obtain the relationship between the
densities by substituting into the expression. This give s
where is the average density of the object and ρflρfl is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, i ts mass and that of the
displaced fluid are equal, and so they cancel from the eq uation, leaving
There are a couple things to note about this expression:
1. Note that it mentions the average density of the objec t. This can be much less than the density of the materia l the object is made
of. For instance, a steel ship is actually mostly filled wit h air (think of the corridors, cargo holds, etc.), so its ave rage density is
between that of air and steel. To be more precise, the average density is defined as the total mass of an object divided by its total
volume:
2. This formula makes sense only if the density of the obje ct is smaller than the density of the fluid. Otherwise, the f raction
submerged becomes greater than one—a sign that the objec t does not float at all, but it sinks!
Key Points
The buoyancy force is caused by the pressure exerted by the fluid in which an object is immersed.
The buoyancy force always points upwards because the press ure of a fluid increases with depth.
You can calculate the buoyancy force either directly by computing the force exerted on each of the object’s s urfaces, or
indirectly by finding the weight of the displaced fluid.
If an object is completely submerged, the volume of the flu id displaced is equal to the volume of the object.
The buoyancy force on hot-air balloons, dirigibles and other objects can be calculated by assuming that they are e ntirely
submerged in air.
The buoyancy force does not depend on the shape of the ob ject, only on its volume.
The buoyancy force experienced by an object depends on its shape.
The fraction of an object’s volume that’s submerged is gi ven by the ratio of its average density to that of the fl uid:.
An object floats if the buoyancy force exerted on it by the fluid balances its weight.
Key Terms
buoyant force: An upward force exerted by a fluid that opposes the weight o f an immersed object.
Archimedes principle: The buoyant force exerted on a body immersed in a flu id is equal to the weight of the fluid the body
displaces.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
buoyant force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/buoyant%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

10.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14496Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
USS Macon F9C. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USS_Macon_F9C.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes_principle. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
USS Macon F9C. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USS_Macon_F9C.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 10.3: Archimedes’ Principle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449710.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
Explain the phenomena of surface tension and capillary a ction
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type ar e called cohesive forces. Liquids can, for example, be kept in open
containers because cohesive forces hold the molecule s together. Attractive forces between molecules of diff erent types are called
adhesive forces. Such forces cause liquid drops to cling to window panes, for example. In this section we exami ne effects of
cohesive and adhesive forces in liquids.
Surface Tension
Surface tension is a contractive tendency of the sur face of a liquid that allows it to resist an externa l force. It is shown, for example,
in the floating of some objects on the surface of wat er, even though they are denser than water, and in th e ability of some insects
(e.g., water striders) to run on water’s surface. This p roperty is caused by cohesion of similar molecules and is responsible for many
of the behaviors of liquids.
The cohesive forces among liquid molecules are respo nsible for the phenomenon of surface tension, as sho wn in. In the bulk of the
liquid, each molecule is pulled equally in every dir ection by neighboring liquid molecules, resulting in a net force of zero. The
molecules at the surface do not have other molecules on all sides of them and therefore are pulled inward s. This creates some
internal pressure and forces liquid surfaces to contract to the minimal area.
Diagram of Surface-Tension Forces: Diagram of the forces on molecules of a liquid
Surface tension has the unit of force per unit length, or of energy per unit area. The two units are equiv alent. However, when we
refer to energy per unit of area, we use the term surface energy, which is more general in that it applies to solid s as well as liquids.
Capillary Action
Capillary action, or capillarity, is the ability of a liquid to flow in narrow spaces without the assistance of, and in opposition to,
external forces like gravity. The effect can be see n in the drawing-up of liquids between the hairs of a paint-brush, in a thin tube, in
porous materials such as paper, in some non-porous ma terials such as liquified carbon fiber, and in a ce ll. It occurs because of
intermolecular attractive forces between the liquid and solid surrounding surfaces. If the diameter of t he tube is sufficiently small,
then the combination of surface tension (which is ca used by cohesion within the liquid) and adhesive force s between the liquid and
the container act to lift the liquid.
With some pairs of materials, such as mercury and glass (see), the intermolecular forces within the liquid exceed those between the
solid and the liquid, so a convex meniscus forms, and capi llary action works in reverse.learning objectives

10.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14497
Capillarity: Capillary action of water compared to mercury, in each c ase with respect to glass
Key Points
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type are called cohesive forces.
Attractive forces between molecules of different types are called adhesive forces.
Surface tension is a contractive tendency of the surface o f a liquid that allows it to resist an external force.
Capillary action, or capillarity, is the ability of a l iquid to flow in narrow spaces without the assistance of, and in opposition to,
external forces such as gravity.
Key Term
Pressure: the amount of force that is applied over a given are a divided by the size of that area
intermolecular: from one molecule to another; between molecules
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capillary action. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Capillary_action. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Adhesion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Adhesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Cohesion (chemistry). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohesion_(chemistry). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

10.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14497intermolecular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/intermolecular. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
File:Capillarity.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Capillarity.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Wassermolek%C3%BCleInTr%C3%B6pfchen.svg&page=1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449810.5: Fluids in Motion
Determine the flow rate based on velocity and area or el apsed time and justify the use of continuity in expressing p roperties
of a fluid and its motion
The flow rate of a fluid is the volume of fluid which passes through a surface in a given unit of time. It is usually represented by the
symbol Q.
AP Phy sics 2 - Continuity Equation for FluidsAP Phy sics 2 - Continuity Equation for Fluids
Continuity Equation for Fluids: A brief introduction to the Continuity Equation fo r Fluids.
Flow Rate
V olumetric flow rate is defined as
where Q is the flow rate, v is the velocity of the flu id, and a is the area of the cross section of the space the fluid is moving through.
V olumetric flow rate can also be found with
where Q is the flow rate, V is the V olume of fluid, and t is ela psed time.learning objectives

10.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14498Continuity
The equation of continuity works under the assumption that the flow in will equal the flow out. This can be u seful to solve for
many properties of the fluid and its motion:
Flow in = Flow out: Using the known properties of a fluid in one condition, we can use the continuity equation to solve for the
properties of the same fluid under other conditions.
This can be expressed in many ways, for example:. The equation of continuity applies to any incompressibl e fluid.
Since the fluid cannot be compressed, the amount of f luid which flows into a surface must equal the amount flowing out of the
surface.
Applying the Continuity Equation
You can observe the continuity equation’s effect in a garden hose. The water flows through the hose and when it reaches the
narrower nozzle, the velocity of the water increases. Speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, an d speed decreases
when cross-sectional area increases. This is a consequence of the continuity equation. If the flow Q is held cons tant, when the area
A decreases, the velocity v must increase proportion ally. For example, if the nozzle of the hose is half t he area of the hose, the
velocity must double to maintain the continuous flow.
Key Points
Flow rate can be expressed in either terms of cross sectional a rea and velocity, or volume and time.
Because liquids are incompressible, the rate of flow into a n area must equal the rate of flow out of an area. This is kno wn as the
equation of continuity.
The equation of continuity can show how much the speed o f a liquid increases if it is forced to flow through a smaller ar ea. For
example, if the area of a pipe is halved, the velocity of th e fluid will double.
Although gases often behave as fluids, they are not incom pressible the way liquids are and so the continuity equation does not
apply.
Key Terms
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
continuity: Lack of interruption or disconnection; the quality o f being continuous in space or time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Equation of continuity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Equation_of_continuity. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity. Sept ember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42205/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bernoulli's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli's_equation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

10.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14498Flow rate. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_rate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
continuity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/continuity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Continuity Equation for Fluids. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fR368Ps-xBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity. Febr uary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42205/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 10.5: Fluids in Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

10.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1449910.6: Deformation of Solids
Explain how length of an object is determined
Length
In geometric measurements, length is the longest dim ension of an object. In other contexts “length” is th e measured dimension of
an object. For example: it is possible to cut a length of a wire which is shorter than wire thickness. Length m ay be distinguished
from height, which is vertical extent, and width or brea dth, which are the distance from side to side, measurin g across the object at
right angles to the length.
Length is a measure of one dimension, whereas area is a measure of two dimensions (length squared) and volu me is a measure of
three dimensions (length cubed). In most systems of measurement, the unit of length is a fundamental uni t, from which other units
are defined.
After Albert Einstein’s Special Relativity Theory, length can no longer be thought of being constant in all r eference frames. Thus, a
ruler that is one meter long in one frame of refere nce will not be one meter long in a reference frame that is travelling at a velocity
relative to the first frame. This means that the length of an object is variable depending on the observer.
Units
One of the oldest units of length measurement used in the ancient world was the ‘cubit,’ which was the length of the arm from the
tip of the finger to the elbow. This could then be su bdivided into shorter units like the foot, hand (which at 4 inches is still used
today for expressing the height of horses) or finger, or added together to make longer units like the stri de. The cubit could vary
considerably due to the different sizes of people.
In the physical sciences and engineering, when one spe aks of “units of length”, the word “length” is synonymous with “distance”.
There are several units that are used to measure leng th. Units of length may be based on lengths of human body parts, the distance
traveled in a number of paces, the distance between la ndmarks or places on the Earth, or arbitrarily on th e length of some fixed
object.In the International System of Units (SI), the ba sic unit of length is the meter and is now defined in terms of the speed of
light. The centimeter and the kilometer, derived fro m the meter, are also commonly used units. In U.S. customa ry units, English or
Imperial system of units, commonly used units of lengt h are the inch, the foot, the yard, and the mile. Unit s used to denote
distances in the vastness of space, as in astronomy, are much longer than those typically used on Earth and include the astronomical
unit, the light-year, and the parsec.
Length: The metric length of one kilometre is equivalent to t he imperial measurement of 0.62137 miles.
Shape
The shape of an object is a description of space that the object takes up; the shape can change if the object i s deformed.
Describe effects of deformations, rotations, and magnific ations
The shape of an object located in some space is a ge ometrical description of the part of that space occu pied by the object, as
determined by its external boundary – abstracting f rom location and orientation in space, size, and othe r properties such as
color, content, and material compositionLearning objectives
learning objectives
Shape

10.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14499Simple and Complex Shapes
Simple shapes can be described by basic geometry obj ects such as a set of two or more points, a line, a cur ve, a plane, a plane
figure (e.g. square or circle), or a solid figure (e.g. cube or sphere). Most shapes occurring in the physical world are complex.
Some, such as plant structures and coastlines, may be so arbitrary as to defy traditional mathematical de scription – in which case
they may be analyzed by differential geometry, or as fr actals.
In geometry, two subsets of a Euclidean space have t he same shape if one can be transformed to the other by a combination of
translations, rotations (together also called rigid tra nsformations), and uniform scalings. In other words, the shape of a set of points
is all the geometrical information that is invarian t to translations, rotations, and size changes. Having the same shape is an
equivalence relation, and accordingly a precise math ematical definition of the notion of shape can be g iven as being an equivalence
class of subsets of a Euclidean space having the same shap e.
Shapes of physical objects are equal if the subsets of space these objects occupy satisfy the definitio n above. In particular, the shape
does not depend on the size and placement in space of t he object.
Shapes: Examples of shapes.
Volume
V olume is a measure of the three-dimensional space an obj ect occupies, usually taken in terms of length, width and height.
Explain how is volume measured geometrically
V olume is the quantity of three-dimensional space con tained by a closed boundary; it is the space that a substance (solid, liquid, gas
or plasma) or shape occupies or contains. V olume is o ften quantified numerically using an SI derived unit, the cubic meter.
However, for liquids the unit of volume used is known as the liter (equivalent to 0.001 cubic meters).
Measuring Volume: A measuring cup can be used to measure volumes of liq uids. This cup measures volume in units of cups, fluid
ounces and millilitres.
V olume is measured geometrically by multiplying an object’s three dimensions—usually taken as length, wid th and height. Some
common volumes are taken as follows:
The volume of a cube: length times width times height.
The volume of a cylinder: the cross-sectional area time s the height of the cylinder.
The volume of a sphere: 4/3 times the radius cubed times p i.
The volume of a solid can be determined by the volume o f liquid it displaces when submerged.learning objectives

10.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14499The volume of a container is generally understood a s the capacity of the container, meaning the amount of fluid (gas or liquid) the
container can hold, rather than the amount of space the container itself displaces. Measuring cups, as seen in, work by taking a
known cross sectional area of a cup and multiplying t hat by a variable height. Since liquid will always cov er the cross section (if
there is enough liquid), adding more liquid will increase the height inside the container.
Liquids take the shape of their container, filling up the minimum height needed. Gases, on the other hand, ta ke up the maximum
amount of volume possible. Thus a measuring cup can accurately measure the volume of a liquid, whereas a gas will always fill the
entire container, more or less uniformly, no matter how litt le gas there is.
Stress and Strain
A point charge creates an electric field that can be calcul ated using Coulomb’s Law.
The electric field of a point charge is, like any e lectric field, a vector field that represents the eff ect that the point charge has on
other charges around it. The effect is felt as a for ce and when charged particles are not in motion this force is known as the
electrostatic force. The electrostatic force is, much l ike gravity, a force that acts at a distance. Therefo re, we rationalize this action
at a distance by saying that charges create fields aro und them that have effects on other charges.
Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size that contains a certain charge, electric field lines emanate radially in all
directions. If the charge is positive, field lines poi nt radially away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point radially
towards it.
Electric field of positive point charge: The electric field of a positively charged particle points radially away from the charge.
Electric field of negative point charge: The electric field of a negatively charged particle p oints radially toward the particle.
The reason for these directions can be seen in the d erivation of the electric field of a point charge. Let’s first take a look at the
definition of electric field of a point particle:

10.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14499In the above equation, q represents the charge of th e particle creating the electric field and the cons tant k is a result of simply
lumping the constants together. This charge is eithe r positive or negative. If the charge is positive, as shown above, the electric field
will be pointing in a positive radial direction from the charge q (away from the charge) and the following text explains why. The
above equation is defined in radial coordinates which can be seen in.
Radial Coordinate System: The electric field of a point charge is defined in rad ial coordinates. The positive r direction points
away from the origin, and the negative r direction points to ward the origin. The electric field of a point charge is sy mmetric with
respect to the θ direction.
If we now place another positive charge, Q (called the test charge), at some radial distance, R, away from th e original particle, the
test charge will feel a force given by
The thing to keep in mind is that the force above i s acting on the test charge Q, in the positive radial d irection as defined by the
original charge q. This means that because the charg es are both positive and will repel one another, the f orce on the test charge
points away from the original charge.
If the test charge were negative, the force felt on that c harge would be
Notice that this points in the negative direction, whic h is toward the original charge. This makes sense bec ause opposite charges
attract and the force on the test charge will tend t o push it toward the original positive charge creatin g the field. The above
mathematical description of the electric field of a point charge is known as Coulomb ‘s Law.
Key Points
Length is typically a measure of the longest dimension of an object.
The deformation of an object is typically a change in le ngth.
The SI unit of length is the meter.
The shape of an object is a representation of the space taken up by the object.
Deformations can change the shape of an object.
Objects that have the same shape can be transformed in to each other by rotation or magnification.
V olume is often quantified numerically using an SI derived unit, the cubic meter. However, for liquids the unit of vo lume used
is known as the liter (equivalent to 0.001 cubic meters).
This can also be understood as the amount of fluid a submerged object displaces.
V olume can be measured for geometrically regular obje cts by simple formulas. However, more complicated objects are easier to
measure with fluid displacement.
The electric field is a vector field around a charged particle that represents the force that other charged pa rticles would feel
when placed near the particle creating the electric field.

10.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14499Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size, t hat contains a certain charge, electric field lines emana te from equally
in all radial directions.
If the point charge is positive, field lines point away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point towards it.
Key Terms
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
plane: A level or flat surface.
Euclidean: Adhering to the principles of traditional geometry, in wh ich parallel lines are equidistant.
cross section: A section formed by a plane cutting through an object, usually at right angles to an axis.
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
coulomb’s law: the mathematical equation calculating the electrosta tic force vector between two charged particles
vector field: a construction in which each point in a Euclidean space i s associated with a vector; a function whose range is a
vector space
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Shape. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shape. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
plane. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plane. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Euclidean. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Euclidean. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cross section. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cross_section. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY: Attribution
vector field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY: Attribution

10.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14499480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
This page titled 10.6: Deformation of Solids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications
11.1: Overview
11.2: Flow in Tubes
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
11.4: Other Applications
Index
This page titled 11: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Front Matter
TitlePage
InfoPage

Boundless
11: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications
Boundless (now LumenLearning)

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/09/2026

11.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450111.1: Overview
Interpret the circulatory system in terms of your knowledge of fluid dynamics
We have discussed many situations in which fluids are st atic, though there are many situations where fluids fl ow. For example, a
column of smoke rises from a camp fire, water streams fro m a fire hose, blood courses through your veins. Why does rising smoke
curl and twist? How does a nozzle increase the speed of water emerging from a hose? How does the body regulate blood flow?
Fluid dynamics, the physics of fluids in motion, allows us to an swer these and many other questions.
Application in the Circulatory System
For example, consider the circulatory system—a connect ed series of tubes with fluid flowing through them. Th e heart is the driver
of the circulatory system, generating cardiac output (CO) by rhythmically contracting and relaxing. This c reates changes in
regional pressures and (combined with a complex valvu lar system in the heart and the veins) ensures that t he blood moves around
the circulatory system in one direction. The “beating ” of the heart generates pulsatile blood flow, conduc ted into the arteries across
the micro-circulation and then back via the venous sy stem to the heart.
The aorta, the main artery, leaves the left side of the heart and proceeds to divide into smaller and sm aller arteries that first become
arterioles and eventually become capillaries, throu gh which oxygen transfer occurs. The capillaries conne ct to venules, into which
the deoxygenated blood passes from the cells back into the blood. The blood then travels back through the network of veins to the
right heart. The micro-circulation (arterioles, capi llaries and venules) constitutes most of the area of the vascular system and is the
site of the transfer of O into the cells.
The venous system returns the de-oxygenated blood to the right heart where it is pumped into the lungs to become oxygenated.
This is also where CO and other gaseous wastes are exc hanged and expelled during breathing. Blood then ret urns to the left side
of the heart where it begins the process again. The he art, vessels and lungs are all actively involved in mai ntaining healthy cells and
organs, and all influence the fluid dynamics of the bloo d.
Fluids and Diffusion
Now consider how nutrients are transported through a hum an body. Diffusion is the movement of substances due t o random
thermal molecular motion. Fluids can even diffuse th rough solids (such as fumes or odors entering ice c ubes). Diffusion is the
dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and waste products occurs between the blood and tissue, and between air
and blood in the lungs. In the evolutionary process, as organisms became larger they needed quicker method s of transportation than
net diffusion, due to the larger distances involved in the transport. This factor lead to the developmen t of circulatory systems. Less
sophisticated, single-celled organisms still rely totally on diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptak e of nutrients.
Another important form of fluid movement is osmosis—the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane (shown in)
from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration. It is driven by the imbalance in water concentration.
Similarly, dialysis is the transport of any other mol ecule through a semipermeable membrane due to its co ncentration difference.
Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the kidneys t o cleanse the blood, and the medical application of dialysis through machinery
is important in the treatment of individuals with failing kidney function.learning objectives

11.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14501
A Semipermeable Membrane: A semipermeable membrane with small pores that allow only small molecules to pass through.
Flow Rate and Velocity
Flow velocity and volumetric flow rates are important q uantities in fluid dynamics used to quantify motion of a fluid and are
interrelated.
Assess the significance of studying volumetric flow in ad dition to flow velocity
Fluid dynamics is the study of fluids in motion and cor responding phenomena. A fluid in motion has a veloci ty, just as a solid
object in motion has a velocity. Like the velocity of a solid, the velocity of a fluid is the rate of c hange of position per unit of time.
In mathematical terms, the velocity of a fluid is the derivative of the position vector of the fluid with respect to time, and is
therefore itself a vector quantity. The flow velocity vector is a function of position, and if the velocit y of the fluid is not constant
then it is also a function of time. Equation 1 shows the mathematical expression for the velocity of a f luid in motion. As a vector
quantity, fluid velocity must have at least one non- zero directional component and may have up to three non-zero directional
components. The velocity vector has non-zero components in any orthogonal direction along which motion of the f luid occurs.
Flow Velocity: Mathematical Expression for Flow Velocity
Turbulent Flow vs. Laminar Flow
Fluid velocity can be affected by the pressure of th e fluid, the viscosity of the fluid, and the cross-s ectional area of the container in
which the fluid is travelling. These factors affect fl uid velocity depending on the nature of the fluid f low—particularly whether the
flow is turbulent or laminar in nature. In the case of turbulent flow, the flow velocity is complex in n ature and thus hard to predict;
it must be analyzed on a system per system basis. In the case of Laminar flow, however, fluid flow is much simpler and flow
velocity can be accurately calculated using Poiseuill e’s Law. In SI units, fluid flow velocity is expressed in terms of meters per
seconds. The magnitude of the fluid flow velocity is the fluid flow speed. Fluid flow velocity effectively d escribes everything about
the motion of a fluid.
Volumetric Flow
In addition to flow velocity, volumetric flow rate is a n important quantity in fluid dynamics analysis. V olum etric flow is defined as
the volume of fluid that passes through a given surfa ce per unit time. Qualitatively, Figure 1 shows the notio n of volumetric flow
rate regarding a cross-sectional surface of area A. Mat hematically, volumetric flow rate is the derivative o f the volume of fluid that
passes through a given surface with respect to time; in SI units this is expressed as meterscubed per seco nd. V olumetric flow rate is
related to the flow velocity vector as the surface i ntegral with respect to the surface in question. If th e surface area in question is a
flat, plane cross-section, the surface integral reduc es as shown in Equation 2, where A is the surface area of the surface in question
and v is the flow velocity of the fluid.learning objectives

11.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14501
Volumetric Flow Rate: V olumetric Flow Rate Surface Integral and its simplificat ion
Flow Velocity – Volumetric Flow Rate Relation: This figure shows the relation between flow velocity and volumetric flow rate.
Moreover, only the flow velocity component parallel to the surface normal of the surface in question, or al ternatively the flow
velocity component perpendicular to the surface in question contributes to the volumetric flow rate. Figur e 1 and Equation 2
illustrate decomposition of the flow velocity vector, making an angle θ with respect to the normal of the surface plane in order to
calculate volumetric flow rate through that surface. Thus, volumetric flow rate for a given fluid velocity and cross-sectional surface
area increases as θ decreases, and is maximized when θ = 0. V olumetric flow rate is an important scalar quan tity in fluid dynamics
and is used widely in fluid flow measurements. V olume tric flow rate can be converted to mass flow rate if t he density of the fluid is
known. Flow of fluids through a closed system is often analyzed as a hydraulic circuit analogous to electr on flow in an electronic
circuit where: 1) the volumetric fluid flow is analogo us to the electric current, 2) pressure is analogous to the voltage, and 3) fluid
velocity is analogous to current density.
Key Points
There are many fluids in biology and understanding their beh avior in motion is crucial to effective medicine.
The heart pumps a fluid, blood, throughout a series of tubes in the body.
Circulation may be understood through a study of fluid d ynamics.
Diffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchang e of nutrients and waste products occur between the blood and
tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs.
Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the kidneys to cl eanse the blood, and the medical application of dialysis through
machinery is important in the treatment of individuals with failing kidney function.
Flow velocity is a vector quantity used to describe the mo tion of a fluid. It can be easily determined for laminar flow but
complex to determine for turbulent flow.
V olumetric flow rate is the volume of a liquid that passes through a given surface per unit time. It is found fro m the flow
velocity and the surface area of the surface through whic h the fluid passes.
Fluid flow through a closed hydraulic system is analyzed m uch like electron flow through an electronic circuit — where
volumetric flow rate is analogous to current, flow veloci ty is analogous to current density, and pressure is analogous t o voltage
(electrical potential).
Key Terms
vascular: Of, pertaining to, or containing vessels that conduct or c irculate fluids (such as blood, lymph, or sap) through the
body of an animal or plant.
osmosis: The net movement of solvent molecules from a region of high solvent potential to a region of lower solvent poten tial
through a partially permeable membrane.
dialysis: A method of separating molecules or particles of diff erent sizes by differential diffusion through a semipermeab le
membrane.
Laminar Flow: Non-turbulent motion of a fluid in which parallel layer s have different velocities relative to each other.
Turbulent Flow: The motion of a fluid having local velocities and pres sures that fluctuate randomly.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS

11.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14501CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Introduction to Fluid Dynamics and Its Bio logical and Medical Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42204/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Haemodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Haemodynamics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dialysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dialysis. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
osmosis. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/osmosis. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vascular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vascular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Flow measurement). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_measurement). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Flow measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_measurement. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
V olumetric flow rate. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volumetric_flow_rate. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/turbulent-flow. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/laminar-flow. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 11.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

11.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450211.2: Flow in Tubes
Contrast turbulent and laminar flow in constant velocity
Virtually all moving fluids exhibit viscosity, which i s a measure of the resistance of a fluid to flow. Vis cosity is a basic property
necessary for the analysis of fluid flow.
Measure of Fluid Friction
It describes a fluid’s internal resistance to movement and can be thought of as a measure of fluid frictio n. The greater the viscosity,
the ‘thicker’ the fluid and the more the fluid will resist movement.
Mathematically, viscosity is a proportionality constan t relating an applied shear stress to the resulting s hear velocity and is given,
along with a representative diagram, (see). As shown, when a force is applied to a fluid, creating a shear stress, th e fluid will
undergo a certain displacement. The viscosity of the fluid is then its inherent resistance to undergo this displacem ent.
Representation of Viscosity: A proportionality constant relating an applied she ar stress to the resulting shear velocity.
Different fluids exhibit different viscous behavior ye t, in this analysis, only Newtonian fluids (fluids with co nstant velocity
independent of applied shear stress) will be considere d. Viscosity in fluids generally decreases with incre asing temperature. The
study of the viscous nature of fluids is called rheology.
In analyzing the properties of moving fluids, it is ne cessary to determine the nature of flow of the fluid. This is generally split into
two categories, laminar and turbulent flow.
Turbulent Flow
Turbulent flow is characterized by irregular flow of a fluid in which there are both inconsistent flow patte rns and velocity
variations throughout the volume of the fluid in mot ion. Analysis of turbulent flow can be very complex a nd often requires
advanced mathematical analysis to simulate flow in syste ms on a near case-by-case basis.
It occurs when the Reynolds number is above a certain critical threshold while mixed turbulent–laminar flo w occurs within a range
of Reynolds number below this threshold value. At the lower limit of this mixed turbulent–laminar flow Reyn olds number region
there is another critical threshold value, below which only laminar flow is possible.
Laminar Flow
Laminar flow consists of a regular-flow pattern with co nstant-flow velocity throughout the fluid volume and is much easier to
analyze than turbulent flow.
Relative Magnitudes of Velocity Vectors: Laminar fluid flow in a circular pipe at the same directio n.learning objectives

11.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14502Laminar flow is often encountered in common hydrauli c systems, such as where fluid flow is through an enclose d, rigid pipe; the
fluid is incompressible, has constant viscosity, and t he Reynolds number is below this lower critical threshol d value. It is
characterized by the flow of a fluid in parallel lay ers, in which there is no disruption or interaction be tween the different layers, and
in which each layer flows at a different velocity alo ng the same direction. The variation in velocity be tween adjacent parallel layers
is due to the viscosity of the fluid and resulting shear fo rces.
This figure (see) gives a representation of the rel ative magnitudes of the velocity vectors of each of these layers for laminar fluid
flow through a circular pipe, in a direction parallel to the pipe axis.
Poiseuille’s Equation: Can be used to determine the pressure drop of a constant vis cosity fluid exhibiting laminar flow through a
rigid pipe.
Considering laminar flow of a constant density, incom pressible fluid such as for a Newtonian fluid travelin g in a pipe, with a
Reynolds number below the upper limit level for fully laminar flow, the pressure difference between two poin ts along the pipe can
be found from the volumetric flow rate, or vice vers a. For such a system with a pipe radius of r, fluid visc osity η, distance between
the two points along the pipe Δx = x – x, and the vo lumetric flow rate Q, of the fluid, the pressure differ ence between the two
points along the pipe Δp is given by Poiseuille’s equation (see).
This equation is valid for laminar flow of incompressi ble fluids only, and may be used to determine a numb er of properties in the
hydraulic system, if the others are known or can be me asured. In practice, Poiseuille’s equation holds for m ost systems involving
laminar flow of a fluid, except at regions where features di srupting laminar flow, such as at the ends of a pipe, are pre sent.
Poiseuille’s equation as given in this example (see) is analogous to Ohm ‘s equation for determining the resistance in an electronic
circuit and is of great practical use in hydraulic-circu it analysis.
Poiseuille’s Equation: Analogous to Ohm’s Law Analogy
Blood Flow
Blood flow is the continuous running of blood through the cardiovascular system, which consists of the vessels and the heart.
Outline how normal plasma behaves in a mammalian cardiovas cular system
Blood flow is the continuous running of blood through vessels in the cardiovascular system (the mammalian ca rdiovascular system
is shown in). Blood is the viscous fluid composed of plasma and cells. The composition of the blood include s plasma, red blood
cells, white blood cells and platelets. In microcirculati on, the properties of the blood cells have an important i nfluence on flow.2 1
learning objectives

11.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14502
An illustrative overview of the mammalian cardiovascular system: Keep in mind that both circular paths are working
simultaneously and not in a sequential manner as the numb ering in the illustration might suggest. Both the ventric les are working
together in harmony; as tiny amounts of blood are moving in the pulmonary circuit, the remainder of the blood moves through the
systemic circuit.
The cardiovascular system, which consists of blood vess els and the heart, helps to distribute nutrients, O, and other products of
metabolism. The blood moves in the blood vessels, whil e the heart serves as the pump for the blood. The ve ssel walls of the heart
are elastic and movable, therefore causing the bloo d and the wall to exert forces on each other and in turn influencing their
respective motion.
The major quantity of interest in describing the mot ion of blood particles is velocity—the rate of chang e of the position of an object
with time:
Blood velocities in arteries are higher during syst ole than during diastole. One parameter to quantify this difference is pulsatility
index (PI), which is equal to the difference between t he peak systolic velocity and the minimum diastolic velocity divided by the
mean velocity during the cardiac cycle.
Another important parameter is the acceleration—the rat e of change of velocity:
Normal plasma behaves like a Newtonian fluid at rates o f shear. Typical values for the viscosity of normal human plasma at 37°C is
1.2Nsm. The viscosity of normal plasma varies with tem perature in the same way as does that of its solvent, water. (a 5°C
increase of temperature in the physiological range red uces plasma viscosity by about 10%).
The osmotic pressure of the plasma affects the mechan ics of the circulation in several ways. An alteration of the osmotic pressure
difference across the membrane of a blood cell cause s a shift of water and a change in cell volume. The change, both in shape and
flexibility, affects the mechanical properties of whol e blood. Therefore, a change in plasma osmotic press ure alters the hematocrit
(the volume concentration of red cells in the whole b lood) by redistributing water between the intravascul ar and extravascular
spaces. This in turn affects the mechanics of the whole bloo d.2
-2

11.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14502Key Points
Viscosity is the resistance of a fluid to flow. Virtuall y all fluids have viscosity which generally changes as a fun ction of
temperature; although different types of fluids exhibi t different types of fluid–shear velocity dependencies.
Laminar flow of a fluid is characterized by its flow in par allel layers in which there is no disruption or interaction between the
different layers, and in which each layer flows at a differ ent velocity along the same direction.
Poiseuille’s equation pertains to moving incompressible fluids exhibiting laminar flow. It relates the difference in pressure at
different spatial points to volumetric flow rate for fluids in motion in certain cases, such as in the flow of fluid thr ough a rigid
pipe.
The major quantity of interest in describing the motion of blood particles is the velocity – the rate of change of t he position of
an object with time:.
Blood velocities in arteries are higher during systol e than during diastole.
The mechanics of the circulation depends on osmotic pressure of plasma.
Key Terms
viscosity: The property of a fluid that resists the force which tend s to cause it to flow.
shear stress: The external force acting on an object or surface pa rallel to the slope or plane in which it lies; the stress tending to
produce shear.
Reynolds Number: A dimensionless number,, where v is the fluid velocity, ρ the density, η the viscosity and l a dimension
of the system. The value of the number indicates the type of fluid flow.
systole: The rhythmic contraction of the heart, by which blood i s driven through the arteries.
vessel: A tube or canal that carries fluid in an animal or plant.
diastole: The phase or process of relaxation and dilation of the heart chambers, between contractions, during which they fil l
with blood; an instance of the process.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Poiseuille. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Poiseuille. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Laminar flow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laminar_flow. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Viscosity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Poiseuille. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Poiseuille. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/reynolds-number.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
shear stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shear_stress. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Blood flow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_flow. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
diastole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diastole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

11.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14502systole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/systole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vessel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vessel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Circulatory System en. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Circulatory_System_en.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 11.2: Flow in Tubes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

11.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450311.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
Adapt Bernoulli’s equation for flows that are either unstea dy or compressible
Application of Bernoulli’s Equation
The relationship between pressure and velocity in ide al fluids is described quantitatively by Bernoulli’s e quation, named after its
discoverer, the Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1 782). Bernoulli’s equation states that for an incompr essible and inviscid
fluid, the total mechanical energy of the fluid is consta nt. (An inviscid fluid is assumed to be an ideal fluid with no viscosity.)
AP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s Principle
Bernoulli’s Principle: A brief introduction to Bernoulli’ s Principle for stude nts studying fluids.
The total mechanical energy of a fluid exists in two forms: potential and kinetic. The kinetic energy of the fluid is stored in static
pressure, psps, and dynamic pressure, 12ρV212ρV2, where \rh o is the fluid density in (SI unit: kg/m) and V is t he fluid velocity
(SI unit: m/s). The SI unit of static pressure and dynami c pressure is the pascal.learning objectives

11.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503
Syphoning: Syphoning fluid between two reservoirs. The flow rate ou t can be determined by drawing a streamline from point (A)
to point (C).
Static pressure is simply the pressure at a given poin t in the fluid, dynamic pressure is the kinetic energ y per unit volume of a fluid
particle. Thus, a fluid will not have dynamic pressure u nless it is moving. Therefore, if there is no change i n potential energy along
a streamline, Bernoulli’s equation implies that the total energy along that streamline is constant and i s a balance between static and
dynamic pressure. Mathematically, the previous statement i mplies:
along a streamline. If changes there are significant changes in height or if the fluid density is high, the change in potential energy
should not be ignored and can be accounted for with,
This simply adds another term to the above version of the Be rnoulli equation and results in
Deriving Bernoulli’s Equation
The Bernoulli equation can be derived by integratin g Newton’s 2nd law along a streamline with gravitationa l and pressure forces as
the only forces acting on a fluid element. Given that any energy exchanges result from conservative force s, the total energy along a
streamline is constant and is simply swapped between poten tial and kinetic.
Applying Bernoulli’s Equation
Bernoulli’s equation can be applied when syphoning f luid between two reservoirs. Another useful application of the Bernoulli
equation is in the derivation of Torricelli’s law fo r flow out of a sharp edged hole in a reservoir. A s treamline can be drawn from the
top of the reservoir, where the total energy is known, t o the exit point where the static pressure and potenti al energy are known but
the dynamic pressure (flow velocity out) is not.
Adapting Bernoulli’s Equation
The Bernoulli equation can be adapted to flows that are both unsteady and compressible. However, the assumpt ion of inviscid flow
remains in both the unsteady and compressible versio ns of the equation. Compressibility effects depend o n the speed of the flow

11.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503relative to the speed of sound in the fluid. This i s determined by the dimensionless quantity known as t he Mach number. The Mach
number represents the ratio of the speed of an object m oving through a medium to the speed of sound in the mediu m.
Torricelli’s Law
Torricelli’s law is theorem about the relation betwee n the exit velocity of a fluid from a hole in a res ervoir to the height of fluid
above the hole.
Infer the exit velocity through examining the Bernoulli equation
Torricelli’s law is theorem in fluid dynamics about th e relation between the exit velocity of a fluid from a sharp-edged hole in a
reservoir to the height of the fluid above that exi t hole. This relationship applies for an “ideal” fl uid (inviscid and incompressible)
and results from an exchange of potential energy,
AP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s Principle
Torricelli’s Principle: A brief introduction to Torricelli’s Principle for st udents studying fluids.
mghmgh, for kinetic energy,
, at the exit.
This relationship can be derived by applying the Ber noulli equation between the top of the reservoir and the exit hole. Applying
Bernoulli between the top of a reservoir and an exit hole a t a height h below the top of the reservoir results in,learning objectives

11.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503
Exchange of Energy: Potential energy at the top of the reservoir becomes k inetic energy at the exit.
where subscript t implies evaluation at the top of th e reservoir and subscript e implies evaluation at t he exit. If we assume both the
top of reservoir and the exit are open to the atmosp here, the zero for potential energy is at the exit h ole, and the fluid velocity at the
top of the reservoir is essentially zero (large reservoir, small hole), we arrive at
This can be solved for the exit velocity, resulting in,
where again h is the height difference between the to p of the reservoir and the exit hole. Due to the assu mption of an ideal fluid, all
forces acting on the fluid are conservative and thus there is an exchange between potential and kinetic e nergy. The result is that the
velocity acquired by the fluid is the same that a body woul d acquire when simply dropped from the height h
A simple experiment to test Torricelli’s law involves filling a soda bottle with water and puncturing the bottom with a small hole
(about 1 cm in diameter). As the height in the reser voir decreases, the exit velocity will decrease as wel l. The exit velocity can be
increased by capping the top of the reservoir and pressur izing it.
Toricelli’s Law: The exit velocity depends on the height of the fluid abo ve the exit hole.
Ideal Fluid: Applies to an ideal fluid (inviscid, incompressible)
Surface Tension
The tendency of the surface of a liquid to resist a force and behave like a membrane and is a result of cohesion between liquid
molecules.t
t.

11.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503Summarize the cause for different surface tensions at a liquid’s surface
Surface tension is the tendency of a liquid surface t o resist forces applied to it. This effect is a res ult of cohesion of the molecules of
the liquid causing the surface of the liquid to con tract to the smallest area possible. This effect is vi sible in nature with water strider
insects that are able to walk on water. Also, a paper clip o r pin can be supported by the surface tension at a wate r air interface.
Surface Tension FBD: Force diagrams showing the direction of forces for wate r supporting a water strider (insect) foot and a pin.
In both cases, the vertical component of the surface tensio n is enough to support the weight of the object.
In the bulk of the liquid, the molecules are pulled equally in all directions. The molecules at the surf ace feel a greater attractive
force toward the bulk material than the interface ma terial.
The surface of a liquid is an interface between anoth er fluid, a solid body, or both. Therefore, the surfac e tension will be a property
of the interface rather than simply the liquid. Adhes ion describes the attractive force between molecules of different types. The
surface of a liquid in a container is an interface between the liquid, the air, and the container. Where the surfaces meet, forces must
be in equilibrium. This results in a contact angle at the interface. The contact angle is measured in the liquid and depends on the
relative strength of cohesive forces in the liquid and adhesive forces between the liquid and interface materials. If liquid molecules
are strongly attracted to the molecules of the solid surface (adhesive forces > cohesive forces), the d rop will tend to spread out and
the contact angle will be close to zero degrees. If t he cohesive forces are greater than the adhesive for ces, the resulting contact
angles will be large and will form a more circular drop.
Water Droplet on Leaf: When a water droplet forms on a leaf, the cohesive forces betw een the water molecules are greater than
the adhesive forces between the water and leaf surface. The lea f is a hydrophobic surface.
learning objectives

11.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503Contact Angle: The contact angle is the angle, measured in the fluid, that results when a liquid-gas interface, meets a solid surfac e.
When the liquid is water, a surface where the contact angle is small is said to be hydrophilic. Large cont act angles are present on
hydrophobic surfaces. The contact angle determines the wettability of the surface.
Key Points
The simplest form of Bernoulli’s equation (steady and incom pressible flow) states that the sum of mechanical energy, poten tial
energy and kinetic energy, along a streamline is const ant. Therefore, any increase in one form results in a decr ease in the other.
Bernoulli’s equation considers only pressure and gravita tional forces acting on the fluid particles. Therefore, if th ere is no
change in height along a streamline, Bernoulli’s equatio n becomes a balance between static pressure and velocity.
The steady-state, incompressible Bernoulli equation, can be derived by integrating Newton’s 2nd law along a str eamline.
Torricelli’s law applies to an inviscid, incompressible fluid (“ideal” fluid).
You can ascertain results from applying the Bernoulli e quation between the top of the reservoir and the exit hole.
The relationship arises from an exchange of potentia l energy at the top of the reservoir to kinetic energy at the exit.
The final kinetic energy is equivalent to what a solid bod y would acquire when falling from height h.
Surface tension is a result of cohesion between the molecul es of the liquid. The molecules at the surface of the liqui d feel an
attractive force pulling them toward the bulk of the liq uid more than the solid or fluid at the interface.
When a liquid-solid-gas interface is encountered, the c ontact angle represents a measure of the relative streng th of adhesive and
cohesive forces.
The contact angle determines the wettability of a surface.
Key Terms
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
Ideal Fluid: An inviscid and incompressible fluid
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
inviscid: A fluid with zero viscosity (internal friction). In real ity viscosity is always present. However, it is often very sm all
compared with other forces (e.g. gravity, pressure) and for com mon fluids (water and air) the fluid can be approximated as
having zero viscosity.
cohesion: Various intermolecular forces that hold solids and liq uids together.
wettability: The ability of a solid surface to reduce the surface tens ion of a liquid in contact with it such that it spreads over the
surface and wets it.
adhesion: The ability of a substance to stick to an unlike substance.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/ideal-fluid. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/inviscid. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

11.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14503Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/TorricelliLa w.svg/200px-TorricelliLaw.svg.png. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d670e4b010f3dd6d22de/idea l.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d406e4b010f3dd6d22c1/peke.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Torricelli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension%23Effects_of_surface_tensio n. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
adhesion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adhesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cohesion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cohesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wettability. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wettability. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/TorricelliLa w.svg/200px-TorricelliLaw.svg.png. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d670e4b010f3dd6d22de/idea l.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d406e4b010f3dd6d22c1/peke.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Torricelli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Erik Christensen, College Physics II. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11458/1.2. License: CC BY: Attribution
SurfTensionContactAngle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:SurfTensionContactAngle.png.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Dew 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dew_2.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
This page titled 11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

11.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450411.4: Other Applications
Predict if flow will be laminar or turbulent
It is possible to predict if flow will be laminar or turbulent. At low velocity, flow in a very smooth tube or around a smooth,
streamlined object will be laminar. At high velocity, even the flow in a smooth tube or around a smooth obj ect will experience
turbulence. However, between low and high velocity, flow is more difficult to predict. In fact, at intermedia te velocities, flow may
oscillate back and forth indefinitely between laminar an d turbulent.
An occlusion (narrowing) of an artery, such as shown in, is likely to cause turbulence because of the irregu larity of the blockage, as
well as the complexity of blood as a fluid. Turbulenc e in the circulatory system (such as aneurysms, or ballo oning of arteries) is
noisy and can sometimes be detected with a stethosco pe (such as when measuring diastolic pressure in the upper arm’s partially
collapsed brachial artery). These turbulent sounds, at the onset of blood flow when the cuff pressure becom es sufficiently small, are
called Korotkoff sounds. Heart murmurs, consistent with their name, are sou nds produced by turbulent flow around damaged and
insufficiently closed heart valves. Another method of detecting this type of turbulence is ultrasound, used as a medical indicator in
a process analogous to Doppler-shift radar (used to detec t storms).
Turbulent Flow in an Artery: Flow is laminar in the large part of this blood vessel and tur bulent in the part narrowed by plaque,
where velocity is high. In the transition region, the flow c an oscillate chaotically between laminar and turbulent fl ow.
Turbulence manifests in other areas, with varying caus es. During an airplane flight, for example, the turbu lence experienced is due
to the mixing of warm and cold air in the atmosphere, causing the airplane to shake. The mixing currents i n oceans creates a similar
effect.
The phenomenon of turbulent air flow must be account ed for in many applications. For example, race cars ar e unable to follow
each other around fast corners because the leading car creates turbulent air flow in its wake (this can lead to under-steering).
Industrial equipment, such as pipes, ducts, and heat exchangers are often designed to induce the flow reg ime of interest (laminar or
turbulent). When flow is turbulent, particles exhibit a dditional transverse motion. This enhances the rate o f energy and momentum
exchange between them, increasing the heat transfer. T urbulent flow is thus desirable in applications where a relatively cool fluid is
mixed with a warmer fluid to reduce the temperature of the warmer fluid.
It is imperative to take into account turbulent flo w when designing certain structures, such as a bridge support, as shown in. In the
late summer and fall, when river flow is slow, water flows smoothly around the support legs. In the spring, when t he flow is faster,
the flow may start off laminar but it is quickly sep arated from the leg and becomes turbulent. The bridge supports must be designed
so that they can withstand the turbulent flow of the water i n the spring.learning objectives

11.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504
Longtown Bridge: Turbulent flow is visible around the bridge supports of t he Longtown bridge.
Motionof an Object in a Viscous Field
Objects moving in a viscous fluid feel a resistive force p roportional to the viscosity of the fluid.
Assess the relationship of the parameters to one another i n determining the inertia of an object moving in fluid
Overview
A moving object in a viscous fluid is equivalent to a stationary object in a flowing fluid stream. (For e xample, when you ride a
bicycle at 10 m/s in still air, you feel the air in y our face exactly as if you were stationary in a 10-m /s wind.) Flow of the stationary
fluid around a moving object may be laminar, turbule nt, or a combination of the two. Just as with flow in tu bes, it is possible to
predict when a moving object creates turbulence. We u se another form of the Reynolds number N′R, defined f or an object moving
in a fluid to be
where L is a characteristic length of the object (a sp here’s diameter, for example), the fluid density, its viscosity, and v the object’s
speed in the fluid. If N′R is less than about 1, flow a round the object can be laminar, particularly if the object has a smooth shape.
The transition to turbulent flow occurs for N′R betwee n 1 and about 10, depending on surface roughness and so on. Depending on
the surface, there can be a turbulent wake behind the object with some laminar flow over its sur face. For an N′R between 10 and
10^6, the flow may be either laminar or turbulent and may oscillate between the two. For N′R greater than abo ut 10^6, the flow is
entirely turbulent, even at the surface of the objec t. (See.) Laminar flow occurs mostly when the objects in the fluid are small, such
as raindrops, pollen, and blood cells in plasma.
Motion of an object in a viscous fluid.: (a) Motion of this sphere to the right is equivalent to fl uid flow to the left. Here the flow is
laminar with N′R less than 1. There is a force, called viscous drag FV, to the left on the ball due to the fluid’s viscosi ty. (b) At a
higher speed, the flow becomes partially turbulent, creat ing a wake starting where the flow lines separate from the surface. Pressure
in the wake is less than in front of the sphere, because fl uid speed is less, creating a net force to the left F′V that i s significantly
greater than for laminar flow. Here N′R is greater than 10. (c) At much higher speeds, where N′R is greater than 10^6, fl ow
becomes turbulent everywhere on the surface and behind the sphere. Drag increases dramatically.learning objectives

11.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504Viscous Drag
One of the consequences of viscosity is a resistance f orce called viscous drag FVFV that is exerted on a movin g object. This force
typically depends on the object’s speed (in contrast wi th simple friction). Experiments have shown that for laminar flow (N′R less
than about one) viscous drag is proportional to spee d, whereas for N′R between about 10 and 106, viscous drag is proportional to
speed squared. (This relationship is a strong dependen ce and is pertinent to bicycle racing, where even a s mall headwind causes
significantly increased drag on the racer. Cyclists t ake turns being the leader in the pack for this rea son.) For N′R greater than 106,
drag increases dramatically and behaves with greater complexity. For laminar flow around a sphere, FVFV is prop ortional to fluid
viscosity, the object’s characteristic size L, and its speed v. All of which makes sense—the more viscous the fluid and the larger the
object, the more drag we expect. Recall Stoke’s law FS=6π rηvFS=6πrηv. For the special case of a small sphere of radius R, moving
slowly in a fluid of viscosity, the drag force FSFS is given by
FS=6πRηvFS=6πRηv.
Molecular Transport Phenomena
Molecular transport phenomena are ways in which molecul es are transported from one region to another. These include diffusion
and osmosis.
Predict the role diffusion plays in blood transport througho ut the body
Diffusion
Atoms and molecules are in constant motion at any tem perature. In fluids they move about randomly even in the absence of
macroscopic flow.
Diffusion is the movement of substances due to rando m thermal molecular motion. Fluids, like fish fumes o r odors entering ice
cubes, can even diffuse through solids. Diffusion is a slow process over macroscopic distances. The densities of common materials
are great enough that molecules cannot travel very far before having a collision that can scatter them in any direction, including
straight backward. More massive molecules diffuse more slo wly.
Another interesting point is that the diffusion rate for oxygen in air is much greater than for oxygen in water. In water, an oxygen
molecule makes many more collisions in its random walk and is slowed considerably. In water, an oxygen molecule moves only
about 40μm in 1 s. (Each molecule actually collides about 1010 times per second!). Finally, note that diff usion constants increase
with temperature, because average molecular speed incr eases with temperature. This is because the average kine tic energy of
molecules, 1/2mv, is proportional to absolute tempe rature. Because diffusion is typically very slow, i ts most important effects
occur over small distances. For example, the cornea of t he eye gets most of its oxygen by diffusion through the thin tear layer
covering it.
If you very carefully place a drop of food coloring in a still glass of water, it will slowly diffuse into the colorless surroundings
until its concentration is the same everywhere. This type of diffusion is called free diffusion, because there are no barriers inhibiting
it. Let us examine its direction and rate. Molecular motion is random in direction, and so simple chance dictates that more
molecules will move out of a region of high concentr ation than into it. The net rate of diffusion is hi gher initially than after the
process is partially completed. The rate of diffusion is proportional to the concentration difference. M any more molecules will
leave a region of high concentration than will enter it from a region of low concentration. In fact, if th e concentrations were the
same, there would be no net movement. The rate of dif fusion is also proportional to the diffusion constant D, which is determined
experimentally. Many of the factors that affect the r ate are hidden in the diffusion constant D. For examp le, temperature and
cohesive and adhesive forces all affect values of D. Di ffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and
waste products occur between the blood and tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs. In the evolutiona ry process, as
organisms became larger, they needed quicker methods o f transportation than net diffusion, because of the larger distances involved
in the transport, leading to the development of circ ulatory systems. Less sophisticated, single-celled org anisms still rely totally on
diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptake o f nutrients.learning objectives

11.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504
Food Coloring: Food coloring spreading on a thin water film.
Osmosis and Dialysis – Diffusion Across Different Membranes
Some of the most interesting examples of diffusion o ccur through barriers that affect the rates of diff usion. For example, when you
soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, water diffuses throu gh your skin. Many substances regularly move through c ell membranes;
oxygen moves in, carbon dioxide moves out, nutrient s go in, and wastes go out, for example. Because memb ranes are thin
structures (typically 6.5×10 to 10×10 m across) diffus ion rates through them can be high.
Diffusion through membranes is an important method of transport. Membranes are generally selectively perme able, or
semipermeable. In other types of membranes, the molec ules may actually dissolve in the membrane or react with molecules in the
membrane while moving across. Membrane function, in f act, is the subject of much current research, involvin g not only physiology
but also chemistry and physics. Osmosis is driven by t he imbalance in water concentration. For example, water is more
concentrated in your body than in Epsom salt. When you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, the water moves out of your body
into the lower-concentration region in the salt. Simi larly, dialysis is the transport of any other molecul e through a semipermeable
membrane due to its concentration difference. Both osmos is and dialysis are used by the kidneys to cleanse the bloo d.
Diffusion: (a) Two sugar-water solutions of different concentrati ons, separated by a semipermeable membrane that passes wat er
but not sugar. Osmosis will be to the right, since water is less co ncentrated there. (b) The fluid level rises until the ba ck pressure
ρgh equals the relative osmotic pressure; then, the net tra nsfer of water is zero.
Pumps and the Heart
The heart pumps blood through the body by contracting a nd relaxing, increasing and decreasing the pressure.
Contrast systole and diastole in cardiovascular circulat ion
The Heart and its Parts
The heart is made up of four chambers. Two atria at th e top of the heart receive blood and two ventricles a t the bottom of the heart
pump blood out of the heart. The septum divides the l eft and right side of the heart, while the valves of th e heart ensure that blood
only flows in one direction.They include the tricuspid valve-found between the right atrium and the right ventricle-and the mitral−9 −9
learning objectives

11.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504valve-found between the left atrium and the left ven tricle. The list of heart valves also includes the s emi-lunar valves, which are
located at the bottom of the aorta and pulmonary ar tery. Strong tendinous chords attached to valves prev ent them from turning
inside out when they close.
The human heart will undergo over 3 billion contract ion cycles during a normal lifetime. A complete card iac cycle is one round of
the heart pumping blood and consists of two parts: s ystole (contraction of the heart muscle) and diastole (relaxation of the heart
muscle). During the cycle, the top half of the heart works a s one unit, while the bottom half of the heart works as one unit.
The heart beat can be heard as a sound that the val ves make when they close. The ‘lub’ sound is made when the atrio ventricular
valves close and the ‘dub’ sound is made when the semi lunar valves close. Blood pressure is produced by th e left ventricle
contractions.The rhythm of ventricle diastole, often just referred to as diastole, causes the pulse, which can be felt by holding two
fingers to the side of the throat.
Cardiac Cycle: The heart pumps blood through the body.
Key Points
For low velocity, flow in a smooth tube will be laminar.
At higher velocities or if there are obstructions, the flo w turns turbulent.
Turbulent flow is very chaotic, with rapid variations in vel ocity and pressure.
Viscous fluids exert a resitive force on objects attempt ing to move through them.
This resistive force is called viscous drag and is propor tional to the viscosity of the fluid and the motion of the object.
An object moving in a fluid can be thought of as a sta tionary object in a moving fluid.
Diffusion is the movement of molecules due to random th ermal motion.
Osmosis is the movement of molecules due to different concen trations. Molecules will move from regions of high
concentrations to lower concentrations.
These transport phenomena can take place through membr anes if the pressure is great enough.
Key Terms
turbulent: Being in, or causing, disturbance or unrest.
streamlined: Designed to offer little resistance to the flow of fluid, especially by having sleek, graceful lines.
laminar: Of fluid motion, smooth and regular, flowing as though i n different layers.
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
turbulence: Disturbance in a gas or fluid, characterized by eviden ce of internal motion or unrest.
diffusion: the intermingling of the molecules of a fluid due to ra ndom thermal agitation
ventricle: One of two lower chambers of the heart.
contraction: A reversible reduction in size.

11.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504atrium: An upper chamber of the heart that receives blood fro m the veins and forces it into a ventricle. In higher vertebrates,
the right atrium receives blood from the superior ve na cava and inferior vena cava, and the left atrium rece ives blood from the
left and right pulmonary veins.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Turbulence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Turbulence%23Examples_of_turbulence.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Turbulence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Turbulence%23Examples_of_turbulence.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
streamlined. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/streamlined. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
turbulent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/turbulent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
laminar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/laminar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Viscous. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscous%23Newtonian_and_non-Newtonian_fluids.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
turbulence. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/turbulence. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/diffusion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. February 16, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

11.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14504Food coloring. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_coloring. License: CC BY: Attribution
Daniel Williamson, 2.3.1 Blood Circulatory System. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
contraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
atrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrium. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ventricle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ventricle. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. February 16, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Food coloring. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_coloring. License: CC BY: Attribution
Daniel Williamson, 2.3.1 Blood Circulatory System. Februa ry 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 11.4: Other Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26949CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Back Matter
Index

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950Index
A
aberration
24.3: Lenses
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
absolute space
27.1: Introduction
absolute zero
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
14.4: Entropy
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
acceleration
1.2: Units
2.3: Acceleration
2.5: Free-Falling Objects
3.2: Vectors
4.3: Newton’s Laws
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
achromatic
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
achromatic doublet
24.3: Lenses
action potential
19.6: Electricity in the World
adhesion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
adiabatic
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
adiabatic index
13.2: Specific Heat
aether
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
afocal system
24.3: Lenses
alpha particle
29.2: The Early Atom
30.2: Radioactivity
alternating current
20.5: RC Circuits
Alveoli
10.2: Density and Pressure
AM Radio Waves
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Ampere
19.2: Electric Current
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
Ampere's law
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
amplifier
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
amplitude
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.7: Waves on Strings
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
Aneroid Barometer
10.2: Density and Pressure
angular
9.2: Angular Accelerationangular acceleration
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
angular frequency
15.3: Periodic Motion
angular momentum
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
angular motion
8.1: Introduction
angular position
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
angular velocity
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
8.1: Introduction
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
annihilation
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
antimatter
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
antinode
16.1: Introduction
16.5: Further Topics
aperture
25.1: The Human Eye
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
application
1.1: The Basics of Physics
approximation
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Archimedes' Principle
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
Artificial satellite
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
asteroid
14.4: Entropy
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
astronomical unit
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
atom
12.1: Introduction
atomic number
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
atomic orbital
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
atomic spectra
30.1: The Nucleus
atrium
11.4: Other Applications
Avogadro’s number
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
29.2: The Early Atomaxis
3.2: Vectors
axon
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
B
ballistics
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
basal metabolic rate
6.6: Power
base
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
battery
19.2: Electric Current
20.1: Overview
Bell's theorem
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
Bernoulli’s equation
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
beta decay
30.2: Radioactivity
bilateral symmetry
3.3: Projectile Motion
binary data
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
black body
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
black body radiation
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
blackbody
13.5: Global Warming
Boltzmann constant
12.5: Kinetic Theory
boundary condition
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
Boyle's Law
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
brachytherapy
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
breakdown
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
brine
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
Brownian motion
12.1: Introduction
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
buoyancy
10.2: Density and Pressure
buoyant force
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
C
calorie
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
calorimeter
13.2: Specific Heat

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950calorimetry
13.1: Introduction
capacitance
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
capacitor
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.5: RC Circuits
Carnot cycle
14.4: Entropy
cathode
29.2: The Early Atom
CCD
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
cell membrane
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
center of mass
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
7.5: Center of Mass
8.3: Stability
8.7: The Center of Gravity
centrifugal force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
centripetal
29.2: The Early Atom
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
centripetal acceleration
15.3: Periodic Motion
CFC
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
characteristic time constant
22.2: AC Circuits
chemical reaction
12.1: Introduction
chromatic aberration
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
circuit
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
circular motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
cladding
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
classical electrodynamics
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
classical mechanics
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
classical physics
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
closed system
7.1: Introduction
cochlea
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
coherence
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
coherent
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
26.1: Superposition and Interference
cohesion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equationcombination circuit
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
combustion
13.2: Specific Heat
complex numbers
19.5: Alternating Currents
component
3.2: Vectors
compression
15.5: Waves
compressive stress
8.5: Applications of Statics
computed tomography
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
concave lens
24.3: Lenses
concave mirror
24.4: Mirrors
concentration
12.9: Diffusion
conductive medium
19.1: Overview
conductor
17.1: Overview
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
conservation
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
7.1: Introduction
conservation of energy
7.3: Collisions
conservation of momentum principle
7.3: Collisions
conservative force
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
constant velocity
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
constructive interference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.5: Further Topics
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
continuity
10.5: Fluids in Motion
contraction
11.4: Other Applications
contrast
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
control rod
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
conversion
1.2: Units
convex
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
convex lens
24.3: Lenses
convex mirror
24.4: Mirrorscoordinate
3.2: Vectors
Coordinate axes
3.2: Vectors
corona discharge
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
coulomb
17.1: Overview
18.1: Overview
Coulomb force
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Coulomb’s Law
10.6: Deformation of Solids
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
Coulomb's law
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
crest
15.5: Waves
critical temperature
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
critically damped
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
cryptography
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
crystallography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
29.2: The Early Atom
Curie temperature
21.2: Magnets
current
19.2: Electric Current
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
Cyclotron
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
cyclotron frequency
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
D
damping
16.5: Further Topics
de Broglie wavelength
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
decay
30.2: Radioactivity
decibels (units)
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
deformation
15.2: Hooke’s Law
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
degeneracy
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
degree of freedom
12.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
demagnetization
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950destructive interference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.5: Further Topics
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
diagram
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
dialysis
11.1: Overview
diamagnetism
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
diastole
11.2: Flow in Tubes
dielectric
17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
differential
12.8: Thermal Stresses
differential equation
20.5: RC Circuits
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
diffraction
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
diffusion
11.4: Other Applications
12.9: Diffusion
19.6: Electricity in the World
dimension
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
10.6: Deformation of Solids
7.3: Collisions
diode
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
diopter
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
dipole
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
dipole moment
17.1: Overview
18.1: Overview
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
direct current
20.1: Overview
20.5: RC Circuits
direction of propagation
15.5: Waves
discharge
17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
disorder
14.4: Entropy
dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
displacement
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectorsdissipative force
15.3: Periodic Motion
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
distortion
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
diurnal
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
Doppler effect
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
Doppler shift
29.2: The Early Atom
dosimeter
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
dot product
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
drift velocity
19.2: Electric Current
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
dynamic contrast ratio
25.1: The Human Eye
dynamics
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
dynamo
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
E
eardrum
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
Eccentricity
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
elastic
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
elastic collision
7.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
Elastic potential energy
15.3: Periodic Motion
elasticity
15.2: Hooke’s Law
16.1: Introduction
electric charge
17.1: Overview
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
19.1: Overview
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
electric current
19.2: Electric Current
electric displacement field
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
electric field
17.1: Overview
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
18.1: Overview
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
electric potential
18.1: Overviewelectrical circuit
20.1: Overview
electrical resistance
19.1: Overview
electrocardiogram
19.6: Electricity in the World
electromagnet
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
Electromagnetic force
29.2: The Early Atom
electromagnetic radiation
26.3: Further Topics
30.2: Radioactivity
6.8: Further Topics
electromagnetic waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
electromotive force
20.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
electromotive force (emf)
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
electron affinity
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
electron gun
18.5: Applications
electron shell
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
electron volt
18.1: Overview
electrostatic force
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
element
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
elementary charge
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
elementary particle
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
emissivity
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
energy
15.5: Waves
6.1: Introduction
enthalpy
10.1: Introduction
13.2: Specific Heat
entropy
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
epistemological
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
epithelium
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
equation
4.5: Problem-Solving

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950equilibrium
10.2: Density and Pressure
12.6: Phase Changes
12.9: Diffusion
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
equipotential
18.1: Overview
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
Escape velocity
5.8: Energy Conservation
Euclidean
10.6: Deformation of Solids
evaporation
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
exponent
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
external beam therapy
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
F
Faraday constant
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
Faraday shield
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Faraday's law of induction
20.1: Overview
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
ferromagnet
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
ferromagnetic
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
fibrillation
19.6: Electricity in the World
fictitious force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
field of view
25.1: The Human Eye
first law of thermodynamics
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
6.8: Further Topics
fission
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
6.8: Further Topics
fluid
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
fluidity
10.1: Introduction
flux
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
flux density
18.3: Point Charge
flux intensity
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
FM
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrumfocal point
24.3: Lenses
force
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
4.1: Introduction
4.2: Force and Mass
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
7.3: Collisions
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
fossil fuels
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
Fourier analysis
15.1: Introduction
frame of reference
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
free electron laser
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
free fall
2.5: Free-Falling Objects
frequency
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.5: Waves
16.1: Introduction
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
friction
4.3: Newton’s Laws
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
7.3: Collisions
frigorific mixture
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
fundamental thermodynamic relation
13.2: Specific Heat
fusion
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
6.8: Further Topics
G
Galilean transformation
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
galvanometer
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
gamma (γ) rays
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
29.2: The Early Atom
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
Gamma decay
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
gamma ray
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
gas constant
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
Gauge Pressure
10.2: Density and Pressure
general relativity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
geometric optics
24.1: Overviewgeothermal
14.4: Entropy
gimbal
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
Gluon
30.1: The Nucleus
gradient
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
grating
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
gravitational acceleration
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
gravitational force
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
gravity
17.1: Overview
3.3: Projectile Motion
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
greenhouse effect
13.5: Global Warming
greenhouse gas
13.5: Global Warming
ground state
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
group velocity
15.5: Waves
gyroradius
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
H
harmonic oscillator
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
heat
14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
heat capacity
13.2: Specific Heat
heat engine
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
heat of reaction
13.2: Specific Heat
heat pump
14.4: Entropy
heat transfer
13.1: Introduction
helical
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
helical motion
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
hertz
16.1: Introduction
Hohmann transfer orbit
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
Hooke's Law
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
humidity
12.6: Phase Changes
Huygen's principle
16.5: Further Topics

5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950hydraulic press
10.2: Density and Pressure
hydrogen bond
12.3: Thermal Expansion
I
ideal energy
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
ideal fluid
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
ideal gas
10.2: Density and Pressure
12.1: Introduction
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
12.5: Kinetic Theory
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
image distance
24.3: Lenses
impedance
20.5: RC Circuits
22.2: AC Circuits
impulse
7.1: Introduction
incandescence
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
incident ray
26.3: Further Topics
incline
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
incompressible
10.2: Density and Pressure
10.5: Fluids in Motion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
index of refraction
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
induction
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
inductor
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.2: AC Circuits
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
inelastic
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
inelastic scattering
29.2: The Early Atom
inertia
1.2: Units
4.3: Newton’s Laws
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
inertial frame
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
Instantaneous
2.2: Speed and Velocity
insulator
17.1: Overview
interfere
16.4: Interactions with Sound Wavesinterference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
26.2: Diffraction
26.3: Further Topics
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
interferometer
26.1: Superposition and Interference
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
intermolecular
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
12.6: Phase Changes
internal energy
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
13.1: Introduction
14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
International Systems of Units
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
inverse
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
inviscid
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
ionization energy
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
ionizing radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
iridescence
26.2: Diffraction
isentropic
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
isolated system
13.1: Introduction
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
isotope
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
isotropic
12.3: Thermal Expansion
J
joint
8.5: Applications of Statics
K
Kelvin
16.1: Introduction
Kelvin scale
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
kilocalorie
13.1: Introduction
Kinematic
2.3: Acceleration
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
9.2: Angular Acceleration
9.8: Problem Solving
kinematics
2.1: Basics of Kinematicskinetic energy
10.2: Density and Pressure
15.2: Hooke’s Law
18.1: Overview
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.8: Energy Conservation
6.8: Further Topics
7.3: Collisions
kinetic theory of gases
12.1: Introduction
12.5: Kinetic Theory
L
laminar
11.4: Other Applications
laminar flow
11.1: Overview
land
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
laser
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Latent Heat of Fusion
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
latent heat of vaporization
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
law
1.1: The Basics of Physics
law of conservation of energy
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
LCD
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
length
1.2: Units
length contraction
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
lens
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.1: Superposition and Interference
Lenz's law
22.2: AC Circuits
leverage
8.5: Applications of Statics
line element
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
linear momentum
7.1: Introduction
linear thermal expansion coefficient
12.3: Thermal Expansion
linear velocity
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
longitudinal
15.5: Waves
Lorentz factor
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
Lorentz force
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
Lorentz transformations
27.1: Introduction
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity

6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950Lorenz Invariance
27.1: Introduction
luminance
25.1: The Human Eye
luminiferous aether
27.1: Introduction
M
Mach number
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
machines
8.5: Applications of Statics
magnetic domains
21.2: Magnets
magnetic field
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
magnetic field lines
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
magnetic flux
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
magnetic mirror
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
magnetron
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
magnification
24.3: Lenses
magnitude
3.2: Vectors
mass
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
4.2: Force and Mass
mass distribution
15.3: Periodic Motion
Mass Spectrometer
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
matter
1.1: The Basics of Physics
matter waves
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
Maxwell’s equations
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
27.1: Introduction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
mean motion
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
mechanical advantage
8.5: Applications of Statics
mechanical equivalent of heat
13.1: Introduction
media
16.1: Introduction
medium
15.5: Wavesmetabolism
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
meteorology
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
metric
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
microscopy
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
microstate
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
Minkowski space
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
model
1.1: The Basics of Physics
mole
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
moment of inertia
12.5: Kinetic Theory
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
momentum
4.3: Newton’s Laws
7.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
monochromatic
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.2: Diffraction
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
motion
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Motional Emf
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
MRI
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
muscles
8.5: Applications of Statics
mutual inductance
22.2: AC Circuits
myocardium
19.6: Electricity in the World
N
nanostructure
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
natural convection
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
natural frequency
16.5: Further Topics
natural satellite
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
nematic
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
nerve impulse
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
net force
4.3: Newton’s Laws
neuron
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
neurotransmitter
16.4: Interactions with Sound WavesNewton’s third law of motion
7.4: Rocket Propulsion
Newton's Law of Gravitation
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
newtonian mechanics
12.5: Kinetic Theory
NMR
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
noble gas
12.5: Kinetic Theory
node
16.1: Introduction
16.5: Further Topics
Nonconservative Forces
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
normal
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
normal force
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
nuclear reactor
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
nucleons
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
nucleosynthesis
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
nucleus
17.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
30.1: The Nucleus
nuclide
30.1: The Nucleus
null measurements
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
O
Objective measurement
16.1: Introduction
ohm
19.2: Electric Current
Ohm’s law
22.2: AC Circuits
ohmic
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
optical window
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
order of magnitude
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
origin
3.2: Vectors
orthogonal
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
26.1: Superposition and Interference
oscillate
15.2: Hooke’s Law
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.7: Waves on Strings
26.3: Further Topics
oscillator
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations

7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950osmosis
11.1: Overview
over damping
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
oxidation
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
ozone
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
P
parallel
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel equivalent resistance
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
paramagnetism
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
particle accelerator
18.1: Overview
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
pendentive
8.5: Applications of Statics
Pendulums
6.8: Further Topics
perihelion
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
period
15.3: Periodic Motion
16.1: Introduction
periodic table
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
permanent magnet
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
permeability
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
permittivity
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
perpendicular
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
phase
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
phase velocity
15.5: Waves
phasor
22.2: AC Circuits
phasors
19.5: Alternating Currents
phon
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
phosphor
18.5: Applications
photoconductivity
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
photoelectric effect
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
photoelectron
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantitiesphoton
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
29.2: The Early Atom
Physical pendulum
15.3: Periodic Motion
pit
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
Planck constant
29.1: Overview
Planck’s constant
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
plane
10.6: Deformation of Solids
plane waves
15.5: Waves
26.1: Superposition and Interference
planet
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
plasma
10.1: Introduction
12.6: Phase Changes
plumb line
7.5: Center of Mass
point mass
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
point particle
7.5: Center of Mass
Poiseuille's law
10.2: Density and Pressure
polarity
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Polarizability
26.3: Further Topics
polarization
26.3: Further Topics
polarizer
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
position
2.3: Acceleration
positive feedback
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
Positron
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
potential
12.3: Thermal Expansion
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
potential difference
18.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
potential energy
18.1: Overview
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
5.8: Energy Conservation
6.8: Further Topics
potentiometer
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
power
15.5: Waves
6.6: Powerprefix
1.2: Units
pressure
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
probability density function
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
propulsion
5.8: Energy Conservation
pupil
25.1: The Human Eye
Purkinje fibers
19.6: Electricity in the World
Q
quantization
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
quantum mechanics
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
Quarks
30.1: The Nucleus
R
radar
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radial
18.1: Overview
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
Radians
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
radiation
1.2: Units
radiative transfer
13.5: Global Warming
radio waves
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
radioactive decay
30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
radioactive tracer
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
radiograph
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radiography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
radioisotope
30.2: Radioactivity
radiometric dating
30.2: Radioactivity
radionuclide
30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
radon
30.2: Radioactivity
rarefaction
15.5: Waves
raster
18.5: Applications
ray tracing
24.3: Lenses

8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950Rayleigh criterion
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
reactance
22.2: AC Circuits
reflection
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
refraction
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.3: Further Topics
refractive index
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
relative
3.4: Multiple Velocities
relativistic quantum theory
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
relativity of simultaneity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
renewable forms of energy
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
reorientate
3.3: Projectile Motion
resisitivity
17.1: Overview
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
resistance
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistor
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.5: RC Circuits
resolution
26.2: Diffraction
resonance
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
22.2: AC Circuits
rest mass
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
restoring force
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
resultant
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
reversible
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
Reynolds number
11.2: Flow in Tubes
right hand rule
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
rigid
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
rigid body
7.5: Center of Mass
rms
12.5: Kinetic Theory
20.5: RC Circuits
22.2: AC Circuits
rms current
19.5: Alternating Currentsrms voltage
19.5: Alternating Currents
root mean square
19.5: Alternating Currents
rotation
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
rotational inertia
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.4: Dynamics
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
S
scalar
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectors
scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Schrodinger's Equation
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
scientific method
1.1: The Basics of Physics
scientific notation
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Scintillation
29.2: The Early Atom
scintillators
30.2: Radioactivity
second law of thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
selective absorber
13.5: Global Warming
semiclassical
29.2: The Early Atom
semiclassical approach
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
semiconductor
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
30.2: Radioactivity
series
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
series equivalent resistance
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
shear stress
10.1: Introduction
11.2: Flow in Tubes
shock hazard
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the World
Shunt resistance
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
shutter speed
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
SI units
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
sidereal year
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
sievert
30.2: Radioactivity
silver halide
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanicssimple circuit
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
simple harmonic motion
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
simple harmonic oscillator
15.3: Periodic Motion
simple pendulum
15.3: Periodic Motion
sinoatrial node
19.6: Electricity in the World
sinusoidal
15.3: Periodic Motion
sinusoidal steady state
19.5: Alternating Currents
Snell’s law of refraction
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
solenoid
21.2: Magnets
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
sonic boom
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
special relativity
10.6: Deformation of Solids
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
27.1: Introduction
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
specific heat
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
13.2: Specific Heat
spectral color
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
spectral radiance
29.1: Overview
spectrum
29.2: The Early Atom
speed of light
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
speed of propagation
15.5: Waves
spherical aberration
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
Spin
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
stable equilibrium
8.3: Stability
Standard atmosphere
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
standing wave
15.7: Waves on Strings
29.2: The Early Atom
static
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
static contrast ratio
25.1: The Human Eye

9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950static electricity
17.1: Overview
static equilibrium
10.2: Density and Pressure
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
8.3: Stability
stimulated emission
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
Stoke's theorem
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
Strain
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
streamlined
11.4: Other Applications
stress
12.8: Thermal Stresses
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
String theory
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
stroboscopic
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Subjective measurement
16.1: Introduction
sublimation
10.1: Introduction
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
Superconductivity
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
superimpose
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
superposition
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
surface vertices
24.3: Lenses
symmetrical
3.3: Projectile Motion
symmetry
4.3: Newton’s Laws
systole
11.2: Flow in Tubes
T
tangent
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
tangential acceleration
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
telecommunication
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
temperature coefficient of resistivity
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
tensile stress
8.5: Applications of Statics
Terminal velocity
17.1: Overview
terminal voltage
20.2: Resistors in Series and Paralleltesla
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
tetrahertz radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Theory
1.1: The Basics of Physics
thermal agitation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermal conductivity
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
thermal energy
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
thermal equilibrium
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
13.1: Introduction
14.1: Introduction
thermal hazard
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the World
thermal radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermodynamic temperature
14.1: Introduction
thermodynamics
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.6: Phase Changes
14.1: Introduction
thermography
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thick lenses
24.3: Lenses
thin lens
24.3: Lenses
thin lens equation
24.3: Lenses
Thomson scattering
29.2: The Early Atom
Thoracic Cavity
10.2: Density and Pressure
thrust
4.3: Newton’s Laws
time dilation
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
tomography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
torque
10.2: Density and Pressure
18.1: Overview
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem
7.5: Center of Mass
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.4: Dynamics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
torques
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Lawstorr
10.2: Density and Pressure
tracer
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
trajectory
3.3: Projectile Motion
Transformer
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
translation
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
transmutation
30.2: Radioactivity
transverse
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
transverse wave
15.5: Waves
15.7: Waves on Strings
16.5: Further Topics
trigonometry
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
triple point
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
trough
15.5: Waves
tunneling
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
Turbine
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
turbulence
11.4: Other Applications
turbulent
11.4: Other Applications
turbulent flow
11.1: Overview
U
ultrasound
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
underdamped
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Uniform Circular Motion
15.3: Periodic Motion
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
uniform motion
4.3: Newton’s Laws
Unit vector
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
3.2: Vectors
V
valance shell
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
vapor
12.6: Phase Changes
vaporization
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
vascular
11.1: Overview

10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26950vector
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.1: Overview
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectors
4.2: Force and Mass
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
8.1: Introduction
vector area
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
vector field
10.6: Deformation of Solids
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
velocity
2.2: Speed and Velocity
2.3: Acceleration
3.2: Vectors
4.2: Force and Mass
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
ventricle
11.4: Other Applications
vessel
11.2: Flow in Tubes
Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
virtual image
24.4: Mirrorsviscosity
10.1: Introduction
11.2: Flow in Tubes
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
11.4: Other Applications
visible light
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
voltage
17.1: Overview
19.2: Electric Current
W
warfare
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
watt
6.6: Power
wave
15.5: Waves
wave equation
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
wave speed
15.5: Waves
waveform
15.1: Introduction
wavefront
16.5: Further Topicswavelength
15.5: Waves
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.3: Further Topics
weight
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
wettability
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
Wheatstone bridge
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
work
15.5: Waves
18.1: Overview
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
9.10: Conservation of Energy
X
xerography
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Z
zeroth law of thermodynamics
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Temperature and Kinetic Theory
This page titled 12: Temperature and Kinetic Theory is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.12.1: Introduction
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.3: Thermal Expansion
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
12.5: Kinetic Theory
12.6: Phase Changes
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
12.8: Thermal Stresses
12.9: DiffusionTopic hierarchy

12.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450812.1: Introduction
Describe gas using the kinetic theory of gases
Introduction to Temperature and Kinetic Theory
The kinetic theory of gases describes a gas as a larg e number of small particles (atoms or molecules), all of which are in constant,
random motion. The rapidly moving particles constant ly collide with each other, and with the walls of the co ntainer. Kinetic theory
explains macroscopic properties of gases (such as pr essure, temperature, and volume) by considering their molecular composition
and motion. Essentially, the theory posits that pressur e is due not to static repulsion between molecules (as was Isaac Newton’s
conjecture) but rather due to collisions between mol ecules moving at different velocities through Brownian motion. Also, the
temperature of an ideal monatomic gas is a measure of the average kinetic energy of its atoms, as illustrated in.
Translational Motion of Helium: Real gases do not always behave according to the ideal mode l under certain conditions, such as
high pressure. Here, the size of helium atoms relative to their spacing is shown to scale under 1950 atmospheres of pressure.
The kinetic theory of gases uses the model of the ide al gas to relate temperature to the average translat ional kinetic energy of the
molecules in a container of gas in thermodynamic equ ilibrium. Classical mechanics defines the translation al kinetic energy of a gas
molecule as follows:
where m is the particle mass and v its speed (the mag nitude of its velocity). The distribution of the spee ds (which determine the
translational kinetic energies) of the particles in a classical ideal gas is called the Maxwell-Boltzmann d istribution. In kinetic
theory, the temperature of a classical ideal gas is rela ted to its average kinetic energy per degree of freedom E via the equation:
(k: Boltzmann’s constant). We will derive this relationshi p in the following atoms. We will also derive the ideal gas law:
(R: ideal gas constant, n: number of moles of gas) from a microscopic theory.
Atomic Theory of Matter
Atomic theory is a scientific theory of the nature of matt er which states that matter is composed of discrete units c alled atoms.
Formulate five postulates of John Dalton’s atomic theory
Atomic theory is a scientific theory of the nature of matter which states that matter is composed of discret e units called atoms, as
opposed to the obsolete notion that matter could be divided into any arbitrarily small quantity. Althoug h physicists discovered thatlearning objectives
k
learning objectives

12.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14508the so-called “indivisible atom” was actually a congl omerate of various subatomic particles, the concept of atoms is still important
because they are building blocks of matter and form the b asis of chemistry.
Illustration of the Helium Atom: This is an illustration of the helium atom, depicting the nucleus (pink) and the electron cloud
distribution (black). The nucleus (upper right) in h elium-4 is in reality spherically symmetric and closely resembles the electron
cloud, although for more complicated nuclei this is not a lways the case. The black bar is one angstrom (10-10 m, or 100 pm).
Dalton’s Atomic Hypothesis
Philosophical proposals regarding atoms have been sug gested since the years of the ancient Greeks, but John Da lton was the first to
propose a scientific theory of atoms. He based his st udy on two laws about chemical reactions that emerged (without referring to
the notion of an atomic theory) in the late 18 centu ry. The first was the law of conservation of mass, formu lated by Antoine
Lavoisier in 1789, which states that the total mass in a chemical reaction remains constant (that is, the reactants have the same mass
as the products). The second was the law of definite propo rtions, first proven by the French chemist Joseph Louis Pro ust.
Dalton proposed that each chemical element is composed of atoms of a single, unique type, and though they c annot be altered or
destroyed by chemical means, they can combine to for m more complex structures (chemical compounds). This marked the first
truly scientific theory of the atom, since Dalton rea ched his conclusions by experimentation and examina tion of the results in an
empirical fashion. For this reason, Dalton is considered th e originator of modern atomic theory.
5 Main Points
Dalton’s atomic theory had 5 main points:
1. Elements are made of extremely small particles called atoms.
2. Atoms of a given element are identical in size, mass, and o ther properties; atoms of different elements differ in size, mass, and
other properties.
3. Atoms cannot be subdivided, created, or destroyed.
4. Atoms of different elements combine in simple whole-num ber ratios to form chemical compounds.
5. In chemical reactions, atoms are combined, separated, or rearranged.
Of these five, only three are still considered valid today. 1, 4, and 5 are valid, while 2 and 3 have turn ed out not to be the case.
Atoms can be broken down into smaller pieces, and ato ms of a given element can vary in mass and other prop erties (see isotopes
and ions).
Knowing that a gas is composed of small atomic and mole cular particles, it is natural to try to explain prop erties of the gas from a
microscopic point of view. This effort led to the d evelopment of the kinetic theory of gases, where macr oscopic properties of gases,
such as pressure, temperature, and volume, are explained by considering their molecular composition and motion.th

12.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14508
John Dalton’s A New System of Chemical Philosophy: Various atoms and molecules as depicted in John Dalt on’s A New System
of Chemical Philosophy (1808).
Key Points
The kinetic theory posits that pressure is due to collision s between molecules moving at different velocities th rough Brownian
motion.
The temperature of an ideal monatomic gas is a measure o f the average kinetic energy of its atoms. In kinetic t heory, it is related
to its average kinetic energy per degree of freedom E via th e equation:.
The kinetic theory of gases uses the model of the ideal ga s to relate temperature to the average translational kinetic energy of
the molecules in a container of gas in thermodynamic equilibrium.
John Dalton was the first to propose a scientific theory of a toms. He based his study on two laws: the law of conservation of
mass and the law of definite proportions.
Dalton proposed that each chemical element is composed of a toms of a single, unique type, and though they cannot be a ltered
or destroyed by chemical means, they can combine to f orm more complex structures.
Kinetic theory of gases explain macroscopic properties of gases, such as pressure, temperature, and volume, by con sidering
their molecular composition and motion.
While Dalton’s idea of matter being composed of various ato ms was correct, he was wrong about some of their properties.
Atoms can be broken down into smaller parts. Atoms of the same ele ment can have slightly different masses and behave
differently. See isotopes and ions for examples.
Key Terms
ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
degree of freedom: Any of the coordinates, a minimum number of which are nee ded to specify the motion of a mechanical
system.
Brownian motion: Random motion of particles suspended in a fluid, arisin g from those particles being struck by individual
molecules of the fluid.
atom: The smallest possible amount of matter which still ret ains its identity as a chemical element, now known to consis t of a
nucleus surrounded by electrons.
kinetic theory of gases: The kinetic theory of gases describes a gas as a large n umber of small particles (atoms or molecules),
all of which are in constant, random motion.k

12.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14508chemical reaction: A process, involving the breaking or making of interato mic bonds, in which one or more substances are
changed into others.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
degree of freedom. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/degree_of_freedom. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Temperature. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Temperature%23Kinetic_theory_of_gases.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory%23Temperature_and_kinetic_ener gy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Brownian motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Brownian_motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
chemical reaction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/chemical_reaction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Atomic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_theory. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic theory of gases. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20theory%20of%20gases.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
atom. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atom. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
John Dalton. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Dalton. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
This page titled 12.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

12.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1450912.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
Explain how the Celsius scale is defined
Celsius, also known as centigrade, is a scale to measure temperature. The unit of measurement is the degree C elsius (°C). It is one
of the most commonly used temperature units in the wo rld. The unit system is named after the Swedish astrono mer Anders Celsius
(1701-1744), who developed a similar temperature scale.
AP Phy sics 2 - T emperatureAP Phy sics 2 - T emperature
Temperature Scales: A brief introduction to temperature and temperatur e scales for students studying thermal physics or
thermodynamics.learning objectives

12.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509
Thermometer: A thermometer calibrated in degrees Celsius
From 1743 until 1954, 0°C was defined as the freezing point of water, and 100°C was defined as the boiling p oint of water, both at
a pressure of one standard atmosphere, with mercury a s the working material. Although these defining correl ations are commonly
taught in schools today, by international agreement the unit “degree Celsius” and the Celsius scale are currently defined by two
different temperatures: absolute zero and the tripl e point of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water (VSMOW; speci ally purified
water). This definition also precisely relates the Cel sius scale to the Kelvin scale, which defines the SI bas e unit of thermodynamic
temperature and which uses the symbol K. Absolute zero, t he lowest temperature possible (the temperature at wh ich matter reaches
minimum entropy), is defined as being precisely 0K an d -273.15°C. The temperature of the triple point of water is defined as
precisely 273.16K and 0.01°C. Based on this, the relationshi p between degree Celsius and Kelvin is as follows:
Phase Diagram of Water: In this typical phase diagram of water, the green lines mark the freezing point, and the blue line marks
the boiling point, showing how they vary with pressure. The do tted line illustrates the anomalous behavior of water. No te that water

12.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509changes states based on the pressure and temperature.
Besides expressing specific temperatures along its scal e (e.g., “Gallium melts at 29.7646°C” and “The temperatu re outside is 23
degrees Celsius”), the degree Celsius is also suitabl e for expressing temperature intervals — differences between temperatures, or
their uncertainties (e.g. “The output of the heat ex changer is hotter by 40 degrees Celsius” and “Our sta ndard uncertainty is ±3°C”).
Because of this dual usage, one must not rely upon the unit name or its symbol to denote that a quantity i s a temperature interval; it
must be clear through context or explicit statement tha t the quantity is an interval.
Farenheit Scale
In the Fahrenheit scale, the freezing of water is defined at 3 2 degrees, while the boiling point of water is defined to be 212 degrees.
Explain how the Fahrenheit scale is defined and convert b etween it and Celsius
The Fahrenheit scale measures temperature. It is based o n a scale proposed in 1724 by physicist Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (16861736). The unit of this scale is the degree Fahrenhei t (°F). On this scale, water’s freezing point is define d to be 32 degrees, while
water’s boiling point is defined to be 212 degrees.
Historically, the zero point of the Fahrenheit scale wa s determined by evaluating a thermometer placed in brine. Fahrenheit himself
used a mixture of ice, water, and ammonium chloride (a salt) at a 1:1:1 ratio. This is a frigorific mixt ure, which stabilizes its
temperature automatically; the stable temperature of this mixture was defined as 0 °F (-17.78 °C). The secon d determining point,
32 degrees, was a mixture of just ice and water at a 1:1 ratio. The third determining point, 96 degrees, was ap proximately the
temperature of the human body, then called “blood-heat. ”
The Fahrenheit system puts the boiling and freezing po ints of water exactly 180 degrees apart. Therefore, a d egree on the
Fahrenheit scale is 1/180 of the interval between the freezing point and the boiling point. On the Celsius scale, the freezing and
boiling points of water are 100 degrees apart. A tempe rature interval of 1 °F is equal to an interval of 5/ 9 degrees Celsius (°C). To
convert °F to °C, you can use the following formula:
The Fahrenheit and Celsius scales intersect at -40° (-40 °F and -40 °C represent the same temperature). Abso lute zero (-273.15 °C,
or 0K) is defined as -459.67 °F.
The Fahrenheit scale was replaced by the Celsius scale in most countries in the mid- to late-20th century, though Canada retains it
as a supplementary scale that can be used alongside t he Celsius scale. The Fahrenheit scale remains the offic ial scale of the United
States, the Cayman Islands, Palau, the Bahamas, and Belize.learning objectives

12.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509
Fig 2: Comparison of Celsius vs Fahrenheit scales.
AP Phy sics 2 - T emperatureAP Phy sics 2 - T emperature

12.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509Temperature Scales: A brief introduction to temperature and temperatur e scales for students studying thermal physics or
thermodynamics.
Absolute Zero
Absolute zero is the coldest possible temperature; formal ly, it is the temperature at which entropy reaches its minimum value.
Explain why absolute zero is a natural choice as the null point for a temperature unit system
Absolute zerois the coldest possible temperature. Form ally, it is the temperature at which entropy reaches its minimum value. More
simply put, absolute zero refers to a state in which all the energy of a system is extracted (by definiti on, the lowest energy state the
system can have). Absolute zero is universal in the sen se that all matteris in ground state at this tempera ture. Therefore, it is a
natural choice as the null point for a temperature unit system.
Graph of Pressure Versus Temperature: Graph of pressure versus temperature for various gases kept at a constant volume. Note
that all of the graphs extrapolate to zero pressure at t he same temperature
To be precise, a system at absolute zero still possesse s quantum mechanical zero-point energy, the energy of its ground state. The
uncertainty principle states that the position of a particle cannot be determined with absolute precisi on; therefore a particle is in
motion even if it is at absolute zero, and a ground state still carries a minimal amount of kinetic ene rgy. However, in the
interpretation of classical thermodynamics, kinetic ene rgy can be zero, and the thermal energy of matter vanishes.
The zero point of a thermodynamic temperature scale, such as the Kelvin scale, is set at absolute zero. By international agreement,
absolute zero is defined as 0K on the Kelvin scale and as -273.15° on the Celsius scale (equivalent to -45 9.67° on the Fahrenheit
scale). Scientists have brought systems to temperatur es very close to absolute zero, at which point matter e xhibits quantum effects
such as superconductivity and superfluidity. The lowe st temperature that has been achieved in the laborato ry is in the 100 pK range,
where pK (pico-Kelvin) is equivalent to 10 K. The lowest n atural temperature ever recorded is approximately 1 K, observed in
the rapid expansion of gases leaving the Boomerang Nebula, shown below.
learning objectives
-12

12.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509
Boomerang Nebula: The rapid expansion of gases resulting in the Boomer ang Nebula causes the lowest observed temperature
outside a laboratory.
AP Phy sics 2 - T emperatureAP Phy sics 2 - T emperature
Temperature Scales: A brief introduction to temperature and temperatur e scales for students studying thermal physics or
thermodynamics.
Kelvin Scale
The kelvin is a unit of measurement for temperature; the null point of the Kelvin scale is absolute zero, the lowest possible
temperature.

12.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509Explain how the Kelvin scale is defined
The kelvin is a unit of measurement for temperature. It is one of the seven base units in the Internation al System of Units (SI) and
is assigned the unit symbol K. The Kelvin scale is an abs olute, thermodynamic temperature scale using absolut e zero as its null
point. In the classical description of thermodynamics, a bsolute zero is the temperature at which all thermal motion ceases.
The choice of absolute zero as null point for the Kel vin scale is logical. Different types of matter boil or freeze at different
temperatures, but at 0K (absolute zero), all thermal motions of any matter are maximally suppressed. The Kelvin scale is used
extensively in scientific work because a number of ph ysical quantities, such as the volume of an ideal gas, are directly related to
absolute temperature.
The Kelvin scale is named after Glasgow University engin eer and physicist William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (1 824-1907), who
wrote of the need for an “absolute thermometric scale. ” Unlike the degree Fahrenheit and the degree Celsi us, the kelvin is not
referred to or typeset as a degree. The kelvin is th e primary unit of measurement in the physical sciences, but it is often used in
conjunction with the degree Celsius, which has the same magnitude. The kelvin is defined as the fraction 1/2 73.16 of the
thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of wat er (exactly 0.01°C, or 32.018°F). To convert kelvin t o degrees Celsius, we use
the following formula:
Subtracting 273.16K from the temperature of the tripl e point of water, 0.01°C, makes absolute zero (0K) equiva lent to -273.15°C
and -460°F.
Calculating U
Relationships Between the Temperature Scales: Relationships between the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin temp erature scales,
rounded to the nearest degree. The relative sizes of the scales are also shownlearning objectives

12.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509
Da n F u lle rton (AP lu sP h y sics)
AP P hysics 2 - T emperature
AP P hysics 2 - T emperature
Watch on
Temperature Scales: A brief introduction to temperature and temperatur e scales for students studying thermal physics or
thermodynamics.
Key Points
The degree Celsius (°C) can refer to a specific temperatu re on the Celsius scale as well as a unit to indicate a te mperature
interval, a difference between two temperatures or an unce rtainty.
The Celsius scale is currently defined by two different temperatures: absolute zero and the triple point of V ienna Standard Mean
Ocean Water (VSMOW; specially purified water).
Based on this, the relationship between Celsius and Kelvin is a s follows:.
The Fahrenheit system puts the boiling and freezing poi nts of water exactly 180 degrees apart. Therefore, a degree on the
Fahrenheit scale is 1⁄180 of the interval between the fre ezing point and the boiling point.
To convert °F to °C, you can use the following formula:. The Fahrenheit and Celsius scales intersect
at −40°.
The Fahrenheit scale was replaced by the Celsius scale in most countries during the mid to late 20th century. Fahrenheit re mains
the official scale of the United States, Cayman Islands, Pal au, Bahamas and Belize.
Absolute zero is universal in the sense that all matter i s in ground state at this temperature. Therefore, it is a nat ural choice as
the null point for a temperature unit system.
K system at absolute zero still possesses quantum mechani cal zero-point energy, the energy of its ground state. Howe ver, in the
interpretation of classical thermodynamics, kinetic ene rgy can be zero, and the thermal energy of matter vanishes.
The lowest temperature that has been achieved in the lab oratory is in the 100 pK range, where pK (pico- Kelvin) is equ ivalent
to 10-12 K. The lowest natural temperature ever recorded i s approximately 1K, observed in the rapid expansion of ga ses leaving

12.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509the Boomerang Nebula.
0K (absolute zero) is universal because all thermal mo tions of all matter are maximally suppressed at this temp erature.
Absolute zero is therefore the natural choice as the null p oint of the Kelvin scale.
The Kelvin scale is used extensively in scientific work b ecause a number of physical quantities, such as the volume of an ideal
gas, are directly related to absolute temperature.
To convert kelvin to degree Celsius, we use the following formula:.
Key Terms
kelvin: in the International System of Units, the base unit of thermo dynamic temperature; 1/273.16 of the thermodynamic
temperature of the triple point of water; symbolized as K
absolute zero: The coldest possible temperature: zero on the Kelvin sca le and approximately -273.15°C and -459.67°F. The
total absence of heat; the temperature at which motion o f all molecules would cease.
standard atmosphere: an international reference pressure defined as 101.325 kPa and formerly used as a unit of pressure
brine: a solution of salt (usually sodium chloride) in water
frigorific mixture: A mixture of two or more chemicals that reaches an equ ilibrium temperature independent of the temperature
of any of its constituent chemicals. The temperature is al so relatively independent of the quantities of mixtures a s long as a
significant amount of each original chemical is present in its pure form
entropy: A measure of how evenly energy (or some analogous proper ty) is distributed in a system.
thermodynamics: a branch of natural science concerned with heat and it s relation to energy and work
absolute zero: The coldest possible temperature: zero on the Kelvin sca le and approximately -273.15°C and -459.67°F. The
total absence of heat; the temperature at which motion o f all molecules would cease.
Triple point: The unique temperature and pressure at which the solid, liquid and gas phases of a substance are all in
equilibrium.
ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kelvin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kelvin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
standard atmosphere. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/standard%20atmosphere. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Fahrenheit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
brine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/brine. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frigorific mixture. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/frigorific%20mixture. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY: Attribution

12.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Fahrenheit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit. License: CC BY: Attribution
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Absolute zero. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
entropy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/entropy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Fahrenheit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit. License: CC BY: Attribution
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Absolute zero. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolute_zero. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Temperature. February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Kelvin. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kelvin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Temperature. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Triple point. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple%20point. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Fahrenheit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit. License: CC BY: Attribution
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Absolute zero. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolute_zero. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Temperature. February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Temperature. February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Angel Fire. Located at: http://www.angelfire.com/wv/bwhomedir/notes/nonpar.pdf. License: CC BY:
Attribution

12.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14509Temperature Scales. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo7fW619TIM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

12.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451012.3: Thermal Expansion
Describe volume changes that take place in response to a temperature change
Thermal expansion is the tendency of matter to chang e in volume in response to a change in temperature. (An example of this is the
buckling of railroad track, as seen in.) Atoms and mol ecules in a solid, for instance, constantly oscillate a round its equilibrium
point. This kind of excitation is called thermal mot ion. When a substance is heated, its constituent partic les begin moving more,
thus maintaining a greater average separation with th eir neighboring particles. The degree of expansion divided by the change in
temperature is called the material’s coefficient of therm al expansion; it generally varies with temperature.
Fig 1: Thermal expansion of long continuous sections of rail t racks is the driving force for rail buckling. This phenom enon resulted
in 190 train derailments during 1998–2002 in the US alone.
AP Phy sics 2 - Thermal ExpansionAP Phy sics 2 - Thermal Expansionlearning objectives

12.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510Thermal Expansion: A brief introduction to thermal expansion for studen ts.
Expansion, Not Contraction
Why does matter usually expand when heated? The answer can be found in the shape of the typical particle- particle potential in
matter. Particles in solids and liquids constantly feel the presence of other neighboring particles. This int eraction can be represented
mathematically as a potential curve. Fig 2 illustrate s how this inter-particle potential usually takes an asymmetric form rather than a
symmetric form, as a function of particle-particle distance. Note that the potential curve is steeper fo r shorter distance. In the
diagram, (b) shows that as the substance is heated, the equilibrium (or average) particle-particle distance increases. Materials which
contract or maintain their shape with increasing tem perature are rare. This effect is limited in size, an d only occurs within limited
temperature ranges.
Fig 2: Typical inter-particle potential in condensed matt er (such as solid or liquid).
Linear Expansion
To a first approximation, the change in length measur ements of an object (linear dimension as opposed to, for example, volumetric
dimension) due to thermal expansion is related to te mperature change by a linear expansion coefficient. It is the fractional change
in length per degree of temperature change. Assuming negl igible effect of pressure, we may write:
where is a particular length measurement and is th e rate of change of that linear dimension per unit change in temperature.
From the definition of the expansion coefficient, the change in the linear dimension over a temperature range can be
estimated to be:
This equation works well as long as the linear-expansio n coefficient does not change much over the change i n temperature. If it
does, the equation must be integrated.

12.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510Area Expansion
Objects expand in all dimensions. That is, their areas and volumes, as well as their lengths, increase with temperatu re.
Express the area thermal expansion coefficient in the form o f an equation
We learned about the linear expansion (in one dimen sion) in the previous Atom. Objects expand in all dimen sions, and we can
extend the thermal expansion for 1D to two (or three) dimensions. That is, their areas and volumes, as well as their lengths,
increase with temperature.
Quiz
Before we look into details, here is an interesting q uestion. Imagine that we have a rectangular sheet of m etal with a circular hole in
the middle. If the metal is heated, we can guess that t he the piece, in general, will get larger due to therm al expansion. Now, what is
going to happen with the circular hole in the middle? Is the hole going to be larger or smaller? Answer: Im agine that we have a
similar metal sheet but without a hole. Draw an imagina ry circular line representing the circular hole in our quiz. How does this
imaginary circle change as the metal is heated? Yes. It will get bigger. Therefore, you can guess that the h ole in our quiz will get
larger.
Fig 1: In general, objects expand in all directions as tempera ture increases. In these drawings, the original boundaries of the objects
are shown with solid lines, and the expanded boundaries wi th dashed lines. (a) Area increases because both length a nd width
increase. The area of a circular plug also increases. (b) I f the plug is removed, the hole it leaves becomes larger with increasing
temperature, just as if the expanding plug were still in pla ce.
Area thermal expansion coefficient
The area thermal expansion coefficient relates the change in a material’s area dimensions to a change in temperature. It is the
fractional change in area per degree of temperature change. Ignoring pressure, we may write:, where is som e area of
interest on the object, and is the rate of change of that area per unit change in temperature. The chang e in the linear dimension
can be estimated as:. This equation works well as long as the linear expansion coefficient does not change much over
the change in temperature. If it does, the equation must b e integrated.
Relationship to linear thermal expansion coefficient
For isotropic materials, and for small expansions, the linear thermal expansion coefficient is one half o f the area coefficient. To
derive the relationship, let’s take a square of steel that has sides of length L. The original area will be,and the new area, after
a temperature increase, will belearning objectives

12.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510The approximation holds for a sufficiently small ca mpared to. Since from the equation above (and from the
definitions of the thermal coefficients), we get.
Volume Expansion
Substances expand or contract when their temperature change s, with expansion or contraction occurring in all directio ns.
Compare the effects of the pressure on the expansion of gaseous and solid materials
The volumetric thermal expansion coefficient is the most basic thermal expansion coefficient. illustrate s that, in general, substances
expand or contract when their temperature changes, wit h expansion or contraction occurring in all directio ns. Such substances that
expand in all directions are called isotropic. For i sotropic materials, the area and linear coefficients ma y be calculated from the
volumetric coefficient (discussed below).
Volumetric Expansion: In general, objects expand in all directions as tempera ture increases. In these drawings, the original
boundaries of the objects are shown with solid lines, and the expanded boundaries with dashed lines. (a) Area increases b ecause
both length and width increase. The area of a circular plu g also increases. (b) If the plug is removed, the hole it l eaves becomes
larger with increasing temperature, just as if the expa nding plug were still in place. (c) V olume also increases, be cause all three
dimensions increase.
AP Phy sics 2 - Thermal ExpansionAP Phy sics 2 - Thermal Expansionlearning objectives

12.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510Thermal Expansion – Volume Expansion: A brief introduction to thermal expansion for stude nts.
Mathematical definitions of these coefficients are define d below for solids, liquids, and gasses:
The subscript p indicates that the pressure is held constant during t he expansion. In the case of a gas, the fact that the p ressure is
held constant is important, as the volume of a gas will var y appreciably with pressure as well as with temperature.
For a solid, we can ignore the effects of pressure on the ma terial, thus the volumetric thermal expansion coefficient can be written:
where V is the volume of the material, and is dV/dT th e rate of change of that volume with temperature. Th is means that the
volume of a material changes by some fixed fractional amount. For example, a steel block with a volume of 1 cubic meter might
expand to 1.002 cubic meters when the temperature is raised by 50 °C. This is an expansion of 0.2%. The vo lumetric expansion
coefficient would be 0.2% for 50 °C, or 0.004% per degree C.
Relationship to Linear Thermal Expansion Coefficient
For isotropic material, and for small expansions, the l inear thermal expansion coefficient is one third the volumetric coefficient. To
derive the relationship, let’s take a cube of steel that has sides of length L. The original volume will be,and the new volume,
after a temperature increase, will be:
The approximation holds for a sufficiently small compar ed to L. Since:
(and from the definitions of the thermal coefficients), we a rrive at:
Special Properties of Water
Objects will expand with increasing temperature, but water is the most important exception to the general rule.

12.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510Describe thermal expansion properties of water
Special Properties of Water
In general, objects will expand with increasing temper ature. However, a number of materials contract on heat ing within certain
temperature ranges; this is usually called negative thermal expansion, rather than “thermal contraction. ” Water is the most
important exception to the general rule. Water has th is unique characteristic because of the particular nature of the hydrogen bond
in H O.
Density of Water as Temperature Changes
At temperatures greater than 4ºC (40ºF) water expands with increasing temperature (its density decreases). Howe ver, it expands
with decreasing temperature when it is between +4ºC and 0ºC (4 0ºF to 32ºF). Water is densest at +4ºC.
Water Density vs. Temperature: The density of water as a function of temperature. Note t hat the thermal expansion is actually
very small. The maximum density at +4ºC is only 0.0075% gre ater than the density at 2ºC, and 0.012% greater than tha t at 0ºC.
Perhaps the most striking effect of this phenomenon i s the freezing of water in a pond. When water near the surface cools down to
4ºC it is denser than the remaining water and thus will sink to the bottom. This “turnover” results in a laye r of warmer water near
the surface, which is then cooled. Eventually the pond has a uniform temperature of 4ºC. If the temperature in the surface layer
drops below 4ºC, the water is less dense than the water below, and thus stays near the top.
As a result, the pond surface can completely freeze ov er, while the bottom may remain at 4ºC. The ice on top of liquid water
provides an insulating layer from winter’s harsh exter ior air temperatures. Fish and other aquatic life can survive in 4ºC water
beneath ice, due to this unusual characteristic of wa ter. It also produces circulation of water in the pon d that is necessary for a
healthy ecosystem of the body of water.
Temperature in a Lake: Temperature distribution in a lake on warm and cold da ys in winter
Ice Versus Water
The solid form of most substances is denser than the liquid phase; thus, a block of most solids will sink in the liquid. However, a
block of ice floats in liquid water because ice is less d ense. Upon freezing, the density of water decreases by about 9 %.learning objectives

12.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510Key Points
Inter-particle potential usually takes an asymmetric f orm, rather than a symmetric form as a function of particle -particle
distance. This is why matters expands and contracts as temper ature changes.
The change in length measurements of an object due to the rmal expansion is related to temperature change by a “line ar
expansion coefficient”, which is given as.
The linear expansion coefficient is as an approximatio n over a narrow temperature interval only.
The area thermal expansion coefficient relates the cha nge in a material’s area dimensions to a change in temperatur e. It is
defined as.
The relationship between the area and linear thermal exp ansion coefficient is given as the following:.
Just like the linear expansion coefficient, the area therm al expansion coefficient works as an approximation over a narrow
temperature interval only.
Substances that expand at the same rate in every direction a re called isotropic.
In the case of a gas, expansion depends on how the pressure changed in the process because the volume of a gas will va ry
appreciably with pressure as well as temperature.
For a solid, we can ignore the effects of pressure on the ma terial, and the volumetric thermal expansion coefficie nt can be
written as. For isotropic materials,.
Water expands with increasing temperature (its density decre ases) when it is at temperatures greater than 4ºC (40ºF). Howe ver,
it expands with decreasing temperature when it is between + 4ºC and 0ºC (40ºF to 32ºF). Water is densest at +4ºC.
Due to the peculiar thermal expansion property of water, a p ond surface can completely freeze over, while the botto m may
remain at 4ºC. Fish and other aquatic life can survive in 4ºC water beneath ice, due to this unusual characteristic of wa ter.
The solid form of most substances is denser than the liqu id phase; thus, a block of most solids will sink in the liquid. However,
a block of ice floats in liquid water because ice is less dense.
Key Terms
potential: A curve describing the situation where the difference in the potential energies of an object in two different po sitions
depends only on those positions.
linear thermal expansion coefficient: The fractional change in length per degree of tempera ture change.
isotropic: Having properties that are identical in all directions; exhibiting isotropy.
hydrogen bond: A weak bond in which a hydrogen atom in one molecule is attracted to an electronegative atom (usually
nitrogen or oxygen) in the same or different molecule.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510d56c6e4b0c14bf464b1af/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion%23Area_expansion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

12.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510linear thermal expansion coefficient. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/linear%20thermal%20expansion%20coefficient. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510d56c6e4b0c14bf464b1af/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
linear thermal expansion coefficient. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/linear%20thermal%20expansion%20coefficient. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
isotropic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isotropic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510d56c6e4b0c14bf464b1af/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermal Expansion - V olume Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Septe mber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Properties of water. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Properties_of_water. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
hydrogen bond. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/hydrogen_bond. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510d56c6e4b0c14bf464b1af/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermal Expansion - V olume Expansion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3P7gHzpXpmU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Properties of water. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Properties_of_water. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Febru ary 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

12.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14510This page titled 12.3: Thermal Expansion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

12.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451112.4: Ideal Gas Law
Describe how ideal gas law was derived.
The ideal gas law is the equation of state of a hypot hetical ideal gas (an illustration is offered in). I n an ideal gas, there is no
molecule-molecule interaction, and only elastic coll isions are allowed. It is a good approximation to the behavior of many gases
under many conditions, although it has several limit ations. It was first stated by Émile Clapeyron in 1834 as a combination of
Boyle’s law and Charles’ law.
Atoms and Modules in a Gas: Atoms and molecules in a gas are typically widely separate d, as shown. Because the forces between
them are quite weak at these distances, they are often de scribed by the ideal gas law.
Empirical Derivation
Boyle’s law states that pressure P and volume V of a given mass of confined gas are inversely proportional:
while Charles’ law states that volume of a gas is propor tional to the absolute temperature T of the gas at cons tant pressure
By combining the two laws, we get
where C is a constant which is directly proportional to the amo unt of gas, n (representing the number of moles).
The proportionality factor is the universal gas constant, R, i.e..
Hence the ideal gas law
Equivalently, it can be written as,
where k is Boltzmann’s constant and N is the number of molecu les.
(Since N = nN, you can see that, where N is Avogadro’s numbe r.)
Note that the empirical derivation does not consider microscopic details. However, the equation can be derived from first principles
in the classical thermodynamics (which goes beyond the sc ope of this Atom).
Microscopic version
We have seen in the Atom on “Origin of Pressure” that
where P is the pressure, N is the number of molecules, m is the mass of the molecule, v is the speed of molecu les, and V is the
volume of the gas. Therefore, we derive a microscopic versio n of the ideal gas lawlearning objectives
A A

12.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Isotherms
An isothermal process is a change of a system in which th e temperature remains constant:.
Identify conditions at which isothermal processes can occur.
An isothermal process is a change of a system in which t he temperature remains constant: ΔT = 0. Typically t his occurs when a
system is in contact with an outside thermal reservoir (heat bath), and the change occurs slowly enough to allow the system to
adjust continually to the temperature of the reservo ir through heat exchange. In contrast, an adiabatic process occurs when a system
exchanges no heat with its surroundings (Q = 0). In oth er words, in an isothermal process, the value ΔT = 0 bu t Q ≠ 0, while in an
adiabatic process, ΔT ≠ 0 but Q = 0.
For an ideal gas, the product PV (P: pressure, V: volum e) is a constant if the gas is kept at isothermal con ditions (Boyle’s law).
According to the ideal gas law, the value of the const ant is NkT, where N is the number of molecules of gas a nd k is Boltzmann’s
constant.
This means that holds.
The family of curves generated by this equation is shown in the graph presented in. Each curve is called an isotherm. Such graphs
are termed indicator diagrams—first used by James Wat t and others to monitor the efficiency of engines. The temperature
corresponding to each curve in the figure increases from th e lower left to the upper right.
Isotherms of an Ideal Gas: Several isotherms of an ideal gas on a PV diagram.
Calculation of Work
In thermodynamics, the work involved when a gas changes from state A to state B is simply:
(This equation is derived in our Atom on “Constant Pre ssure” under kinetic theory. Note that. This defini tion is consistent
with our definition of work being force times distance.)
For an isothermal, reversible process, this integral equals the area under the relevant pressure-volume isotherm, and is indicated in
blue in for an ideal gas. Again, applies and with T being constant (as this is an isothermal process), we have:learning objectives

12.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511
Work Done by Gas During Expansion: The blue area represents “work” done by the gas during e xpansion for this isothermal
change.
By convention, work is defined as the work the system does on its environment. If, for example, the syste m expands by a piston
moving in the direction of force applied by the int ernal pressure of a gas, then the work is counted as p ositive. As this work is done
by using internal energy of the system, the result is that the internal energy decreases. Conversely, if t he environment does work on
the system so that its internal energy increases, the wo rk is counted as negative (for details on internal en ergy, check our Atom on
“Internal Energy of an Ideal Gas”).
Constant Pressure
Isobaric processis a thermodynamic process in which the pr essure stays constant (at constant pressure, work done by a g as is).
Describe behavior of monatomic gas during isobaric proce sses.
Under a certain constraint (e.g., pressure), gases can e xpand or contract; depending on the type of constrai nt, the final state of the
gas may change. For example, an ideal gas that expan ds while its temperature is kept constant (called iso thermal process) will exist
in a different state than a gas that expands while pr essure stays constant (called isobaric process). This Atom addresses isobaric
process and correlated terms. We will discuss isothermal pr ocess in a subsequent Atom.
Isobaric Process
An isobaric process is a thermodynamic process in whi ch pressure stays constant:. For an ideal gas, this mea ns the volume
of a gas is proportional to its temperature (histor ically, this is called Charles’ law). Let’s consider a case in which a gas does work
on a piston at constant pressure P, referring to Fig 1 as illustration. Since the pressure is constant, the force exerted is constant and
the work done is given as W=Fd, where F (=PA) is the force on the piston applied by the pressure and d is the displacement of the
piston. Therefore, the work done by the gas (W) is:
Because the change in volume of a cylinder is its cr oss-sectional area A times the displacement d, we see t hat Ad=ΔV, the change in
volume. Thus,
(as seen in Fig 2—isobaric process). Note: if ΔV is po sitive, then W is positive, meaning that work is done by the gas on the
outside world. Using the ideal gas law,learning objectives

12.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511
Fig 2: A graph of pressure versus volume for a constant-press ure, or isobaric process. The area under the curve equals the work
done by the gas, since W=PΔV.
(Eq. 1) for an ideal gas undergoing an isobaric process.
Monatomic Gas
According to the first law of thermodynamics,
(Eq. 2), where W is work done by the system, U is internal energy, and Q is heat. The law says that the heat transf erred to the
system does work but also changes the internal energy of t he system. Since,
for a monatomic gas, we get
(Eq. 3; for the details on internal energy, see our Ato m on “Internal Energy of an Ideal Gas”). By using the E quations 1 and 3, Eq. 2
can be written as:
for monatomic gas in an isobaric process.
Specific Heat
Specific heat at constant pressure is defined by the follo wing equation:
Here n is the amount of particles in a gas represente d in moles. By noting that and (N: Avogadro’s numbe r, R:
universal gas constant), we derive:
for a monatomic gas.
Problem Solving
With the ideal gas law we can figure pressure, volume or temperature, and the number of moles of gases unde r ideal
thermodynamic conditions.
Identify steps used to solve the ideal gas equation.
The Ideal Gas Law is the equation of state of a hypot hetical ideal gas. It is a good approximation to the behavior of many gases
under many conditions, although it has several limit ations. It is most accurate for monatomic gases at hi gh temperatures and low
pressures.
The ideal gas law has the form: A
learning objectives

12.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511where R is the universal gas constant, and with it we c an find values of the pressure P, volume V, temperatur e T, or number of
moles n under a certain ideal thermodynamic conditi on. Typically, you are given enough parameters to calc ulate the unknown.
Variations of the ideal gas equation may help solving the problem easily. Here are some general tips.
The ideal gas law can also come in the form:
where N is the number of particles in the gas and k is the Bol tzmann constant.
To solve the ideal gas equation:
1. Write down all the information that you know about the g as.
2. If necessary, convert the known values to SI units.
3. Choose a relevant gas law equation that will allow you to calculate the unknown variable.
4. Substitute the known values into the equation. Calculate t he unknown variable.
Remember that the general gas equation only applies if the molar quantity of the gas is fixed. For examp le, if a gas is mixed with
another gas, you may have to apply the equation separatel y for individual gases.
Example
Let’s imagine that at the beginning of a journey a truck tire has a volume of 30,000 cm and an interna l pressure of 170 kPa. The
temperature of the tire is 16 C. By the end of the t rip, the volume of the tire has increased to 32,000 cm and the temperature of the
air inside the tire is 40 C. What is the tire pressure at t he end of the journey?
Tire Pressure: Tire pressure may change significantly during the operation of the vehicle. This is mostly due to the temperature
change of the air in tires.
Solution:
Step 1. Write down all the information that you know a bout the gas: P = 170 kPa and P is unknown. V = 30,000 c m and V =
32,000 cm. T = 16 C and T = 40 C.
Step 2. Convert the known values to SI units if necessar y: Here, temperature must be converted into Kelvin. The refore, T = 16 +
273 = 289 K, T = 40 + 273 = 313 K
Step 3. Choose a relevant gas law equation that will allo w you to calculate the unknown variable: We can use th e general gas
equation to solve this problem:.
Therefore,.3
∘ 3
1 2 132
31∘2∘

12.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Step 4. Substitute the known values into the equation. Calcu late the unknown variable:
The pressure of the tire at the end of the journey is 17 3 kPa.
Note that in Step 2 we did not bother to convert the v olume values to m. In Step 4, pressure appears both in the numerator and
denominator. In this case the conversion was not necessary.
Avogador’s Number
The number of molecules in a mole is called Avogadro’s number (N)—defined as 6.02x 10 mol.
Explain relationship between Avogadro’s number and mole.
When measuring the amount of substance, it is sometim es easier to work with a unit other than the number o f molecules. A mole
(abbreviated mol) is a base unit in the Internation al System of Units (SI). It is defined as any substance co ntaining as many atoms
or molecules as there are in exactly 12 grams (0.012 kg) of carbon-12. The actual number of atoms or mo lecules in one mole is
called Avogadro’ s constant (N), in recognition of Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro.
Amadeo Avogadro: Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856). He established the relatio nship between the masses of the same volume of
different gases (at the same temperature and pressure) corresponds to the relationship between their respecti ve molecular weights.
Avogadro’ s number (N) refers to the number of molecules in one gram-molec ule of oxygen. This indicates an amount of substance
as opposed to an independent dimension of measureme nt. In 1811 Amedeo Avogadro first proposed that the vo lume of a gas (at a
given pressure and temperature) is proportional to t he number of atoms or molecules, regardless of the na ture of the gas (i.e., this
number is universal and independent of the type of gas). In 1926, Jean Perrin won the Nobel Prize in Physics, largely for his work
in determining the Avogadro constant (by several dif ferent methods). The value of Avogadro’s constant, N, has been found to
equal 6.02×10 mol.3
A23 -1
learning objectives
A
A
23 −1

12.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Role in Science
Avogadro’s constant is a scaling factor between macro scopic and microscopic (atomic scale) observations o f nature. As such, it
provides the relation between other physical constants and properties. For example, it establishes a relati onship between the gas
constant R and the Boltzmann constant k,
and the Faraday constant F and the elementary charge e,
Measuring N
The determination of N is crucial to the calculation of an atom’s mass, since the latter is obtained by dividing the mass of a mole
of the gas by Avogadro’s constant. In his study on Bro wnian motion in 1905, Albert Einstein proposed that t his constant could be
determined based on the quantities observable in Bro wnian motion. Subsequently, Einstein’s idea was verifie d, leading to the first
determination of N in 1908 through the experimental work of Jean Baptiste Perrin.
Absolute Temperature
Absolute temperature is the most commoly used thermodyanm ic temperature unit and is the standard unit of temperature.
Describe relationship between absolute temperature and k inetic energy.
Thermodynamic temperature is the absolute measure o f temperature. It is one of the principal parameters of thermodynamics and
kinetic theory of gases. Thermodynamic temperature is an “absolute” scale because it is the measure of t he fundamental property
underlying temperature: its null or zero point (“ab solute zero”) is the temperature at which the partic le constituents of matter have
minimal motion and cannot become any colder. That is, they have minimal motion, retaining only quantum me chanical motion, as
diagramed in.
Graph of Pressure Versus Temperature: Graph of pressure versus temperature for various g ases kept at a constant volume. Note
that all of the graphs extrapolate to zero pressure at t he same temperature
At its simplest, “temperature” arises from the kinetic e nergy of the random motions of matter’s particle co nstituents such as
molecules or atoms, as seen in. Therefore, it is re asonable to choose absolute zero, where all classical motion ceases, as the
reference point (T=0) of our temperature system. By u sing the absolute temperature scale (Kelvin system), wh ich is the most
commonly used thermodynamic temperature, we have shown that the average translational kinetic energy (KE) o f a particle in a
gas has a simple relationship to the temperature:A
A
A
learning objectives

12.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511
Translational Motion of Helium: Real gases do not always behave according to the idea l model under certain conditions, such as
high pressure. Here, the size of helium atoms relative to their spacing is shown to scale under 1950 atmospheres of p ressure.
Note that this equation would not look this elegant if th e Fahrenheit scale were used instead.
The Kelvin scale
The kelvin (or “absolute temperature”) is the stand ard thermodyanmic temperature unit. It is one of th e seven base units in the
International System of Units (SI) and is assigned the un it symbol K. By international agreement, the unit kelvi n and its scale are
defined by two points: absolute zero and the triple po int of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water (water with a sp ecified blend of
hydrogen and oxygen isotopes). Absolute zero, the lowest possible temperature, is defined precisely as 0 K an d −273.15 °C. The
triple point of water is defined precisely as 273.16 K and 0.01 °C.
Key Points
Ideal gas law was derived empirically by combining Boyle’ s law and Charles’ law.
Although the empirical derivation of the equation does n ot consider microscopic details, the ideal gas law can be deri ved from
first principles in the classical thermodynamics.
Pressure and volume of a gas can be related to the average vel ocity of molecues:
Isothermal processes typically occur when a system is in con tact with an outside thermal reservoir (heat bath), and the change
occurs slowly enough to allow the system to adjust continu ally to the temperature of the reservoir through heat e xchange.
For an ideal gas, from the ideal gas law remains constant through an isothermal process. A curve in a P-V
diagram generated by the equation is called an isothe rm.
For an isothermal, reversible process, the work done by the gas is equal to the area under the relevant pressure -volu me
isotherm. It is given as.
Gases can expand or contract under a certain constrain t. Depending on the constraint, the final state of the gas may change.
The heat transferred to the system does work but also chan ges the internal energy of the system. In an isobaric pro cess for a
monatomic gas, heat and the temperature change satisfy t he following equation:.
For a monatomic ideal gas, specific heat at constant pressu re is.
Write down all the information that you know about the gas and convert the known values to SI units if necessary.
Choose a relevant gas law equation that will allow you to c alculate the unknown variable, and substitute the known valu es into
the equation. Then calculate the unknown variable.
The general gas equation only applies if the molar quant ity of the gas is fixed.
Avogadro hypothesized that equal volumes of gas, at the same pressure and temperature, contain equal numbers of mol ecules,
regardless of the type of gas.
Avogadro’s constant is a scaling factor between macrosco pic and microscopic (atomic scale) observations of na ture. It provides
the relation between other physical constants and prop erties.
Albert Einstein proposed that Avogadro’s number could b e determined based on the quantities observable in Browni an motion.
NA was measured for the first time by Jean Baptiste Perrin in 1908.

12.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Temperature arises from the kinetic energy of the random m otions of matter ‘s particle constituents such as molecul es or atoms.
Therefore, it is reasonable to choose absolute zero, wher e all classical motion ceases, as the reference point.
By international agreement, the unit kelvin and its scale are defined by two points: absolute zero and the triple poin t of the
standardized water.
At absolute zero, the particle constituents of matter ha ve minimal motion and cannot become any colder. They ret ain minimal,
quantum mechanical motion.
Key Terms
mole: In the International System of Units, the base unit of am ount of substance; the amount of substance of a system whi ch
contains as many elementary entities as there are atoms in 12 g of carbon-12. Symbol: mol.
ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
Avogadro’s number: the number of constituent particles (usually atoms or molecules) in one mole of a given substance. It has
dimensions of reciprocal mol and its value is equal to 6.02214129·1023 mol-1
adiabatic: Occurring without gain or loss of heat.
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
the first law of thermodynamics: A version of the law of energy conservation: the change in the internal energy of a closed
system is equal to the amount of heat supplied to the system, m inus the amount of work done by the system on its surroun dings.
specific heat: The ratio of the amount of heat needed to raise the te mperature of a unit mass of substance by a unit degree t o the
amount of heat needed to raise that of the same mass of wat er by the same amount.
SI units: International System of Units (abbreviated SI from French: L e Système international d’unités). It is the modern form
of the metric system.
gas constant: A universal constant, R, that appears in the ideal gas la w, (PV = nRT), derived from two fundamental constants,
the Boltzman constant and Avogadro’s number, (R = NAk).
Faraday constant: The magnitude of electric charge per mole of electro ns.
Brownian motion: Random motion of particles suspended in a fluid, arisin g from those particles being struck by individual
molecules of the fluid.
absolute zero: The coldest possible temperature: zero on the Kelvin sca le and approximately -273.15°C and -459.67°F. The
total absence of heat; the temperature at which motion o f all molecules would cease.
International System of Units: (SI): The standard set of basic units of measurement used i n scientific literature worldwide.
Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water: A standard defining a standardized isotopic compositi on of water.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Ideal gas law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_gas_law%23Empirical. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Avogadro's number. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Avogadro's%20number. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
mole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

12.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/internal-energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
adiabatic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adiabatic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isobaric process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isobaric_process. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
the first law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/the%20first%20law%20of%20thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
specific heat. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specific_heat. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Ideal gas law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_gas_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Thermal Properties and Ideal Gases: Ideal Gas Law and General Gas Equation.
September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39086/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/si-units. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tire. License: CC BY: Attribution
Brownian motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Brownian_motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Avogadro constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Avogadro_constant%23Measurement.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

12.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14511Brownian motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brownian_motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday%20constant. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
gas constant. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gas_constant. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tire. License: CC BY: Attribution
Avogadro Amedeo. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Avogadro_Amedeo.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Thermodynamic temperature. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamic_temperature.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
International System of Units. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/International%20System%20of%20Units. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at:
en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Vienna_Standard_Mean_Ocean_Water. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ideal Gas Law. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42216/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tire. License: CC BY: Attribution
Avogadro Amedeo. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Avogadro_Amedeo.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Temperature. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
This page titled 12.4: Ideal Gas Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

12.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451212.5: Kinetic Theory
Express the relationship between the pressure and the aver age kinetic energy of gas molecules in the form of equati on
In Newtonian mechanics, if pressure is the force divide d by the area on which the force is exerted, then wha t is the origin of
pressure in a gas? What forces create the pressure? W e can gain a better understanding of pressure (and t emperature as well) from
the kinetic theory of gases, which assumes that atoms an d molecules are in continuous random motion.
Microscopic Origin of Pressure
Pressure is explained by kinetic theory as arising fro m the force exerted by molecules or atoms impacting o n the walls of a
container, as illustrated in the figure below. Consi der a gas of N molecules, each of mass m, enclosed in a cubical container of
volume V=L. When a gas molecule collides with the wall o f the container perpendicular to the x coordinate a xis and bounces off
in the opposite direction with the same speed (an el astic collision), then the momentum lost by the part icle and gained by the wall (
) is:
Translational Motion of Helium: Real gases do not always behave according to the ideal mode l under certain conditions, such as
high pressure. Here, the size of helium atoms relative to their spacing is shown to scale under 1950 atmospheres of pressure.
where v is the x-component of the initial velocity of th e particle.
The particle impacts one specific side wall once every,
(where L is the distance between opposite walls). The force due to this particle is:
The total force on the wall, therefore, is:
where the bar denotes an average over the N particles. Since the assumption is that the particles move in random directions, if we
divide the velocity vectors of all particles in thr ee mutually perpendicular directions, the average va lue of the squared velocity
along each direction must be same. (This does not mean that e ach particle always travel in 45 degrees to the coordinat e axes.)learning objectives
x

12.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512
Pressure: Pressure arises from the force exerted by molecules or ato ms impacting on the walls of a container.
This gives. We can rewrite the force as.
This force is exerted on an area L. Therefore the pressure of the gas is:
where V=L is the volume of the box. The fraction n=N/V is the number density of the gas. This is a first non- trivial result of the
kinetic theory because it relates pressure (a macro scopic property) to the average (translational) kine tic energy per molecule which
is a microscopic property.
Speed Distribution of Molecules
A gas of many molecules has a predictable distribution of molecular speeds, known as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distr ibution.
Describe the shape and temperature dependence of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution curve
The motion of molecules in a gas is random in magnitude and direction for individual molecules, but a gas of man y molecules has a
predictable distribution of molecular speeds, known as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution (illustrated in). The distribution has a
long tail because some molecules may go several times the rms speed. The most probable speed v (at the peak of the curve) is less
than the rms speed v. As shown in, the curve is shifted to hig her speeds at higher temperatures, with a broader range of speeds.
Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution at Higher Temperatures: The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is shifted to highe r speeds and
is broadened at higher temperatures.2
learning objectives
p
rms

12.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512
Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution: The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of molecular spee ds in an ideal gas. The most likely
speed v_p is less than the rms speed v_rms. Although very hi gh speeds are possible, only a tiny fraction of the molecule s have
speeds that are an order of magnitude greater than v_rms.
Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is a probability distr ibution. It applies to ideal gases close to thermodyn amic equilibrium, and is
given as the following equation:
where fv is the velocity probability density functio n. (Derivation of the formula goes beyond the scope o f introductory physics.)
The formula calculates the probability of finding a particle with velocity in the infinitesimal element [dv, dv, dv] about velocity v
= [v, v, v] is:
It can also be shown that the Maxwell–Boltzmann velocity distribution for the vector velocity [v, v, v] is the product of the
distributions for each of the three directions:
where the distribution for a single direction is,
This makes sense because particles are moving randomly, mea ning that each component of the velocity should be indep endent.
Distribution for the Speed
Usually, we are more interested in the speeds of molecul es rather than their component velocities. The Maxwell–B oltzmann
distribution for the speed follows immediately from the di stribution of the velocity vector, above. Note that the spe ed is:
and the increment of volume is:
where and are the “course” (azimuth of the velocit y vector) and “path angle” (elevation angle of the v elocity vector).
Integration of the normal probability density funct ion of the velocity, above, over the course (from 0 to) and path angle (from 0
to), with substitution of the speed for the sum of the squares of the vector components, yields the foll owing probability density
function (known simply as the Maxwell distribution):
for speed v.x y z
x y z
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
x y z

12.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512Temperature
Temperature is directly proportional to the average tran slational kinetic energy of molecules in an ideal gas.
Describe relationship between temperature and energy of molecules in an ideal gas
Intuitively, hotter air suggests faster movement of air molecules. In this atom, we will derive an equation relating the temperature
of a gas (a macroscopic quantity) to the average kine tic energy of individual molecules (a microscopic qua ntity). This is a basic and
extremely important relationship in the kinetic theory o f gases.
Microscopic View
We assume that a molecule is small compared with the s eparation of molecules in the gas (confined in a thr ee dimensional
container), and that its interaction with other mole cules can be ignored. Also, we assume elastic collision s when molecules hit the
wall of the container, as illustrated in.
Elastic Collisions When Molecules Hit the Wall of the Containe r: Gas in a box exerts an outward pressure on its walls. A
molecule colliding with a rigid wall has the directio n of its velocity and momentum in the x-direction r eversed. This direction is
perpendicular to the wall. The components of its velo city momentum in the y- and z-directions are not ch anged, which means there
is no force parallel to the wall.
We have seen in the Atom on “Origin of Pressure ” that, for an ideal gas under our assumptions:
where P is the pressure, N is the number of molecules, m is the mass of the molecule, v is the speed of molecu les, and V is the
volume of the gas. From the equation, we get:
What can we learn from this atomic and molecular ver sion of the ideal gas law? We can derive a relations hip between temperature
and the average translational kinetic energy of molecule s in a gas. Recall the macroscopic expression of the id eal gas law:
where N is the number of molecules, T is the temperature of th e gas, and k is the Boltzmann constant.
Equating the right hand sides of the macroscopic and mic roscopic versions of the ideal gas law (Eq. 1 & 2) gives:learning objectives

12.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512Thermal Energy
Note that the average kinetic energy (KE) of a molecule in t he gas is:
Therefore, we derive the relation between average KE and temp erature as follows:
The average translational kinetic energy of a molecule is called thermal energy.
RMS Speed
Eq. 3 is a molecular interpretation of temperature. It has been found to be valid for gases and reasona bly accurate in liquids and
solids. It is another definition of temperature base d on an expression of the molecular energy. It is some times useful to know the
average speed of molecules in a gas in terms of temperature:
where v stands for root-mean-square (rms) speed.
Internal Energy of an Ideal Gas
Internal energy is the total energy contained by a thermodynamic system, and has two major components: k inetic energy and
potential energy.
Determine the number of degrees of freedom and calcula te the internal energy for an ideal gas molecule
In thermodynamics, internal energy is the total ener gy contained by a thermodynamic system. Internal en ergy has two major
components: kinetic energy and potential energy. Th e kinetic energy is due to the motion of the system’ s particles (e.g.,
translations, rotations, vibrations). In ideal gases, the re is no inter-particle interaction. Therefore, we will disregard potential energy
and only focus on the kinetic energy contribution to the internal energy.
Monatomic Gases
A monatomic gas is one in which atoms are not bound t o each other. Noble gases (He, Ne, etc.) are typical exampl es. A helium
balloon is shown in the following figure. In this case, the kinetic energy consists only of the translational e nergy of the individual
atoms. Monoatomic particles do not vibrate, and the ir rotational energy can be neglected because atomi c moment of inertia is so
small. Also, they are not electronically excited to h igher energies except at very high temperatures. There fore, practical internal
energy changes in an ideal gas may be described solely by changes in its translational kinetic energy.
Helium Blimp: Helium, like other noble gases, is a monatomic gas, which o ften can be described by the ideal gas law. It is the gas
of choice to fill airships such as the Goodyear blimp.
The average kinetic energy (KE) of a particle in an idea l gas is given as:rms
learning objectives

12.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512where k is the Boltzmann’s constant. (See the Atom on “Tem perature” in kinetic theory.) With N atoms in the gas, its total internal
energy U is given as:
where N is the number of atoms in the gas. Note that the re are three degrees of freedom in monatomic gases: tr anslation in x, y and
z directions.
Since atomic motion is random (and therefore isotropic), each degrees of freedom contribute per atom to the int ernal energy.
Diatomic gases
A diatomic molecule (H, O, N, etc.) has 5 degrees o f freedom (3 for translation in x, y and z direction s, and 2 for rotation).
Therefore, the internal energy for diatomic gases is
Key Points
We can gain a better understanding of pressure (and temp erature as well) from the kinetic theory of gases, which assum es that
atoms and molecules are in continuous random motion.
Pressure, a macroscopic property, can be related to the average (translational) kinetic energy per molecule which is a
microscopic property by.
Since the assumption is that the particles move in rando m directions, the average value of velocity squared a long each direction
must be same. This gives:.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution has a long tail, and th e most probable speed v is less than the rms speed v. The
distribution curve is shifted to higher speeds at higher te mperatures, with a broader range of speeds.
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is given as follows:. It is a product of three
independent 1D Maxwell-Boltzmann distributions.
Molecular speed distribution is given as. This is simply c alled Maxwell distribution.
The average translational kinetic energy of a molecule is equivalent to and is called thermal energy.
In kinematic theory of gases, macroscopic quantities (suc h as press and temperature) are explained by considering microscopic
(random) motion of molecules.
The rms speed of molecules in a gas is given as.
In ideal gases, there is no inter-particle interaction. T herefore, only the kinetic energy contribute to the in ternal energy.
Each degrees of freedom contribute per atom to the intern al energy.
For monatomic ideal gases with N atoms, its total internal e nergy U is given as. For diatomic gases,.
Key Terms
kinetic theory of gases: The kinetic theory of gases describes a gas as a large n umber of small particles (atoms or molecules),
all of which are in constant, random motion.
Newtonian mechanics: Early classical mechanics as propounded by Isaac Newton, e specially that based on his laws of motion
and theory of gravity.
rms: Root mean square: a statistical measure of the magnit ude of a varying quantity.
ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
Boltzmann’s constant: The physical constant relating energy at the particl e level with temperature observed at the bulk level. It
is the gas constant R divided by Avogadro’s number, NA.
moment of inertia: A measure of a body’s resistance to a change in its an gular rotation velocity
noble gas: Any of the elements of group 18 of the periodic table, be ing monatomic and (with very limited exceptions) inert.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY2 2 2
p rms

12.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory%23Pressure_and_kinetic_energy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic theory of gases. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20theory%20of%20gases.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Newtonian mechanics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Newtonian_mechanics. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Maxwellu2013Boltzmann distribution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell%E2%80%93Boltzmann_distribution. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinetic theory of gases. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20theory%20of%20gases.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
noble gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/noble_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Internal energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_energy%23Internal_energy_of_the_idea l_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

12.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14512moment of inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/moment_of_inertia. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boltzmann's constant. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Boltzmann's_constant. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Kinetic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_theory. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Exp lanation of Pressure and Temperature. February 4, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42217/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Helium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Helium. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 12.5: Kinetic Theory is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

12.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451312.6: Phase Changes
Describe behavior of the medium during a phase transitio n
A phase of a thermodynamic system and the states of matter have uniform physical properties. During a phase transition of a given
medium certain properties of the medium change, often discontinuously, as a result of some external conditi on, such as temperature
or pressure. For example, a liquid may become gas upon h eating to the boiling point, resulting in an abrupt change in volume. The
measurement of the external conditions at which the t ransformation occurs is termed the phase transition. The term is most
commonly used to describe transitions between solid, liqu id and gaseous states of matter and, in rare cases, plasma.
As an example, if you boil water, it never goes above 1 00 degrees Celsius. Only after it has completely evap orated will it get any
hotter. This is because once water reaches the boiling point, extra energy is used to change the state of matter and increase the
potential energy instead of the kinetic energy. The o pposite happens when water freezes. To boil or melt on e mole of a substance, a
certain amount of energy is required. These amounts of energy are the molar heat of vaporization and mo lar heat of fusion. If that
amount of energy is added to a mole of that substan ce at boiling or freezing point, all of it will melt or boil, but the temperature
won’t change.
Temperature increases linearly with heat, until the mel ting point. But the heat added does not change the t emperature; that heat
energy is instead used to break intermolecular bonds and convert ice into water. At this point, there is a mixture of both ice and
water. Once all ice has been melted, the temperature a gain rises linearly with heat added. At the boiling p oint, temperature no
longer rises with heat added because the energy is onc e again being used to break intermolecular bonds. On ce all water has been
boiled to steam, the temperature will continue to rise linea rly as heat is added.
Temperature vs. Heat: This graph shows the temperature of ice as heat is added.
The plots of pressure versus temperatures provide cons iderable insight into thermal properties of substan ces. There are welldefined regions on these graphs that correspond to v arious phases of matter, so PT graphs are called phase diagrams. Using the
graph, if you know the pressure and temperature you ca n determine the phase of water. The solid lines—bounda ries between
phases—indicate temperatures and pressures at which t he phases coexist (that is, they exist together in r atios, depending on
pressure and temperature). For example, the boiling p oint of water is 100º C at 1.00 atm. As the pressure inc reases, the boiling
temperature rises steadily to 374º C at a pressure of 218 atm. A pressure cooker (or even a covered pot) wi ll cook food faster
because the water can exist as a liquid at temperatur es greater than 100º C without all boiling away. The cu rve ends at a point called
the critical point, because at higher temperatures the liquid phase does not exist at any pressure. The critical temperature for oxygen
is -118ºC, so oxygen cannot be liquefied above this temper ature.learning objectives

12.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14513
Phase Diagram of Water: In this typical phase diagram of water, the green lines mark the freezing point, and the blue line marks
the boiling point, showing how they vary with pressure. The do tted line illustrates the anomalous behavior of water. No te that water
changes states based on the pressure and temperature.
Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
The amount of water vapor in air is a result of evaporati on or boiling, until an equilibrium is reached.
Explain why water boils at 100 °C
Overview
The term relative humidity refers to how much water v apor is in the air compared with the maximum possible. At its maximum,
denoted as saturation, the relative humidity is 100%, and evaporation is inhibited. The amount of water v apor the air can hold
depends on its temperature. For example, relative humid ity rises in the evening, as air temperature declines, s ometimes reaching the
dew point. At the dew point temperature, relative humid ity is 100%, and fog may result from the condensatio n of water droplets if
they are small enough to stay in suspension. Converse ly, if one wished to dry something, it is more effecti ve to blow hot air over it
rather than cold air, because, among other things, hot air ca n hold more water vapor.
Evaporation
The capacity of air to hold water vapor is based on vapor pressure of water. The liquid and solid phases are continuously giving off
vapor because some of the molecules have high enough speeds to enter the gas phase, a process called evap oration; see (a). For the
molecules to evaporate, they must be located near t he surface, be moving in the proper direction, and ha ve sufficient kinetic energy
to overcome liquid-phase intermolecular forces. When only a small proportion of the molecules meet these criteria, the rate of
evaporation is low. Since the kinetic energy of a mol ecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporatio n proceeds more quickly at
higher temperatures.
If a lid is placed over the container, as in (b), eva poration continues, increasing the pressure, until s ufficient vapor has built up for
condensation to balance evaporation. Then equilibrium has been achieved, and the vapor pressure is equal to the partial pressure of
water in the container. Vapor pressure increases with temper ature because molecular speeds are higher as temperature increases.
As the faster-moving molecules escape, the remaining m olecules have lower average kinetic energy, and the te mperature of the
liquid decreases. This phenomenon is also called eva porative cooling. This is why evaporating sweat cools the human body.
Evaporation also tends to proceed more quickly with h igher flow rates between the gaseous and liquid phase and in liquids with
higher vapor pressure. For example, laundry on a clot hes line will dry (by evaporation) more rapidly on a windy day than on a still
day.learning objectives

12.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14513Application for Boiling Water
Why does water boil at 100ºC? The vapor pressure of wate r at 100ºC is 1.01×10 Pa, or 1.00 atm. Thus, it can ev aporate without
limit at this temperature and pressure. But why does i t form bubbles when it boils? This is because water or dinarily contains
significant amounts of dissolved air and other impur ities, which are observed as small bubbles of air in a glass of water. If a bubble
starts out at the bottom of the container at 20ºC, it contains water vapor (about 2.30%). The pressure insid e the bubble is fixed at
1.00 atm (we ignore the slight pressure exerted by t he water around it). As the temperature rises, the amount of air in the bubble
stays the same, but the water vapor increases; the bub ble expands to keep the pressure at 1.00 atm. At 100ºC, wat er vapor enters the
bubble continuously since the partial pressure of wate r is equal to 1.00 atm in equilibrium. It cannot rea ch this pressure, however,
since the bubble also contains air and total pressu re is 1.00 atm. The bubble grows in size and thereby i ncreases the buoyant force.
The bubble breaks away and rises rapidly to the surfac e, resulting in boiling. (See.)
Close-up of the Boiling Process: (a) An air bubble in water starts out saturated with wate r vapor at 20ºC. (b) As the temperature
rises, water vapor enters the bubble because its vapor pressure increases. The bubble expands to keep its press ure at 1.00 atm. (c)
At 100ºC, water vapor enters the bubble continuously because wa ter’s vapor pressure exceeds its partial pressure in the bubble,
which must be less than 1.00 atm. The bubble grows and rises t o the surface.
Key Points
The term is most commonly used to describe transitions be tween solid, liquid and gaseous states of matter and, in rar e cases,
plasma.
Once water reaches the boiling point, extra energy is used to change the state of matter and increase the potential ener gy instead
of the kinetic energy.
Plots of pressure versus temperatures, an example of a phase diagram, provide considerable insight into thermal prop erties of
substances.
Relative humidity is the fraction of water vapor in a gas c ompared to the saturation value.
Since the kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporation proceeds more quickly at hi gher
temperatures.
Vapor pressure increases with temperature because molecular sp eeds are higher as temperature increases.
Water boils at 100 °C because the vapor pressure exceeds at mospheric pressure at this temperature.
Key Terms
intermolecular: from one molecule to another; between molecules
plasma: a state of matter consisting of partially ionized gas
thermodynamic: Relating to the conversion of heat into other forms of energy.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
vapor pressure: The pressure that a vapor exerts, or the partial pre ssure if it is mixed with other gases.
humidity: The amount of water vapor in the air.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike5

12.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14513CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
General Chemistry/Phase Changes. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/General_Chemistry/Phase_Changes. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Phase Changes. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42218/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
intermolecular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/intermolecular. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
thermodynamic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thermodynamic. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
plasma. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plasma. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Phase Heat Diagram. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/File:Phase_Heat_Diagram.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42219/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Phase Changes. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42218/latest/#import-auto-id2387893. License: CC BY: Attribution
Evaporation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaporation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42219/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Evaporation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaporation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
humidity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/humidity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
vapor pressure. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vapor_pressure. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Phase diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_diagram. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Phase Heat Diagram. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/File:Phase_Heat_Diagram.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42219/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 12.6: Phase Changes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

12.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1556812.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
Identify major implications of the Zeroth Law of Thermo dynamics
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
There are a few ways to state the Zeroth Law of Thermo dynamics, but the simplest is as follows: systems that are in thermal
equilibrium exist at the same temperature.
Systems are in thermal equilibrium if they do not tra nsfer heat, even though they are in a position to do so, based on other factors.
For example, food that’s been in the refrigerator ove rnight is in thermal equilibrium with the air in the refrigerator: heat no longer
flows from one source (the food) to the other source (the ai r) or back.
What the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics means is that te mperature is something worth measuring, because it indic ates whether
heat will move between objects. This will be true rega rdless of how the objects interact. Even if two object s don’t touch, heat may
still flow between them, such as by radiation (as from a heat lamp). However, according to the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics, if
the systems are in thermal equilibrium, no heat flow will ta ke place.
There are more formal ways to state the Zeroth Law of Thermodyn amics, which is commonly stated in the following manner:
Let A, B, and C be three systems. If A and C are in t hermal equilibrium, and A and B are in thermal equi librium, then B and C are
in thermal equilibrium.
This statement is represented symbolically in. Temper ature is not mentioned explicitly, but it’s implied that temperature exists.
Temperature is the quantity that is always the same for all systems in thermal equilibrium with one another.
Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics: The double arrow represents thermal equilibrium betwee n systems. If systems A and C are in
equilibrium, and systems A and B are in equilibrium, then systems B and C are in equilibrium. The systems A, B, and C are at the
same temperature.
Key Points
Assuming A, B, and C are three systems, if A and C are in the rmal equilibrium, and A and B are in thermal equilibrium, then B
and C are in thermal equilibrium.
Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could tra nsfer heat between each other, but do not.
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics implies that temperature is a quantity worth measuring.
Key Terms
thermal equilibrium: Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could tr ansfer heat between each other, but don’t.
zeroth law of thermodynamics: Let A, B and C be three systems. If A and C are in thermal eq uilibrium, and A and B are in
thermal equilibrium, then B and C are in thermal equilib rium.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Zeroth law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeroth_law_of_thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikelearning objectives

12.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15568zeroth law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/zeroth%20law%20of%20thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thermal-equilibrium--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5094796fe4b0b4558d8e505e/ zeroth_law.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1556912.8: Thermal Stresses
Formulate relationship between thermal stress and therma l expansion
Thermal Expansion
Thermal expansion is the change in size or volume of a given mass with temperature. The expansion of alco hol in a thermometer is
one of many commonly encountered examples of this. Hot air rises because its volume increases, which caus es the hot air’s density
to be smaller than the density of surrounding air, ca using a buoyant (upward) force on the hot air. The sam e happens in all liquids
and gases, driving natural heat transfer upward in ho mes, oceans, and weather systems. Solids also undergo th ermal expansion.
Railroad tracks and bridges, for example, have expansio n joints to allow them to freely expand and contract with temperature
changes.
Thermal Expansion Joints: Thermal expansion joints like these in the Auckland Har bour Bridge in New Zealand allow bridges to
change length without buckling. (credit: Ingolfson, Wik imedia Commons)
What are the basic properties of thermal expansion? First, thermal expansion is clearly related to temper ature change. The greater
the temperature change, the more a bimetallic strip wi ll bend. Second, it depends on the material. In a ther mometer, for example,
the expansion of alcohol is much greater than the expansi on of the glass containing it.
What is the underlying cause of thermal expansion? An increase in temperature implies an increase in the k inetic energy of the
individual atoms. In a solid, unlike in a gas, the ato ms or molecules are closely packed together, but the ir kinetic energy (in the
form of small, rapid vibrations) pushes neighboring atoms or molecules apart from each other. This neigh bor-to-neighbor pushing
results in a slightly greater distance, on average, be tween neighbors, and adds up to a larger size for the whole body. For most
substances under ordinary conditions, there is no pref erred direction, and an increase in temperature will i ncrease the solid’s size by
a certain fraction in each dimension.
To be more quantitative, the change in length ΔL is proportional to length L. The dependence of therma l expansion on temperature,
substance, and length is summarized in the equation
where ΔL is the change in length L, ΔT is the change in temperature, and α is the coefficient of linear expansion, which varies
slightly with temperature.learning objectives

12.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15569Thermal Stress
Thermal stress is created by thermal expansion or co ntraction. Thermal stress can be destructive, such as wh en expanding gasoline
ruptures a tank. It can also be useful, for example, when two parts are joined together by heating one in m anufacturing, then
slipping it over the other and allowing the combinat ion to cool. Thermal stress can explain many phenom ena, such as the
weathering of rocks and pavement by the expansion of ice when it freezes.
Forces and pressures created by thermal stress can be quite large. Railroad tracks and roadways can buckle on hot days if they lack
sufficient expansion joints. Power lines sag more in t he summer than in the winter, and will snap in cold wea ther if there is
insufficient slack. Cracks open and close in plaste r walls as a house warms and cools. Glass cooking pans will crack if cooled
rapidly or unevenly, because of differential contrac tion and the stresses it creates. (Pyrex is less suscep tible because of its small
coefficient of thermal expansion.) Nuclear reactor p ressure vessels are threatened by overly rapid cooli ng, and although none have
failed, several have been cooled faster than consider ed desirable. Biological cells are ruptured when food s are frozen, detracting
from their taste. Repeated thawing and freezing accen tuates the damage. Even the oceans can be affected. A significant portion of
the rise in sea level that is resulting from global warming is due to the thermal expansion of sea water.
Metal is regularly used in the human body for hip an d knee implants. Most implants need to be replaced over time because, among
other things, metal does not bond with bone. Researcher s are trying to find better metal coatings that woul d allow metal-to-bone
bonding. One challenge is to find a coating that has an expansion coefficient similar to that of metal. If the expansion coefficients
are too different, the thermal stresses during the man ufacturing process lead to cracks at the coating-metal interface.
Another example of thermal stress is found in the mo uth. Dental fillings can expand differently from tooth enamel. It can give pain
when eating ice cream or having a hot drink. Cracks m ight occur in the filling. Metal fillings (gold, si lver, etc.) are being replaced
by composite fillings (porcelain), which have smaller coef ficients of expansion, and are closer to those of teeth.
Key Points
Thermal expansion is the change in size or volume of a giv en mass with changing temperature.
An increase in temperature implies an increase in the kineti c energy of the individual atoms, which will increase a sol id’s size
by a certain fraction in each dimension.
Thermal stress is created when thermal expansion is const rained.
Key Terms
stress: The internal distribution of force per unit area (pressu re) within a body reacting to applied forces which causes strain or
deformation and is typically symbolized by σ.
differential: A qualitative or quantitative difference between sim ilar or comparable things.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermal expansion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_expansion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stress. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
differential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/differential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike®

12.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15569OpenStax College, Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids. Novem ber 4, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42215/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
12.8: Thermal Stresses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1557012.9: Diffusion
Discuss the process and results of diffusion, identifying fa ctors that affect its rate
Diffusion is the movement of particles move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concent ration until equilibrium is
reached. A distinguishing feature of diffusion is tha t it results in mixing or mass transport without requir ing bulk motion. Thus,
diffusion should not be confused with convection or advection, which are other transport mechanisms that us e bulk motion to move
particles from one place to another.
Diffusion: Particles moving from areas of high concentration to are as of low concentration.
Molecular diffusion, often called simply diffusion, i s the thermal motion of all (liquid or gas) particle s at temperatures above
absolute zero. The rate of this movement is a functio n of temperature, viscosity of the fluid and the size (mass) of the particles.
Diffusion explains the net flux of molecules from a r egion of higher concentration to one of lower concen tration. However,
diffusion can still occur in the absence of a concentratio n gradient.
The result of diffusion is a gradual mixing of mater ial. In a phase with uniform temperature, absent exter nal net forces acting on the
particles, the diffusion process will eventually result in complete mixing.
Key Points
Molecular diffusion, often called simply diffusion, is the th ermal motion of all (liquid or gas) particles at temperat ures above
absolute zero.
The result of diffusion is a gradual mixing of material. In a phase with uniform temperature, absent external net f orces acting on
the particles, the diffusion process will eventually resul t in complete mixing.
Diffusion can also occur in the absence of a concentration gr adient — equilibrium particles are still moving around their
container.
Key Terms
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
diffusion: Diffusion is the movement of particles from regions of h igh concentration toward regions of lower concentrati on.
concentration: The proportion of a substance in a mixture.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Diffusion equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_equilibrium. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Diffusion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlikelearning objectives

12.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15570Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/diffusion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
concentration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/concentration. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Diffusion. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diffusion.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
12.9: Diffusion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: Heat and Heat Transfer
13.1: Introduction
13.2: Specific Heat
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
13.5: Global Warming
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
This page titled 13: Heat and Heat Transfer is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451513.1: Introduction
Distinguish three modes of heat transfer
Introduction to Heat and Heat Transfer
Energy can exist in many forms and heat is one of the most intriguing. Heat is often hidden, as it only exi sts when in transit, and is
transferred by a number of distinctly different metho ds. Heat transfer touches every aspect of our lives an d helps us understand
how the universe functions. It explains the chill we fe el on a clear breezy night, or why Earth’s core has y et to cool. This module
defines and explores heat transfer, its effects, and the methods by which heat is transferred. These topics a re fundamental, as well
as practical, and will often be referred to in the modules a head.
Examples of Heat Transfer: (a) The chilling effect of a clear breezy night is pro duced by the wind and by radiative heat transfer to
cold outer space. (b) There was once great controversy about the Earth’s age, but it is now generally accepted to be about 4.5
billion years old. Much of the debate is centered on the Earth ’s molten interior. According to our understanding of hea t transfer, if
the Earth is really that old, its center should have coole d off long ago. The discovery of radioactivity in rocks revealed the source of
energy that keeps the Earth’s interior molten, despite hea t transfer to the surface, and from there to cold outer sp ace.
Definitions
Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell, in his 1871 clas sic Theory of Heat, was one of many who began to build on the already
established idea that heat was something to do with m atter in motion. This was the same idea put forwards by Sir Benjamin
Thompson in 1798, who said he was only following on from the work of many others. One of Maxwell’s recommended b ooks was
Heat as a Mode of Motion by John Tyndall. Maxwell outlined four stipulations for the definition of heat:
It is something which may be transferred from one body to a nother.
It is a measurable quantity, and thus treated mathematic ally.
It cannot be treated as a substance, because it may be tr ansformed into something that is not a substance, such as me chanical
work.
Heat is one of the forms of energy.
In the following sections, we will define heat more rigorous ly, paying particular attention to how it can be measured and quantified.
Estimation of Quantity of Heat
The quantity of heat transferred by some process can either be directly measured, or determined indirectl y through calculations
based on other quantities. Direct measurement is by calorimetry and is the primary empirical basis of t he idea of quantity of heat
transferred in a process. The transferred heat is meas ured by changes in a body of known properties, for e xample, temperature rise,
change in volume or length, or phase change, such as melting of ice. Indirect estimations of quantity of h eat transferred rely on the
law of conservation of energy, and, in particular cas es, on the first law of thermodynamics (explored in th e following sections).
Indirect estimation is the primary approach of many the oretical studies of quantity of heat transferred.learning objectives

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515Heat Transfer Methods
After defining and quantifying heat transfer and its effects on physical systems, we will discuss the methods by which heat is
transferred. So many processes involve heat transfer, so that it is hard to imagine a situation where no h eat transfer occurs. Yet
every process involving heat transfer takes place by onl y three methods:
1. Conduction is heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact. (The matter is stationary on a macr oscopic scale—we
know there is thermal motion of the atoms and molecules at any temperature above absolute zero.) Heat transferred between
the electric burner of a stove and the bottom of a pa n is transferred by conduction.
2. Convection is the heat transfer by the macroscopic m ovement of a fluid. This type of transfer takes place in a f orced-air furnace
and in weather systems, for example.
3. Heat transfer by radiation occurs when microwaves, infr ared radiation, visible light, or another form of electr omagnetic
radiation is emitted or absorbed. An obvious example is the wa rming of the Earth by the Sun. A less obvious example is t hermal
radiation from the human body.
Heat as Energy Transfer
Heat is the spontaneous transfer of energy due to a temperatur e difference.
Identify SI and common units of heat
Heat as Energy Transfer
Consider two objects at different temperatures that a re brought together. Energy is transferred from the hotter object to the cooler
one, until both objects reach thermal equilibrium (i.e., both become the same temperature). How is this ene rgy transferred? No
work is done by either object, because no force acts t hrough a distance. The transfer of energy is caused by the temperature
difference, and ceases once the temperatures are eq ual. This observation leads to the following definitio n of heat: Heat is the
spontaneous transfer of energy due to a temperature differ ence.
Heat Transfer and Equilibrium: (a) The soft drink and the ice have different tempera tures, T1 and T2, and are not in thermal
equilibrium. (b) When the soft drink and ice are allowed to interact, energy is transferred until they reach the s ame temperature T,
achieving equilibrium. Heat transfer occurs due to the diff erence in temperatures. In fact, since the soft drink and ice are both in
contact with the surrounding air and bench, the equilibr ium temperature will be the same for both.
Where Is the Most Heat Lost?: Use movable thermometers to discover where a house has poor insulation.learning objectives

13.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515
AP Phy sics 2 - Heat T ransferAP Phy sics 2 - Heat T ransfer
Heat Transfer: A brief introduction to heat transfer for students.
Heat is often confused with temperature. For example, we may say the heat was unbearable, when we actually mean that the
temperature was high. Heat is a form of energy, whereas temperature is not. The misconception arises because we are sensitive to
the flow of heat, rather than the temperature.
Units
Owing to the fact that heat is a form of energy, it has the SI unit of joule (J). The calorie (cal) is a common unit of energy, defined
as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by 1.00ºC —specifically, between 14.5ºC an d 15.5ºC, since there
is a slight temperature dependence. Another common un it of heat is the kilocalorie (kcal), which is the en ergy needed to change the
temperature of 1.00 kg of water by 1.00ºC. Since mass is often specified in kilograms, kilocalorie is common ly used. Food calories
(given the notation Cal, and sometimes called “big ca lorie”) are actually kilocalories (1kilocalorie=100 0 calories), a fact not easily
determined from package labeling in the United States, but more common in Europe and elsewhere. In some e ngineering fields, the
British Thermal Unit (BTU), equal to about 1.055 kilo-jou les, is widely used.

13.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515
Figure 1 Equivalence of Heat and Work: Schematic depiction of Joule’s experiment that establis hed the equivalence of heat and
work
The total amount of energy transferred as heat is co nventionally written as Q for algebraic purposes. Heat released by a system int o
its surroundings is by convention a negative quantit y (Q < 0); when a system absorbs heat from its surrounding s, it is positive (Q >
0).
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat
It is also possible to change the temperature of a su bstance by doing work. Work can transfer energy into or out of a system. This
realization helped establish the fact that heat is a form of energy. James Prescott Joule (1818–1889) per formed many experiments
to establish the mechanical equivalent of heat— the work needed to produce the same effects as heat tra nsfer. In terms of the units
used for these two terms, the best modern value for th is equivalence is 1.000 kcal = 4186 J. We consider th is equation as the
conversion between two different units of energy.
Figure 1 shows one of Joule’s most famous experimental setups for demonstrating the mechanical equivalent of heat. It
demonstrated that work and heat can produce the same e ffects, and helped establish the principle of conserv ation of energy.
Gravitational potential energy (PE) (work done by the gravitational force) is converted into kinetic ener gy (KE), and then
randomized by viscosity and turbulence into increased average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in the system, producing a
temperature increase. His contributions to the field of thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named
after him.
Heat added or removed from a system changes its inte rnal energy (a concept we will discuss in the following section) and thus its
temperature. Such a temperature increase is observed whi le cooking. However, adding heat does not necessarily i ncrease the
temperature. An example is melting of ice; that is, wh en a substance changes from one phase to another. Work done on the system
or by the system can also change the internal energy of the system. Joule demonstrated that the temperat ure of a system can be
increased by stirring. If an ice cube is rubbed again st a rough surface, work is done by the frictional forc e. A system has a welldefined internal energy, but we cannot say that it ha s a certain “heat content” or “work content.” We use t he phrase “heat transfer”
to emphasize its nature.
Internal Energy
The internal energy of a system is the sum of all kinetic and potential energy in a system.
Express the internal energy in terms of kinetic and pote ntial energy
Internal Energy
James Joule showed that both heat and work can produce the same change in the internal energy of a substan ce, establishing the
principle of the mechanical equivalence of heat. Hea t is emphatically a quantity that solely describes energy being transferred. Itlearning objectives

13.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515makes no sense to speak of the total ‘heat’ an obje ct or system contains. However, a system does contain a quantifiable amount of
energy called the internal energy of a system. The internal energy of a system is the quantity that chan ges with the addition or
subtraction of work or heat. It is closely related to te mperature.
Definition
The internal energy is the energy required to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings. Internal
energy has two components: kinetic energy and potenti al energy. The kinetic energy consists of all the ener gy involving the
motions of the particles constituting the system, incl uding translation, vibration, and rotation. The potent ial energy is associated
with the static constituents of matter, static electri c energy of atoms within molecules or crystals, and th e energy from chemical
bonds. The equation describing the total internal energ y of a system is then:
We can also think of the internal energy as the sum of all the energy states of each component in the system:
At any finite temperature, kinetic and potential ene rgies are constantly converted into each other, but th e total energy remains
constant in an isolated system. The kinetic energy portion of internal energy gives rise to the temperat ure of the system. We can use
statistical mechanics to relate the (somewhat) random motions of particles in a system to the mean kinetic energy of the ensemble
of particles, and thus the empirically measurable quant ity expressed as temperature.
We can see that internal energy is an extensive prope rty: it depends on the size of the system or on the amount of substance it
contains.
In most cases, we are not concerned with the total amount of internal energy in the system, as it is ra rely convenient or necessary to
consider all energies belonging to the system. Rather, we are far more interested in the change in internal energy, given some
transfer of work or heat. This can be expressed as:
Q is heat added to a system and W is the mechanical wor k performed by the surroundings due to pressure or v olume changes in
the system. All other perturbations and energies added by other processes, such as an electric current introdu ced into an electronic
circuit, is summarized as the term W.
We can calculate a small change in internal energy of the system by considering the infinitesimal amount of heat δQ added to the
system minus the infinitesimal amount of work δW done by the s ystem:
This expression is the first law of thermodynamics.
The Sun and Internal Energy: Nuclear fusion in the sun converts nuclear potential e nergy into available internal energy and
keeps the temperature of the Sun very high.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
mech
extra

13.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515Key Points
Heat is a crucial concept that touches every aspect of our l ives. James Clerk Maxwell set down important principles that couple
into the definition of heat.
The quantity of heat transfer can be directly measured or estimated indirectly through the science of calorimet ry.
There are three modes of heat transfer: conduction, conv ection, and radiation.
If two objects at different temperature are brought togeth er, energy will transfer from the hotter object to the coo ler one until
both are at the same temperature. This transfer of energ y is known as heat.
Heat should not be confused with temperature. Temperatur e describes the internal state of an object, while heat re fers to the
energy transferred to or from the object.
Since heat is a form of energy, its SI unit is the joule. Ot her common units of heat energy include the calorie and k ilocalorie,
equal to 4.186 and 4,186 joules, respectively.
Because heat and work both involve the transfer of energy, they can each produce the same effects. The concept of th e
mechanical equivalent of heat was instrumental in establi shing the principle of conservation of energy.
While a system does not contain ‘ heat,’ it does contain a total amount of energy called internal energy.
The internal energy is the energy necessary to create a s ystem, minus the energy necessary to displace its surround ings.
Most of the time, we are interested in the change in interna l energy rather than the total internal energy.
The first law of thermodynamics,, describes small chang es in internal energy.
Key Terms
heat transfer: The transmission of thermal energy via conduction, con vection, or radiation.
calorimetry: The science of measuring the heat absorbed or evolved during the course of a chemical reaction or change of
state.
kilocalorie: A non-SI unit of energy equal to 1,000 calories or 4,1 86 joules; equal to the “calorie” or “Calorie” used in
nutritional labeling. Symbol: kcal.
thermal equilibrium: Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could tr ansfer heat between each other, but don’t.
mechanical equivalent of heat: The work needed to produce the same effects as heat tran sfer.
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
isolated system: A system that does not interact with its surroundings, t hat is, its total energy and mass stay constant.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42226/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42226/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42221/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
calorimetry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calorimetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
heat transfer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/heat_transfer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42221/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

13.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14515OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thermal-equilibrium--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/mechanical-equivalentof-heat. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kilocalorie. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kilocalorie. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42221/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat Transfer. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEBwctL490M. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Internal energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/internal-energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
isolated system. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isolated_system. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42221/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat Transfer. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEBwctL490M. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42223/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 13.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

13.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451613.2: Specific Heat
Explain the enthalpy in a system with constant volume and pr essure
Heat capacity (usually denoted by a capital C, often wi th subscripts), or thermal capacity, is the measurabl e physical quantity that
characterizes the amount of heat required to change a substance’s temperature by a given amount. In SI un its, heat capacity is
expressed in units of joules per kelvin (J/K).
An object’s heat capacity (symbol C) is defined as the ratio of the amount of heat ener gy transferred to an object to the resulting
increase in temperature of the object.
Heat capacity is an extensive property, so it scales wi th the size of the system. A sample containing twice the amount of substance
as another sample requires the transfer of twice as mu ch heat (Q) to achieve the same change in temperatur e (ΔT). For example, if
it takes 1,000 J to heat a block of iron, it would take 2,00 0 J to heat a second block of iron with twice the mass as the fi rst.
The Measurement of Heat Capacity
The heat capacity of most systems is not a constant. Rather, it depends on the state variables of the the rmodynamic system under
study. In particular, it is dependent on temperature itself, as well as on the pressure and the volume of the system, and the ways in
which pressures and volumes have been allowed to chan ge while the system has passed from one temperature to another. The
reason for this is that pressure-volume work done to the system raises its temperature by a mechanism other than heating, while
pressure-volume work done by the system absorbs heat wi thout raising the system’s temperature. (The temperat ure dependence is
why the definition a calorie is formally the energy nee ded to heat 1 g of water from 14.5 to 15.5 °C instead of ge nerally by 1 °C.)
Different measurements of heat capacity can therefor e be performed, most commonly at constant pressure an d constant volume.
The values thus measured are usually subscripted (by p and V, respectively) to indicate the definition. Gases and liquids are
typically also measured at constant volume. Measuremen ts under constant pressure produce larger values than those at constant
volume because the constant pressure values also inclu de heat energy that is used to do work to expand the substance against the
constant pressure as its temperature increases. This d ifference is particularly notable in gases where value s under constant pressure
are typically 30% to 66.7% greater than those at consta nt volume.
Thermodynamic Relations and Definition of Heat Capacity
The internal energy of a closed system changes eithe r by adding heat to the system or by the system perf orming work. Recalling
the first law of thermodynamics,
For work as a result of an increase of the system volume we may write,
If the heat is added at constant volume, then the second te rm of this relation vanishes and one readily obtains
This defines the heat capacity at constant volume, C. Another useful quantity is the heat capacity at constant pressure, C. With
the enthalpy of the system given by
our equation for d U changes tolearning objectives
V P

13.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516and therefore, at constant pressure, we have
Specific Heat
The specific heat is an intensive property that desc ribes how much heat must be added to a particular sub stance to raise its
temperature.
Summarize the quantitative relationship between heat tra nsfer and temperature change
Specific Heat
The heat capacity is an extensive property that desc ribes how much heat energy it takes to raise the temp erature of a given system.
However, it would be pretty inconvenient to measure the heat capacity of every unit of matter. What we want is an intensive
property that depends only on the type and phase of a substance and can be applied to systems of arbitrar y size. This quantity is
known as the specific heat capacity (or simply, the sp ecific heat), which is the heat capacity per unit ma ss of a material.
Experiments show that the transferred heat depends on three factors: (1) The change in temperature, (2) t he mass of the system, and
(3) the substance and phase of the substance. The last two f actors are encapsulated in the value of the specific h eat.
Heat Transfer and Specific Heat Capacity: The heat Q transferred to cause a temperature change d epends on the magnitude of
the temperature change, the mass of the system, and the su bstance and phase involved. (a) The amount of heat tran sferred is
directly proportional to the temperature change. To do uble the temperature change of a mass m, you need to add twi ce the heat. (b)
The amount of heat transferred is also directly proportio nal to the mass. To cause an equivalent temperature change in a doubled
mass, you need to add twice the heat. (c) The amount of hea t transferred depends on the substance and its phase. If it takes an
amount Q of heat to cause a temperature change ΔT in a given mass of copper, it will take 10.8 times that amount of hea t to cause
the equivalent temperature change in the same mass of wa ter assuming no phase change in either substance.learning objectives

13.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516
Chemistry 10.2 Speci c Heat CapacityChemistry 10.2 Speci c Heat Capacity
Specific Heat Capacity: This lesson relates heat to a change in temperature. We discuss how the amount of heat needed for a
temperature change is dependent on mass and the substance involved, and that relationship is represented by the s pecific heat
capactiy of the substance, C.
The dependence on temperature change and mass are ea sily understood. Because the (average) kinetic energ y of an atom or
molecule is proportional to the absolute temperature, the internal energy of a system is proportional to the absolute temperature and
the number of atoms or molecules. Since the transferred heat is equal to the change in the internal energy, the heat is proportional to
the mass of the substance and the temperature chang e. The transferred heat also depends on the substance so that, for example, the
heat necessary to raise the temperature is less for alcohol than for water. For the same substance, the t ransferred heat also depends
on the phase (gas, liquid, or solid).
The quantitative relationship between heat transfer and temperature change contains all three factors:
where Q is the symbol for heat transfer, m is the mass of the substance, and ΔT is the change in temperatur e. The symbol c stands
for specific heat and depends on the material and phase.
The specific heat is the amount of heat necessary to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of mass by 1.00ºC. T he specific heat c is a
property of the substance; its SI unit is J/(kg ⋅K) or J/(kg ⋅C). Recall that the temperature change (ΔT) is the sa me in units of kelvin
and degrees Celsius. Note that the total heat capaci ty C is simply the product of the specific heat cap acity c and the mass of the
substance m, i.e.,

13.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516where ϱ is the density of the substance and V is its volume.
Values of specific heat must generally be looked up in tables, because there is no simple way to calculate them. Instead, they are
measured empirically. In general, the specific heat also depends on the temperature. The table below lists representative values of
specific heat for various substances. Except for gases, the temperature and volume dependence of the specif ic heat of most
substances is weak. The specific heat of water is five t imes that of glass and ten times that of iron, which m eans that it takes five
times as much heat to raise the temperature of water the same amount as for glass and ten times as much he at to raise the
temperature of water as for iron. In fact, water has on e of the largest specific heats of any material, whi ch is important for
sustaining life on Earth.
Specific Heats: Listed are the specific heats of various substances. Thes e values are identical in units of cal/(g ⋅C).3. cv at constant
volume and at 20.0ºC, except as noted, and at 1.00 atm aver age pressure. Values in parentheses are cp at a constant p ressure of 1.00
atm.
Calorimetry
Calorimetry is the measurement of the heat of chemical r eactions or physical changes.
Analyze the relationship between the gas constant for an ide al gas yield and volume
Calorimetrylearning objectives

13.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516Overview
Calorimetry is the science of measuring the heat of chemical reactions or physical changes. Calorimetry is performed with a
calorimeter. A simple calorimeter just consists of a thermometer attached to a metal container full of wa ter suspended above a
combustion chamber. The word calorimetry is derived fr om the Latin word calor, meaning heat. Scottish physician and scientist
Joseph Black, who was the first to recognize the distinction between heat and temperature, is said to be the founder o f calorimetry.
Calorimetry requires that the material being heated have known thermal properties, i.e. specific heat capa cities. The classical rule,
recognized by Clausius and by Kelvin, is that the pr essure exerted by the calorimetric material is fully and rapidly determined
solely by its temperature and volume; this rule is for changes that do not involve phase change, such as melting of ice. There are
many materials that do not comply with this rule, and for them, more complex equations are required than those belo w.
Ice Calorimeter: The world’s first ice-calorimeter, used in the winter of 1782-83, by Antoine Lavoisier and Pierre-Simon Laplace,
to determine the heat evolved in variouschemical changes; calculations which were based on Joseph Black’s prior di scovery of
latent heat. These experiments mark the foundation of the rmochemistry.
Basic Calorimetry at Constant Value
Constant-volume calorimetry is calorimetry performed at a constant volume. This involves the use of a cons tant-volume
calorimeter (one type is called a Bomb calorimeter). For c onstant-volume calorimetry:
where δQ is the increment of heat gained by the sampl e, C is the heat capacity at constant volume, c is the specific heat at
constant volume, and ΔT is the change in temperature.
Measuring Enthalpy Change
To find the enthalpy change per mass (or per mole) of a substance A in a reaction between two substances A and B, the substances
are added to a calorimeter and the initial and fina l temperatures (before the reaction started and aft er it has finished) are noted.
Multiplying the temperature change by the mass and s pecific heat capacities of the substances gives a val ue for the energy given off
or absorbed during the reaction:
Dividing the energy change by how many grams (or moles) of A were present gives its enthalpy change of reac tion. This method is
used primarily in academic teaching as it describes the theory of calorimetry. It does not account for t he heat loss through the
container or the heat capacity of the thermometer a nd container itself. In addition, the object placed inside the calorimeter showsV v
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

13.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516that the objects transferred their heat to the calo rimeter and into the liquid, and the heat absorbed by the calorimeter and the liquid
is equal to the heat given off by the metals.
Constant-Pressure Calorimetry
A constant-pressure calorimeter measures the change i n enthalpy of a reaction occurring in solution durin g which the atmospheric
pressure remains constant. An example is a coffee-cup calorimeter, which is constructed from two nested Styro foam cups and a lid
with two holes, allowing insertion of a thermometer an d a stirring rod. The inner cup holds a known amount of a solute, usually
water, that absorbs the heat from the reaction. When the reaction occurs, the outer cup provides insulation. Th en
where C is the specific heat at constant pressure, ΔH is the enthalpy of the solution, ΔT is the change in te mperature, W is the
mass of the solute, and M is the molecular mass of th e solute. The measurement of heat using a simple cal orimeter, like the coffee
cup calorimeter, is an example of constant-pressure calorimetry, since the pressure (atmospheric pressur e) remains constant during
the process. Constant-pressure calorimetry is used i n determining the changes in enthalpy occurring in s olution. Under these
conditions the change in enthalpy equals the heat (Q=Δ H).
Specific Heat for an Ideal Gas at Constant Pressure and Volume
An ideal gas has different specific heat capacities unde r constant volume or constant pressure conditions.
Explain how to derive the adiabatic index
Specific Heat for an Ideal Gas at Constant Pressure and Volume
The heat capacity at constant volume of nR = 1 J·K of any gas, including an ideal gas is:
This represents the dimensionless heat capacity at con stant volume; it is generally a function of tempera ture due to intermolecular
forces. For moderate temperatures, the constant for a monoatomic gas is c =3/2 while for a diatomic gas it is c =5/2 (see).
Macroscopic measurements on heat capacity provide informati on on the microscopic structure of the molecules.
Molecular internal vibrations: When a gas is heated, translational kientic energy of m olecules in the gas will increase. In
addition, molecules in the gas may pick up many characte ristic internal vibrations. Potential energy stored in these internal degrees
of freedom contributes to specific heat of the gas.
The heat capacity at constant pressure of 1 J·K ideal gas i s:
where H=U+pV is the enthalpy of the gas.p
learning objectives
−1
v v
−1

13.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516Measuring the heat capacity at constant volume can be prohibitively difficult for liquids and solids. That is, small temperature
changes typically require large pressures to mainta in a liquid or solid at constant volume (this implie s the containing vessel must be
nearly rigid or at least very strong). It is easier to measure the heat capacity at constant pressure (allowing the material to expand or
contract freely) and solve for the heat capacity at constant volume using mathematical relationships deriv ed from the basic
thermodynamic laws.
Utilizing the Fundamental Thermodynamic Relation we can sh ow:
where the partial derivatives are taken at: constant volume and constant number of particles, and at const ant pressure and constant
number of particles, respectively.
The heat capacity ratio or adiabatic index is the ra tio of the heat capacity at constant pressure to hea t capacity at constant volume. It
is sometimes also known as the isentropic expansion fact or:
For an ideal gas, evaluating the partial derivatives above according to the equation of state, where R is t he gas constant for an ideal
gas yields:
substituting:
This equation reduces simply to what is known as Mayer’s rela tion:

13.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516
Julius Robert Mayer: Julius Robert von Mayer (November 25, 1814 – March 20, 187 8), a German physician and physicist, was
one of the founders of thermodynamics. He is best known for h is 1841 enunciation of one of the original statements o f the
conservation of energy (or what is now known as one of the fi rst versions of the first law of thermodynamics): “Energy c an be
neither created nor destroyed. ” In 1842, Mayer described the vital chemical process now referred to as oxidation as the primary
source of energy for any living creature. His achievemen ts were overlooked and credit for the discovery of the me chanical
equivalent of heat was attributed to James Joule in the f ollowing year. von Mayer also proposed that plants conv ert light into
chemical energy.
It is a simple equation relating the heat capacities unde r constant temperature and under constant pressure.
Solving Problems with Calorimetry
Calorimetry is used to measure the amount of heat produc ed or consumed in a chemical reaction.
Explain a bomb calorimeter is used to measure heat evolved in a combustion reaction
Calorimeters are designed to minimize energy exchang e between the system being studied and its surrounding s. They range from
simple coffee cup calorimeters used by introductory chemistry students to sophisticated bomb calorimeters u sed to determine the
energy content of food.
Calorimetry is used to measure amounts of heat transfe rred to or from a substance. To do so, the heat is exc hanged with a calibrated
object (calorimeter). The change in temperature of the measuring part of the calorimeter is converted into the amount of heat (since
the previous calibration was used to establish its h eat capacity). The measurement of heat transfer usin g this approach requires the
definition of a system (the substance or substances u ndergoing the chemical or physical change) and its surroundings (the other
components of the measurement apparatus that serve to either provide heat to the system or absorb heat from the system).
Knowledge of the heat capacity of the surroundings, a nd careful measurements of the masses of the system an d surroundings and
their temperatures before and after the process allows on e to calculate the heat transferred as described in thi s section.learning objectives

13.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516A calorimeter is a device used to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process. For example, when an
exothermic reaction occurs in solution in a calorim eter, the heat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the solution, which
increases its temperature. When an endothermic reac tion occurs, the heat required is absorbed from the t hermal energy of the
solution, which decreases its temperature. The tempera ture change, along with the specific heat and mass of the solution, can then
be used to calculate the amount of heat involved in eithe r case.
Coffee-Cup Calorimeters
General chemistry students often use simple calorimete rs constructed from polystyrene cups. These easy-to-us e “coffee cup”
calorimeters allow more heat exchange with their surroundi ngs, and therefore produce less accurate energy values.
Structure of the Constant Volume (or “Bomb”) Calorimeter
Bomb Calorimeter: This is the picture of a typical setup of bomb calorime ter.
A different type of calorimeter that operates at co nstant volume, colloquially known as a bomb calorimete r, is used to measure the
energy produced by reactions that yield large amount s of heat and gaseous products, such as combustion re actions. (The term
“bomb” comes from the observation that these reaction s can be vigorous enough to resemble explosions that would damage other
calorimeters.) This type of calorimeter consists of a ro bust steel container (the “bomb”) that contains the reactants and is itself
submerged in water. The sample is placed in the bomb, which is then filled with oxygen at high pressure. A sma ll electrical spark is
used to ignite the sample. The energy produced by th e reaction is trapped in the steel bomb and the surr ounding water. The
temperature increase is measured and, along with the kn own heat capacity of the calorimeter, is used to calc ulate the energy
produced by the reaction. Bomb calorimeters require calibration to determine the heat capacity of the c alorimeter and ensure
accurate results. The calibration is accomplished usi ng a reaction with a known q, such as a measured quant ity of benzoic acid
ignited by a spark from a nickel fuse wire that is weig hed before and after the reaction. The temperature change produced by the
known reaction is used to determine the heat capacit y of the calorimeter. The calibration is generally per formed each time before
the calorimeter is used to gather research data.
A 59.7 g piece of metal that had been submerged in boiling wate r was quickly transferred into 60.0 mL of water initially at 22.0
°C. The final temperature is 28.5 °C. Use these data to determine the specific heat of the metal. Use this re sult to identify the
metal.
Solution
Assuming perfect heat transfer, the heat given off by met al is the negative of the heat taken in by water, or:
In expanded form, this is:
Noting that since the metal was submerged in boiling water, its initial temperature was 100.0 °C; and that for water, 60.0 mL =
60.0 g; we have:Example: Identifying a Metal by Measuring Specific Heat

13.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516Solving this:
Our experimental specific heat is closest to the value f or copper (0.39 J/g °C), so we identify the metal as copper.
Key Points
Heat capacity is the measurable physical quantity that ch aracterizes the amount of heat required to change a subs tance’s
temperature by a given amount. It is measured in joules p er Kelvin and given by.
The heat capacity is an extensive property, scaling with the size of the system.
The heat capacity of most systems is not constant (though it can often be treated as such). It depends on the temp erature,
pressure, and volume of the system under consideration.
Unlike the total heat capacity, the specific heat capac ity is independent of mass or volume. It describes how much heat must be
added to a unit of mass of a given substance to raise its tem perature by one degree Celsius. The units of specific hea t capacity
are J/(kg °C) or equivalently J/(kg K).
The heat capacity and the specific heat are related b y or.
The mass m, specific heat c, change in temperature ΔT, an d heat added (or subtracted) Q are related by the equati on:
Values of specific heat are dependent on the properties and phase of a given substance. Since they cannot be calcul ated easily,
they are empirically measured and available for refere nce in tables.
A calorimeter is used to measure the heat generated (or a bsorbed) by a physical change or chemical reaction. The sci ence of
measuring these changes is known as calorimetry.
In order to do calorimetry, it is crucial to know the spe cific heats of the substances being measured.
Calorimetry can be performed under constant volume or co nstant pressure. The type of calculation done depends on the
conditions of the experiment.
The specific heat at constant volume for a gas is given a s.
The specific heat at constant pressure for an ideal gas i s given as.
The heat capacity ratio (or adiabatic index) is the rat io of the heat capacity at constant pressure to heat ca pacity at constant
volume.
Calorimetry is used to measure amounts of heat transfer red to or from a substance.
A calorimeter is a device used to measure the amount of hea t involved in a chemical or physical process.
This means that the amount of heat produced or consumed in the reaction equals the amount of heat absorbed or lost by the
solution.
Key Terms
heat capacity: The amount of heat energy needed to raise the tempera ture of an object or unit of matter by one degree Celsius;
in units of joules per kelvin (J/K).
enthalpy: the total amount of energy in a system, including both t he internal energy and the energy needed to displace its
environment
specific heat capacity: The amount of heat that must be added (or removed) fro m a unit mass of a substance to change its
temperature by one degree Celsius. It is an intensive prop erty.
constant-pressure calorimeter: An instrument used to measure the heat generated durin g changes that do not involve changes
in pressure.
calorimeter: An apparatus for measuring the heat generated or absor bed by either a chemical reaction, change of phase or s ome
other physical change.
constant-volume calorimeter: An instrument used to measure the heat generated durin g changes that do not involve changes in
volume.

13.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516Fundamental Thermodynamic Relation: In thermodynamics, the fundamental thermodynamic rela tion expresses an
infinitesimal change in internal energy in terms of infi nitesimal changes in entropy, and volume for a closed sy stem in thermal
equilibrium in the following way: dU=TdS-PdV. Here, U is internal e nergy, T is absolute temperature, S is entropy, P is pressur e
and V is volume.
adiabatic index: The ratio of the heat capacity at constant pressure to heat capacity at constant volume.
specific heat: The ratio of the amount of heat needed to raise the te mperature of a unit mass of substance by a unit degree t o the
amount of heat needed to raise that of the same mass of wat er by the same amount.
heat of reaction: The enthalpy change in a chemical reaction; the amoun t of heat that a systems gives up to its surroundings so
it can return to its initial temperature.
combustion: A process where two chemicals are combined to produce heat.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Heat capacity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_capacity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
enthalpy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enthalpy. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
heat capacity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/heat_capacity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat capacity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_capacity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
specific heat capacity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specific_heat_capacity. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Specific Heat Capacity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kbn_WHEJsyc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Calorimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Calorimeter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimeter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
calorimeter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calorimeter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constant-volumecalorimeter. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
constant-pressure calorimeter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/constantpressure%20calorimeter. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Specific Heat Capacity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kbn_WHEJsyc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

13.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14516Calorimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimetry. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
specific heat. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specific_heat. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Specific heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Specific_heat. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Ideal gas. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Relations between heat capacities. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Relations_between_heat_capacities. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Julius Robert von Mayer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Robert_von_Mayer. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
adiabatic index. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/adiabatic%20index. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Fundamental Thermodynamic Relation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental%20Thermodynamic%20Relation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Specific Heat Capacity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kbn_WHEJsyc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Calorimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimetry. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Julius Robert von Mayer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Robert_von_Mayer. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Thermally Agitated Molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Thermally_Agitated_Molecule.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Calorimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Chemistry. October 13, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/contents/85abf193-2bd2-4908-8563-90b8a7ac8df6@9. 110. License: CC BY: Attribution
combustion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/combustion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Specific Heat Capacity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kbn_WHEJsyc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42224/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Calorimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Calorimetry. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Julius Robert von Mayer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Robert_von_Mayer. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Thermally Agitated Molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Thermally_Agitated_Molecule.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Bomb Calorimeter. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bomb_Calorimeter.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 13.2: Specific Heat is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

13.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451713.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
Describe the latent heat as a form of energy
Latent Heat
Previously, we have discussed temperature change due t o heat transfer. No temperature change occurs from he at transfer if ice
melts and becomes liquid water (i.e., during a phase change). For example, consider water dripping from ic icles melting on a roof
warmed by the Sun. Conversely, water freezes in an ice tray co oled by lower-temperature surroundings.
Melting Icicle: Heat from the air transfers to the ice causing it to melt.
Energy is required to melt a solid because the cohe sive bonds between the molecules in the solid must be broken apart so that the
molecules can move around at comparable kinetic ene rgies; thus, there is no rise in temperature. Similar ly, energy is needed to
vaporize a liquid, because molecules in a liquid inte ract with each other via attractive forces. There is no temperature change until a
phase change is complete. The temperature of a glass of lemonade initially at 0 ºC stays at 0 ºC until all the ice has melted.
Conversely, energy is released during freezing and co ndensation, usually in the form of thermal energy. Wor k is done by cohesive
forces when molecules are brought together. The corre sponding energy must be given off (dissipated) to al low them to stay
together.
The energy involved in a phase change depends on two major factors: the number and strength of bonds or f orce pairs. The number
of bonds is proportional to the number of molecules and thus to the mass of the sample. The strength of forces depends on the type
of molecules. The heat Q required to change the phase of a sample of mass m is given by
(melting or freezing)
(evaporating or condensing)
where the latent heat of fusion, L, and latent heat of vaporization, L, are material constants that are determined experimen tally.learning objectives
f v

13.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14517
Phase Transitions: (a) Energy is required to partially overcome the attrac tive forces between molecules in a solid to form a liquid.
That same energy must be removed for freezing to take place. (b) Molecules are separated by large distances when going fro m
liquid to vapor, requiring significant energy to overcom e molecular attraction. The same energy must be removed for condensation
to take place. There is no temperature change until a p hase change is complete.
Latent heat is an intensive property measured in uni ts of J/kg. Both L and L depend on the substance, particularly on the strength
of its molecular forces as noted earlier. L and L are collectively called latent heat coefficients. Th ey are latent, or hidden, because
in phase changes, energy enters or leaves a system wi thout causing a temperature change in the system; so, in effect, the energy is
hidden. Note that melting and vaporization are endot hermic processes in that they absorb or require ene rgy, while freezing and
condensation are exothermic process as they release energ y.
STEMbite: Heating Up IceSTEMbite: Heating Up Icef v
f v

13.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14517Heating Up Ice: Andrew Vanden Heuvel explores latent heat while trying to cool down his soda.
Significant amounts of energy are involved in phase ch anges. Let us look, for example, at how much energy is ne eded to melt a
kilogram of ice at 0º C to produce a kilogram of wate r at 0°C. Using the equation for a change in temperat ure and the value for
water (334 kJ/kg), we find that Q=mLf=(1.0kg)(334kJ/kg)= 334kJ is the energy to melt a kilogram of ice. This is a lot of energy as
it represents the same amount of energy needed to rai se the temperature of 1 kg of liquid water from 0ºC to 79.8ºC. Even more
energy is required to vaporize water; it would take 2 256 kJ to change 1 kg of liquid water at the normal boiling point (100ºC at
atmospheric pressure) to steam (water vapor). This exa mple shows that the energy for a phase change is enor mous compared to
energy associated with temperature changes without a ph ase change.
Phase changes can have an enormous stabilizing effect (see figure below). Consider adding heat at a consta nt rate to a sample of ice
initially at -20 ºC. Initially the temperature of the ice rises linearly, absorbing heat at a constant rate of 0.50 cal/g ⋅C until it reaches
0 ºC. Once at this temperature, the ice begins to melt u ntil all the entire sample has melted, absorbing a to tal of 79.8 cal/g of heat.
The temperature remains constant at 0 ºC during this phase change. Once all the ice has melted, the temp erature of the liquid water
rises, absorbing heat at a new constant rate of 1.00 ca l/g⋅C (remember that specific heats are dependent on ph ase). At 100ºC, the
water begins to boil and the temperature again remai ns constant until the water absorbs 539 cal/g of heat to complete this phase
change. When all the liquid has become steam, the temper ature rises again, absorbing heat at a rate of 0.482 cal/g ⋅C.
Heating and Phase Changes of Water: A graph of temperature versus energy added. The system i s constructed so that no vapor
evaporates while ice warms to become liquid water, and so t hat, when vaporization occurs, the vapor remains in of the system. The
long stretches of constant temperature values at 0ºC and 10 0ºC reflect the large latent heat of melting and vaporiza tion,
respectively.
A phase change we have neglected to mention thus far is sublimation, the transition of solid directly in to vapor. The opposite case,
where vapor transitions directly into a solid, is cal led deposition. Sublimation has its own latent heat L s and can be used in the
same way as Land L.
v f

13.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14517Key Points
Energy is required to change the phase of a substance, suc h as the energy to break the bonds between molecules in a bloc k of
ice so it may melt.
During a phase change energy my be added or subtracted fro m a system, but the temperature will not change. The tempe rature
will change only when the phase change has completed.
The heat Q required to change the phase of a sample of ma ss m is given by (melting or freezing) and
(evaporating or condensing), where and are the latent heat of fusion and the latent heat of vaporization, respec tively.
Key Terms
latent heat of fusion: the energy required to transition one unit of a substanc e from solid to liquid; equivalently, the energy
liberated when one unit of a substance transitions from li quid to solid.
latent heat of vaporization: the energy required to transition one unit of a substanc e from liquid to vapor; equivalently, the
energy liberated when one unit of a substance transitions f rom vapor to liquid.
sublimation: the transition of a substance from the solid phase dire ctly to the vapor state such that it does not pass through t he
intermediate, liquid phase
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Latent heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_heat. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42225/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
sublimation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sublimation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/latent-heat-ofvaporization. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/latent-heat-of-fusion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Icicle Drip Free Stock Photo - Public Domain Pictures. Provided by: Public Domain Pictures. Located at:
http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?image=8182&picture= icicle-drip. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42225/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42225/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heating Up Ice. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S6n3o9T68qI. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

13.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451813.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
Assess why particular characteristics are necessary for e ffective conduction
Conduction
Conduction is the transfer of heat through stationar y matter by physical contact. (The matter is stationar y on a macroscopic scale—
we know there is thermal motion of the atoms and mole cules at any temperature above absolute zero.) Heat tr ansferred from an
electric stove to the bottom of a pot is an example of condu ction.
Some materials conduct thermal energy faster than ot hers. For example, the pillow in your room may the sa me temperature as the
metal doorknob, but the doorknob feels cooler to th e touch. In general, good conductors of electricity (metals like copper,
aluminum, gold, and silver) are also good heat condu ctors, whereas insulators of electricity (wood, plastic, and rubber) are poor
heat conductors.
Microscopic Description of Conduction
On a microscopic scale, conduction occurs as rapidly mov ing or vibrating atoms and molecules interact with ne ighboring particles,
transferring some of their kinetic energy. Heat is tr ansferred by conduction when adjacent atoms vibrate a gainst one another, or as
electrons move from one atom to another. Conduction i s the most significant means of heat transfer within a solid or between solid
objects in thermal contact. Conduction is greater i n solids because the network of relatively close fix ed spatial relationships
between atoms helps to transfer energy between them by vibratio n.
Fluids and gases are less conductive than solids. Thi s is due to the large distance between atoms in a fl uid or (especially) a gas:
fewer collisions between atoms means less conduction.
Microscopic Illustration of Conduction: The molecules in two bodies at different temperatures have different average kinetic
energies. Collisions occurring at the contact surface te nd to transfer energy from high-temperature regions to low-temperature
regions. In this illustration, a molecule in the lower tempe rature region (right side) has low energy before collisio n, but its energy
increases after colliding with the contact surface. In co ntrast, a molecule in the higher temperature region (left side) has high energy
before collision, but its energy decreases after collid ing with the contact surface.
The (average) kinetic energy of a molecule in the h ot body is higher than in the colder body. If two mole cules collide, an energy
transfer from the hot to the cold molecule occurs (s ee the above figure). The cumulative effect from al l collisions results in a net
flux of heat from the hot body to the colder body. The heat flux thus depends on the temperature differe nce.
Therefore, you will get a more severe burn from boili ng water than from hot tap water. Conversely, if the te mperatures are the
same, the net heat transfer rate falls to zero, and equilibrium is achieved. Owing to the fact that the nu mber of collisions increases
with increasing area, heat conduction depends on the cross-sectional area. If you touch a cold wall with y our palm, your hand cools
faster than if you just touch it with your fingertip.learning objectives

13.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518Factors Affecting the Rate of Heat Transfer Through Conduction
In addition to temperature and cross-sectional area, another factor affecting conduction is the thickne ss of the material through
which the heat transfers. Heat transfer from the left side to the right side is accomplished by a series of molecular collisions. The
thicker the material, the more time it takes to tran sfer the same amount of heat. If you get cold durin g the night, you may retrieve a
thicker blanket to keep warm.
Effect of Thickness on Heat Conduction: Heat conduction occurs through any material, represented h ere by a rectangular bar.
The temperature of the material is on the left and on t he right, where is greater than. The rate of heat transfe r by
conduction is directly proportional to the surface area, the temperature difference, and the substance’s conducti vity kk.
The rate of heat transfer is inversely proportional to the thickness.
Lastly, the heat transfer rate depends on the materia l properties described by the coefficient of therma l conductivity. All four factors
are included in a simple equation that was deduced fr om and is confirmed by experiments. The rate of con ductive heat transfer
through a slab of material, such as the one in the f igure above is given by where is the rate of heat transfer in
Joules per second (Watts), is the thermal conductiv ity of the material, and are its surface area and thickness, and is
the temperature difference across the slab.
Convection
Convection is the heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of a fluid, such as a car’s engine kept coo l by the water in the cooling
system.
Illustrate the mechanisms of convection with phase chan ge
Calculating Heat Transfer by Convection: Convection of Air Through the Walls of a House.
Most houses are not airtight: air goes in and out arou nd doors and windows, through cracks and crevices, foll owing wiring to
switches and outlets, and so on. The air in a typical house i s completely replaced in less than an hour.
Suppose that a moderately-sized house has inside dime nsions 12.0 m × 18.0 m × 3.00 m high, and that all air is replaced in
30.0 min. Calculate the heat transfer per unit time in watts needed to warm the incoming cold air by 10.0 ºC, thus replacing the
heat transferred by convection alone.
Strategy:
Heat is used to raise the temperature of air so that. The rate of heat transfer is then, where is the time for air
turnover. We are given that is 10.0ºC, but we must sti ll find values for the mass of air and its specific h eat before we can
calculate QQ. The specific heat of air is a weighted av erage of the specific heats of nitrogen and oxygen, whi ch is
(note that the specific heat at constant pressure must be used for this process).
Solutionlearning objectives
Example:

13.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518(1) Determine the mass of air from its density and th e given volume of the house. The density is given f rom the density and
the volume
(2) Calculate the heat transferred from the change in air temperature: so that
(3) Calculate the heat transfer from the heat and the turnover time. Since air is turned over in, the heat
transferred per unit time is.
This rate of heat transfer is equal to the power consumed by about forty-six 100-W light bulbs.
Newly constructed homes are designed for a turnover tim e of 2 hours or more, rather than 30 minutes for the house of this
example. Weather stripping, caulking, and improved wi ndow seals are commonly employed. More extreme measure s are
sometimes taken in very cold (or hot) climates to ac hieve a tight standard of more than 6 hours for one a ir turnover. Still longer
turnover times are unhealthy, because a minimum amoun t of fresh air is necessary to supply oxygen for breat hing and to dilute
household pollutants. The term used for the process by which outside air leaks into the house from cracks around windows,
doors, and the foundation is called “air infiltration.”
Convection
Convection (illustrated in) is the concerted, collect ive movement of ensembles of molecules within fluids (e.g., liquids, gases).
Convection of mass cannot take place in solids, sinc e neither bulk current flows nor significant diffusi on can occur in solids.
Instead heat diffusion in solids is called heat conductio n, which we’ve just reviewed.
Convection Cells: Convection cells in a gravity field.
Convection is driven by large-scale flow of matter. I n the case of Earth, the atmospheric circulation is c aused by the flow of hot air
from the tropics to the poles, and the flow of cold a ir from the poles toward the tropics. (Note that Earth ’s rotation causes changes
in the direction of airflow depending on latitude.). An example of convection is a car engine kept cool b y the flow of water in the
cooling system, with the water pump maintaining a flow of co ol water to the pistons.
While convection is usually more complicated than co nduction, we can describe convection and perform some straightforward,
realistic calculations of its effects. Natural convect ion is driven by buoyant forces: hot air rises beca use density decreases as
temperature increases. This principle applies equall y with any fluid. For example, the pot of water on the s tove in is kept warm in
this manner; ocean currents and large-scale atmospheric circulation transfer energy from one part of the globe t o another.

13.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518Convection in a Pot of Water: Convection plays an important role in heat transfer insi de this pot of water. Once conducted to the
inside, heat transfer to other parts of the pot is mostly by convection. The hotter water expands, decreases in densit y, and rises to
transfer heat to other regions of the water, while colder wate r sinks to the bottom. This process keeps repeating.
Convection and Insulation
Although air can transfer heat rapidly by convection, it is a poor conductor and thus a good insulator. The amount of available
space for airflow determines whether air acts as an i nsulator or conductor. The space between the inside an d outside walls of a
house, for example, is about 9 cm (3.5 in)—large enoug h for convection to work effectively. The addition o f wall insulation
prevents airflow, so heat loss (or gain) is decreased. Similarly, the gap between the two panes of a double-p aned window is about 1
cm, which prevents convection and takes advantage of air’s low conductivity to prevent greater loss. Fur, fiber and fiberglass also
take advantage of the low conductivity of air by tra pping it in spaces too small to support convection. I n animals, fur and feathers
are lightweight and thus ideal for their protection.
Convection and Phase Changes
Some interesting phenomena happen when convection is accompanied by a phase change. It allows us to cool of f by sweating, even
if the temperature of the surrounding air exceeds b ody temperature. Heat from the skin is required in o rder for sweat to evaporate
from the skin, but without air flow the air becomes sat urated and evaporation stops. Air flow caused by conv ection replaces the
saturated air by dry air and thus evaporation continues.
Another important example of the combination of phas e change and convection occurs when water evaporates f rom the ocean.
Heat is removed from the ocean when water evaporates. If the water vapor condenses in liquid droplets as cl ouds form, heat is
released in the atmosphere (this heat release is lat ent heat). Thus, an overall transfer of heat from t he ocean to the atmosphere
occurs. This process is the driving power behind thunder heads—great cumulus clouds that rise as much as 20.0 k m into the
stratosphere. Water vapor carried in by convection co ndenses, releasing tremendous amounts of energy, and this energy allows air
to become more buoyant (warmer than its surroundings) and rise. As the air continues to rise, more condensa tion occurs, which in
turn drives the cloud even higher. Such a mechanism i s called positive feedback, since the process reinforce s and accelerates itself.
These systems sometimes produce violent storms with lightnin g and hail, and constitute the mechanism that drives h urricanes.
Cumulus Clouds: Cumulus clouds are caused by water vapor that rises because of c onvection. The rise of clouds is driven by a
positive feedback mechanism.
Radiation
Radiation is the transfer of heat through electromagneti c energy
Explain how the energy of electromagnetic radiation cor responds with wavelength
Radiation
You can feel heat transfer from a fire or the Sun. Y et the space between Earth and the Sun is largely empt y, without any possibility
of heat transfer by convection or conduction. Similar ly, you can tell that an oven is hot without touchin g it or looking inside—it just
warms you as you walk by.learning objectives

13.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518In these examples, heat is transferred by radiation. The hot body emits electromagnetic waves that are abs orbed by our skin, and no
medium is required for them to propagate. We use diff erent names for electromagnetic waves of different wavel engths: radio
waves, microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, ultr aviolet radiation, X-rays, and gamma rays.
Radiation from a Fire: Most of the heat transfer from this fire to the observers is through infrared radiation. The visible light,
although dramatic, transfers relatively little thermal energy. Convection transfers energy away from the observe rs as hot air rises,
while conduction is negligibly slow here. Skin is very sensiti ve to infrared radiation so that you can sense the prese nce of a fire
without looking at it directly.
The energy of electromagnetic radiation depends on its wavelength (color) and varies over a wide range; a smaller wavelength (or
higher frequency) corresponds to a higher energy. We can write this as:
where is the energy, is the frequency, is the wavel ength, and is a constant.
Because more heat is radiated at higher temperatures, a temperature change is accompanied by a color ch ange. For example, an
electrical element on a stove glows from red to oran ge, while the higher-temperature steel in a blast furn ace glows from yellow to
white. The radiation you feel is mostly infrared, which is l ower in temperature still.
The radiated energy depends on its intensity, which is repr esented by the height of the distribution.
Radiation Spectrum: (a) A graph of the spectra of electr omagnetic waves emitted from an ideal radiator at three different
temperatures. The intensity or rate of radiation emissi on increases dramatically with temperature, and the spectru m shifts toward
the visible and ultraviolet parts of the spectrum. The sh aded portion denotes the visible part of the spectrum. It is apparent that the
shift toward the ultraviolet with temperature makes the visibl e appearance shift from red to white to blue as temperatur e increases.
(b) Note the variations in color corresponding to variati ons in flame temperature.

13.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518Heat Transfer
All objects absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation. The rate of heat transfer by radiation is largely determined by the color of
the object. Black is the most effective, and white the l east. People living in hot climates generally avoid wea ring black clothing, for
instance. Similarly, black asphalt in a parking lot wil l be hotter than the adjacent gray sidewalk on a sum mer day, because black
absorbs better than gray. The reverse is also true—b lack radiates better than gray. Thus, on a clear summ er night the asphalt will be
colder than the gray sidewalk because black radiates energ y more rapidly than gray.
An ideal radiator, often called a blackbody, is the sa me color as an ideal absorber, and captures all the radiation that falls on it. In
contrast, white is a poor absorber and also a poor ra diator. A white object reflects all radiation, like a mirror. (A perfect, polished
white surface is mirror-like in appearance, and a crushe d mirror looks white.)
There is a clever relation between the temperature o f an ideal radiator and the wavelength at which it em its the most radiation. It is
called Wien’s displacement law and is given by:
where is a constant equal to.
Gray objects have a uniform ability to absorb all par ts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Colored objects behave in similar but more
complex ways, which gives them a particular color in t he visible range and may make them special in other ranges of the
nonvisible spectrum. Take, for example, the strong a bsorption of infrared radiation by the skin, which al lows us to be very sensitive
to it.
Good and Poor Radiators: A black object is a good absorber and a good radiator, wh ile a white (or silver) object is a poor
absorber and a poor radiator. It is as if radiation from t he inside is reflected back into the silver object, whereas radiation from the
inside of the black object is “absorbed” when it hits the surface and finds itself on the outside and is strongly emi tted.
The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is determi ned by the Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation:
where is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, A is the surfa ce area of the object, and T is its absolute tempera ture
in kelvin. The symbol e stands for the emissivity of t he object, which is a measure of how well it radiates. An ideal jet-black (or
blackbody) radiator has e=1e=1, whereas a perfect refl ector has. Real objects fall between these two value s. For example,
tungsten light bulb filaments have an ee of about 0.5, and carbon black (a material used in printer ton er), has the (greatest known)
emissivity of about 0.99.
The radiation rate is directly proportional to the f ourth power of the absolute temperature—a remarkably strong temperature
dependence. Furthermore, the radiated heat is proport ional to the surface area of the object. If you kno ck apart the coals of a fire,
there is a noticeable increase in radiation due to an incre ase in radiating surface area.

13.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518Net Rate of Heat Transfer
The net rate of heat transfer by radiation (absorpt ion minus emission) is related to both the temperatur e of the object and that of its
surroundings. Assuming that an object with a temperatu re is surrounded by an environment with uniform tem perature, the
net rate of heat transfer by radiation is:
\[\mathrm{\dfrac{Q_{net}}{t}=eAσ(T_2^4−T_1^4)}\)
where e is the emissivity of the object alone. In othe r words, it does not matter whether the surroundings a re white, gray, or black;
the balance of radiation into and out of the object depends on how well it emits and absorbs radiation. Wh en, the quantity
is positive; that is, the net heat transfer is from hot ter objects to colder objects.
Key Points
On a microscopic scale, conduction occurs as rapidly m oving or vibrating atoms and molecules interact with neig hboring
particles, transferring some of their kinetic energy.
Conduction is the most significant form of heat transf er within a solid object or between solids in thermal conta ct.
Conduction is most significant in solids, and less though in liquids and gases, due to the space between molecule s.
The rate of heat transfer by conduction is dependent on t he temperature difference, the size of the area in cont act, the thickness
of the material, and the thermal properties of the mater ial(s) in contact.
Convection is driven by the large scale flow of matter in fluids. Solids cannot transport heat through convection.
Natural convection is driven by buoyant forces: hot air rises because density decreases as temperature increase s. This principle
applies equally with any fluid.
Convection can transport heat much more efficiently th an conduction. Air is a poor conductor and a good insulato r if the space
is small enough to prevent convection.
Convection often accompanies phase changes, such as when swea t evaporates from your body. This mass flow during
convection allows humans to cool off even if the surround ing air’s temperature exceeds the body temperature.
The energy of electromagnetic radiation depends on the wavelength (color) and varies over a wide range: a sm aller wavelength
(or higher frequency) corresponds to a higher energy.
All objects emit and absorb electromagnetic energy. The color of an object is related emissivity, or its efficien cy of radiating
away energy. Black is the most effective while white is the l east effective (and, respectively).
An ideal radiator, often called a blackbody, is the same col or as an ideal absorber and captures all the radiation t hat falls on it.
The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is determ ined by the Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation: where
is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, is the surface are a of the object, and is its absolute temperature in
kelvin.
The net rate of heat transfer is related to the temperatu re of the object and the temperature of its surroundings. The larger the
difference, the higher the net heat flux.
The temperature of an object is very significant, because the radiation emitted is proportional to this quantity to the fourth
power.
Key Terms
thermal conductivity: the measure of a material’s ability to conduct heat
natural convection: A method for heat transport. A fluid surrounding a heat source receives heat, becomes less dense and rises.
The surrounding, cooler fluid then moves to replace it. This cooler fluid is then heated and the process contin ues, forming a
convection current.
positive feedback: a feedback loop in which the output of a system is amplif ied with a net positive gain each cycle.
blackbody: A theoretical body, approximated by a hole in a hol low black sphere, that absorbs all incident electromagnetic
radiation and reflects none; it has a characteristic e mission spectrum.
emissivity: The energy-emitting propensity of a surface, usually me asured at a specific wavelength.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

13.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14518CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
thermal conductivity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/thermal%20conductivity. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Conduction (heat). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Conduction_(heat). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax, CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42228/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 15, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42228/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
natural convection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/natural%20convection. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Convection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Convection. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
positive feedback. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/positive_feedback. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013.. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42229/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Cumulus Clouds. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cumulus_clouds. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
blackbody. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/blackbody. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
emissivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/emissivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42230/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fire. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

13.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451913.5: Global Warming
Describe effect of greenhouse gases on the Earth’s equi librium temperature
Radiation is a natural process of heat transfer; ev erything is constantly radiating heat. When a system is at equilibrium, we do not
notice this exchange of energy because every object absorbs and emits precisely the amount of energy it receives, but this
equilibrium is dynamic–the exchange is always taking p lace. In general, as the temperature of an object inc reases, it emits energy
more rapidly by emitting photons at a faster rate, and by emitting photons of a greater average energy.
If we approximate the Earth as a perfect absorber an d emitter of the radiation received from the sun (c alled a blackbody), we would
expect the Earth to be at an average temperature of 5°C, rather than the 14°C which we observe. The extra temperature comes from
the Earth and it’s atmosphere selectively absorbing certain wavelengths of radiation while reflecting oth er wavelengths. The 9°C
discrepancy is due to the greenhouse effect. The gas es of the atmosphere are “selective absorbers”; ener gy in the visible part of the
electromagnetic spectrum passes through the atmosphe re directly to the Earth’s surface (with some reflect ion occurring as well).
The Earth absorbs this energy and then re-emits radi ation in the infrared portion of the spectrum. The g ases in the atmosphere,
primarily CO and water vapor are highly absorbent in the infrared part of the spectrum. The atmosphere abs orbs the infrared
radiation from the Earth, preventing it from escapi ng to space. Because all objects are continually emi tting radiation, the
atmosphere (having absorbed the Earth’s radiation) t hen emits radiation, some of which is then reabsorbed by the Earth’s surface.
Thus the greenhouse effect is a continuous cycle of absorption and emission of energy between the Earth a nd atmosphere. This
causes the Earth’s atmosphere and surface to be warmer than otherwise expected.
Radiative Transfer
The greenhouse effect is a phenomenon of radiative t ransfer, the process by which the energy of light waves is exchanged in matter.
Radiative transfer dictates what energy is reflected, abso rbed, and emitted.
The greenhouse effect: A summary of the heat transfer in the Earth’s atmospher e.
Atmospheric Absorbers
The radiative transfer properties of atmospheric chemi cals depend on the energy of the radiation (both for absorption and
emission), and those properties are unique to each c hemical. In the context of global warming, we find tha t it is important to
consider both how chemicals and particles reflect su nlight and how they absorb energy radiated from the Earth. Atmospheric
reflecters, notably sulfates and nitrates, reflect and scatter light before it ever hits the surface of the Earth, effectively reducing the
power that the Earth receives. On the other hand, gree nhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO), methane (C H), and nitrous
oxide (N O) are characteristically strong absorbers of the energy radiated by the Earth’s surface. They abso rb so strongly because
they typically exhibit resonant absorption behavior in the same energy range as the radiation emitted by the earth. These trap heat
before it leaves the Earth, insulating the Earth and incr easing the Earth’s equilibrium temperature.learning objectives
2 4

13.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14519Entropy and Solar Radiation
The Second Law of Thermodynamics implies that in orde r to produce energy sources, entropy must be produced. On a planetary
scale, this production of entropy is primarily accoun ted for by the absorption and re-emisson of radiati on. In general, the earth
radiates the same energy that it receives. (If greenh ouse gases increase, then temperature increases, and higher temperatures cause
the Earth to radiate more, compensating for the grea ter energy absorbed in the atmosphere.) With light radiation, we find the
entropy carried by the photons decreases as tempera ture increases, S ∝1TS∝1T. Since the Earth is cooler than the Sun, as the Ear th
absorbs radiation from the Sun and re-emits radiatio n from the Earth’s surface, there is a net production of entropy. This net
production of entropy allows energy to be stored and reused, particularly in the form of chemical energy stored by cells through
photosynthesis.
Key Points
The atmosphere can both absorb and reflect radiation, ei ther increasing or decreasing the Earth’s average tem perature.
All bodies naturally emit radiation; warmer bodies emit more photons, with higher average energies.
In absorbing sunlight and emitting infrared radiation, the Earth produces entropy.
Key Terms
selective absorber: An object that will absorb radiation over a particula r set of wavelengths but will not (is transparent) at other
wavelengths.
greenhouse effect: The process by which a planet is warmed by its atmosphere.
greenhouse gas: Any gas, such as carbon dioxide or CFCs, that contribut es to the greenhouse effect when released into the
atmosphere.
radiative transfer: The transfer of radiation (energy) leaving one obje ct and being absorbed by another.
blackbody: An object that is a perfect absorber and emitter of radia tion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Aerosols: Tiny Particles, Big Impact: Feature Articles. Provided by: National Air and Space Association. Located at:
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Aerosols/page3.php. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Greenhouse effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenhouse_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiative transfer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiative_transfer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
radiative transfer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radiative_transfer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
greenhouse effect. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/greenhouse_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
greenhouse gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/greenhouse_gas. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Greenhouse effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenhouse_effect. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 13.5: Global Warming is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

13.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452013.6: Phase Equilbrium
Illustrate the causes for evaporation near the surface o f a liquid
Evaporation is a type of vaporization of a liquid t hat only occurs on the liquid’s surface. Usually, the m olecules in a glass of water
do not have enough heat energy to escape from the l iquid. With sufficient heat, however, the liquid would quickly turn into vapor.
When the molecules collide, they transfer energy to each other in varying degrees. Sometimes the transfer is so one-sided for a
molecule near the surface that it achieves enough energy to e scape the liquid.
Three key parts to evaporation are heat, atmospheri c pressure (determines the percent humidity) and air movement. For molecules
of a liquid to evaporate, they must be located near the surface, be moving in the proper direction, and have sufficient kinetic energy
to overcome liquid- phase intermolecular forces. Whe n only a small proportion of the molecules meet these criteria, the rate of
evaporation is low. Since the kinetic energy of a mol ecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporatio n proceeds more quickly at
higher temperatures. As the faster-moving molecules esc ape, the remaining molecules have lower average kinet ic energy, and the
temperature of the liquid decreases. This phenomeno n is also called evaporative cooling. This is why ev aporating sweat cools the
human body. Evaporation also tends to proceed more q uickly with higher flow rates between the gaseous and li quid phases and in
liquids with higher vapor pressure. For example, laundr y on a clothes line will dry (by evaporation) more r apidly on a windy day
than on a still day.
Vapor Pressure Diagram: (a) Because of the distribution of speeds and kinetic energ ies, some water molecules can break away to
the vapor phase even at temperatures below the ordinary boiling point. (b) If the container is sealed, evaporatio n will continue until
there is enough vapor density for the condensation rate to equal the evaporation rate. This vapor density and the pa rtial pressure it
creates are the saturation values. They increase with te mperature and are independent of the presence of other ga ses, such as air.
They depend only on the vapor pressure of water.
Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle. The sun (solar energy) drives evaporation of water fr om oceans, lakes, moisture
in the soil, and other sources of water. In hydrology, e vaporation and transpiration (which involves evaporat ion within plant
stomata) are collectively termed evapotranspiration. Evaporation of water occurs when the surface of the l iquid is exposed,
allowing molecules to escape and form water vapor; this va por can then rise and form clouds.
The Evaporating Atmosphere
At equilibrium, evaporation and condensation processes ex actly balance and there is no net change in the volume of either phase.
Explain how a substance can have multiple distinct phases in the same environmentlearning objectives
learning objectives

13.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14520Phase Equilibrium
Left to equilibration, many compositions will form a uniform single phase, but depending on the temperat ure and pressure even a
single substance may separate into two or more distin ct phases. Within each phase, the properties are unif orm but between the two
phases properties differ.
Water in a closed jar with an air space over it form s a two phase system. Most of the water is in the liqu id phase, where it is held by
the mutual attraction of water molecules. Even at equ ilibrium, molecules are constantly in motion and, onc e in a while, a molecule
in the liquid phase gains enough kinetic energy to break away from the liquid phase and enter the gas ph ase. Likewise, every once
in a while a vapor molecule collides with the liquid su rface and condenses into the liquid. At equilibrium, e vaporation and
condensation processes exactly balance and there is no net c hange in the volume of either phase.
At room temperature and pressure, the water jar reache s equilibrium when the air over the water has a humidit y of about 3%. This
percentage increases as the temperature goes up. At 100 ° C and atmospheric pressure, equilibrium is not reache d until the air is
100% water. If the liquid is heated a little over 100 °C, the transition from liquid to gas will occur not on ly at the surface, but
throughout the liquid volume: the water boils.
The Earth’s atmosphere is not unchanging. The water va por in it changes phases. It is in a phase equilibrium. Collisions between
water molecules in the atmosphere allows some to conden se and some to remain in vapor. Similarly, several light er gases can
escape the gravitational field entirely.
Water Vapor in the Atmosphere: Water vapor condenses in the atmosphere
Key Points
Evaporation turns liquids into gas.
Evaporation can take place at temperatures below boiling point since the molecules in the liquid have different en ergies.
As the molecules in a liquid collide, some achieve highe r energies, allowing them to escape. This process lowers the energy of
the remaining molecules and is the source of cooling in evaporating liquids.
The atmosphere is made of gases in a phase equilibrium.
As molecules in the atmosphere collide, they gain and lo se energy.
As water evaporates from the surface of the earth, water co ndenses in the atmosphere.
Key Terms
Vaporization: a conversion of a solid or a liquid into a gas
Evaporation: The process of a liquid converting to the gaseous sta te.
condensation: The conversion of a gas to a liquid; the condensate so fo rmed
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

13.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14520CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Evaporation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaporation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Vaporization. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaporization. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42219/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Earth's atmosphere. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth's_atmosphere. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Phase (matter). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_(matter)%23Phase_equilibrium.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Evaporation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaporation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
condensation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/condensation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42219/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Water vapour. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_vapour%23Air_and_water_vapor_density_inte ractions_at_equal_temperatures. License:
CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 13.6: Phase Equilbrium is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
14: Thermodynamics
This page titled 14: Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
14.5: The Third Law of ThermodynamicsTopic hierarchy

14.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452214.1: Introduction
Analyze the necessity to exclude energy transferred bet ween system as heat from mechanical work
Work
In thermodynamics, work performed by a closed system is the energy transferred to another system that is measured by mechanical
constraints on the system. Thermodynamic work encompas ses mechanical work (gas expansion,) plus many other ty pes of work,
such as electrical. As such, thermodynamic work is a ge neralization of the concept of mechanical work in me chanics. It necessarily
excludes energy transferred between systems as heat, wh ich is modeled distinctly in thermodynamics. For close d systems, energy
changes in a system other than as work transfer are as heat.
Fig 1: An isobaric expansion of a gas requires heat transfer dur ing the expansion to keep the pressure constant. Since press ure is
constant, the work done is PΔV.
Heat and Work
Heat transfer (often represented by Q) and doing work (W) are the two everyday means of bringing energy into or taking energy
out of a system. The processes are quite different. He at transfer, a less organized process, is driven by temp erature differences.
Work, a quite organized process(as in gas expansion), involves a macroscopic force exerted through a dis tance. Nevertheless, heat
and work can produce identical results. Both heat and wor k can cause a temperature increase.
Heat transfer into a system, such as when the Sun warms the air in a bicycle tire, can increase its temperatur e, and so can work
done on the system, as when the bicyclist pumps air in to the tire. Once the temperature increase has occur red, it is impossible to tell
whether it was caused by heat transfer or by doing work.
This uncertainty is an important point. Heat transfer and work are both energy in transit—neither is store d as such in a system.
However, both can change the internal energy of a syste m. Internal energy is a form of energy completely di fferent from either heat
or work.learning objectives

14.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14522A Review of the Zeroth Law
Zeroth law justifies the use of thermodynamic temper ature, defined as the shared temperature of three d esignated systems at
equilibrium.
Discuss how the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics justifies the use of thermodynamic temperature
AP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and PV DiagramsAP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and PV Diagrams
Thermodynamics and PV Diagrams: A brief introduction to the zeroth and 1st laws of ther modynamics as well as PV diagrams
for students.learning objectives

14.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14522
Thermometer: A thermometer calibrated in degrees Celsius
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics states: If two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each other, and B is in thermal
equilibrium with a third system, C, then A is also in therma l equilibrium with C.
This law was postulated in the 1930s, after the first and second laws of thermodynamics had been developed and named. It is called
the “zeroth” law because it comes logically before the first and second laws (discussed in Atoms on the 1 and 2 laws).
Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could transfer heat between each other, but don’t. Indeed, experiments have shown
that if two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each other, and B is in thermal equilibrium with a third system C, then
A is also in thermal equilibrium with C. This conclusi on may seem obvious, because all three have the same temperature, but
zeroth law is basic to thermodynamics. Zeroth law justi fies the use of thermodynamic temperature: the comm on “label” that the
three systems in the definition above share is defined as the temperature of the systems.
Temperature
Thermometers actually take their own temperature, no t the temperature of the object they are measuring. This raises the question of
how we can be certain that a thermometer measures the temperature of the object with which it is in contact. The answer lies in the
fact that any two systems placed in thermal contact (meaning heat transfer can occur between them) will rea ch the same
temperature. That is, heat will flow from the hotter ob ject to the cooler one until they reach exactly the same temperature. The
objects are then in thermal equilibrium, and no furth er changes will occur. The systems interact and change because their
temperatures differ, and the changes stop once their temperatures are the same. Thus, if enough time is al lowed for this transfer of
heat to run its course, the temperature a thermometer registers does represent the system with which it achiev es thermal
equilibrium.
Key Points
Thermodynamic work is a generalization of the concept of mechanical work in mechanics.
For closed systems, energy changes in a system other than as wor k transfer are as heat.
Work in thermodynamics is a quite organized process (as in gas expansion), involving a macroscopic force exerted through a
distance.st nd

14.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14522The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that when systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each other, and B is in
thermal equilibrium with a third system, C, then A is also in t hermal equilibrium with C.
Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could tra nsfer heat between each other, but don’t.
If enough time is allowed for heat transfer to occur betwe en a thermometer and a system, the temperature the therm ometer
registers does represent the system with which it achieves thermal equilibrium.
Key Terms
heat: energy transferred from one body to another by thermal i nteractions
thermodynamics: a branch of natural science concerned with heat and it s relation to energy and work
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
thermal equilibrium: Two systems are in thermal equilibrium if they could tr ansfer heat between each other, but don’t.
thermodynamic temperature: Temperature defined in terms of the laws of thermodyn amics rather than the properties of a real
material: expressed in kelvins
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Work (thermodynamics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(thermodynamics). License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest...n=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...nternal-energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/heat. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3svt4kUPdI. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Temperature. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42214/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...equilibrium--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
thermodynamic temperature. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thermo...ic_temperature.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3svt4kUPdI. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Celsius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamics and PV Diagrams. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aqQF_aX2naQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 14.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

14.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452314.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
Explain how the net heat transferred and net work done in a system relate to the first law of thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics is a version of the la w of conservation of energy specialized for thermodyn amic systems. It is
usually formulated by stating that the change in th e internal energy of a closed system is equal to th e amount of heat supplied to the
system, minus the amount of work done by the system on its surroundings. The law of conservation of energy can be stated like
this: The energy of an isolated system is constant.
Thermody namics 2: First Law of Thermody namicsThermody namics 2: First Law of Thermody namics
First Law of Thermodynamics: In this video I continue with my series of tutorial vid eos on Thermal Physics and
Thermodynamics. It’s pitched at undergraduate level and wh ile it is mainly aimed at physics majors, it should be useful to anybody
taking a first course in thermodynamics such as engineers etc..
If we are interested in how heat transfer is converted into work, then the conservation of energy principle is important. The first law
of thermodynamics applies the conservation of energy principle to systems where heat transfer and doing wor k are the methods oflearning objectives

14.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523transferring energy into and out of the system. In equatio n form, the first law of thermodynamics is
Internal Energy: The first law of thermodynamics is the conservation -of-energy principle stated for a system where heat and work
are the methods of transferring energy for a system in thermal equilibrium. Q represents the net heat tran sfer—it is the sum of all
heat transfers into and out of the system. Q is positi ve for net heat transfer into the system. W is the t otal work done on and by the
system. W is positive when more work is done by the syste m than on it. The change in the internal energy of t he system, ΔU, is
related to heat and work by the first law of thermodynami cs,.
Here ΔU is the change in internal energy U of the syst em, Q is the net heat transferred into the system, an d W is the net work done
by the system. We use the following sign conventions: i f Q is positive, then there is a net heat transfer int o the system; if W is
positive, then there is net work done by the system. So positive Q adds energy to the system and positive W takes energy from the
system. Thus. Note also that if more heat transfer into the system occurs than work done, the difference is st ored as
internal energy. Heat engines are a good example of this —heat transfer into them takes place so that they can do work.
Constant Pressure and Volume
Isobaric process is one in which a gas does work at con stant pressure, while an isochoric process is one in whi ch volume is kept
constant.
Contrast isobaric and isochoric processes
According to the first law of thermodynamics, heat tran sferred to a system can be either converted to intern al energy or used to do
work to the environment. A process in which a gas does wor k on its environment at constant pressure is called a n isobaric process,
while one in which volume is kept constant is called an iso choric process.
Isobaric Process (Constant Pressure)
An isobaric process occurs at constant pressure. Since t he pressure is constant, the force exerted is constan t and the work done is
given as PΔV. An example would be to have a movable pist on in a cylinder, so that the pressure inside the cyli nder is always at
atmospheric pressure, although it is isolated from the atmosphere. In other words, the system is dynamically connected, by a
movable boundary, to a constant-pressure reservoir. If a gas is to expand at a constant pressure, heat s hould be transferred into the
system at a certain rate. This process is called an isobar ic expansion.learning objectives

14.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523
Fig 1: An isobaric expansion of a gas requires heat transfer dur ing the expansion to keep the pressure constant. Since press ure is
constant, the work done is PΔV.
Isochoric Process (Constant Volume)
An isochoric process is one in which the volume is held constant, meaning that the work done by the system wi ll be zero. It follows
that, for the simple system of two dimensions, any heat energy transferred to the system externally will be absorbed as internal
energy. An isochoric process is also known as an isometr ic process or an isovolumetric process. An example wou ld be to place a
closed tin can containing only air into a fire. To a first approximation, the can will not expand, and the only change will be that the
gas gains internal energy, as evidenced by its increase in temperature and pressure. Mathematically,
We may say that the system is dynamically insulated, by a rigid boundary, from the environment.
Isothermal Processes
An isothermal process is a change of a thermodynamic sy stem, in which the temperature remains constant.
Identify the typical systems in which an isothermal proces s occurs
An isothermal process is a change of a system, in whi ch the temperature remains constant:. This typically occurs when a
system is in contact with an outside thermal reservoi r (heat bath), and the change occurs slowly enough to allow the system to
continually adjust to the temperature of the reserv oir through heat exchange. In contrast, an adiabatic process is where a system
exchanges no heat with its surroundings (). (See our a tom on “Adiabatic Process. “) In other words, in an isothe rmal process,
the value but, while in an adiabatic process, but.
Ideal Gas in an Isothermal Process
For an ideal, the product of pressure and volume () is a constant if the gas is kept at isothermal condit ions. (This is historically
called Boyle’s law.) However, the cases where the produc t is an exponential term, does not comply. The value of the constant is
, where n is the number of moles of gas present and R is the ideal gas constant. In other words, the ideal ga s law
applies. This means thatlearning objectives

14.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523holds.
Calculation of Work
In thermodynamics, the work involved when a gas changes from state A to state B is simply
For an isothermal, reversible process, this integral equals the area under the relevant pressure-volume isotherm, and is indicated in
blue in for an ideal gas. Again, applies and with T being constant (as this is an isothermal process), we have
Work Done by Gas During Expansion: The blue area represents “work” done by the gas duri ng expansion for this isothermal
change.
It is also worth noting that, for many systems, if the temperature is held constant, the internal energy of the system also is constant,
and so ΔU=0ΔU=0. From the first law of thermodynamics, it fol lows that Q=−WQ=−W for this same isothermal process.
Adiabatic Processes
An adiabatic process is any process occurring without gai n or loss of heat within a system.
Assess the environments in which isothermal processes typ ically occur
An isothermal process is a change of a system, in whi ch the temperature remains constant:. This typically occurs when a
system is in contact with an outside thermal reservoir (heat bath), and the change occurs slowly enough to allow the system to
continually adjust to the temperature of the reserv oir through heat exchange. In contrast, an adiabatic process is where a system
exchanges no heat with its surroundings (). (See our a tom on “Adiabatic Process. “) In other words, in an isothe rmal process,
the value but, while in an adiabatic process, but.
Ideal Gas in an Isothermal Process
For an ideal, the product of pressure and volume (PV) is a constant if the gas is kept at isothermal condition s. (This is historically
called Boyle’s law.) However, the cases where the prod uct PV is an exponential term, does not comply. The value of the constant is
, where n is the number of moles of gas present and R is the ideal gas constant. In other words, the ideal ga s law
applies. This means that
holds. The family of curves generated by this equation is shown in. Each curve is called an isotherm.learning objectives

14.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523

Isotherms of an Ideal Gas: Several isotherms of an ideal gas on a PV diagram.
Calculation of Work
In thermodynamics, the work involved when a gas changes from state A to state B is simply
For an isothermal, reversible process, this integral equals the area under the relevant pressure-volume isotherm, and is indicated in
blue in for an ideal gas. Again, P = nRT / V applies and with T being constant (as this is an isothermal process), we hav e

Work Done by Gas During Expansion: The blue area represents “work” done by the gas during e xpansion for this isothermal
change.
It is also worth noting that, for many systems, if the temperature is held constant, the internal energy of the system also is constant,
and so. From the first law of thermodynamics, it follows that for this same isothermal process.
Human Metabolism
The 1st law of thermodynamics explains human metaboli sm: the conversion of food into energy that is used by the body to perform
activities.

14.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523Contrast catabolism and anabolism in regards to energy
Metabolism in humans is the conversion of food into en ergy, which is then used by the body to perform activ ities. It is an example
of the first law of thermodynamics in action. Consid ering the body as the system of interest, we can use t he first law to examine
heat transfer, doing work, and internal energy in acti vities ranging from sleep to heavy exercise. For examp le, one major factor in
such activities is body temperature—normally kept c onstant by heat transfer to the surroundings, meani ng that Q is negative (i.e.,
our body loses heat). Another factor is that the bod y usually does work on the outside world, meaning tha t W is positive. Thus, in
such situations the body loses internal energy, since i s negative.
Eating
Now consider the effects of eating. The body metaboliz es all the food we consume. Eating increases the inter nal energy of the body
by adding chemical potential energy. In essence, metab olism uses an oxidation process in which the chemical potential energy of
food is released. This implies that food input is in the form of work. Food energy is reported in a special unit, known as the Calorie.
This energy is measured by burning food in a calorimeter, whi ch is how the units are determined.
Catabolism and Anabolism
Catabolism is the pathway that breaks down molecules i nto smaller units and produces energy. Anabolism is the building up of
molecules from smaller units. Anabolism uses up the en ergy produced by the catabolic break down of your fo od to create
molecules more useful to your body.
Internal energy
Our body loses internal energy, and there are three pl aces this internal energy can go—to heat transfer, t o doing work, and to stored
fat (a tiny fraction also goes to cell repair and g rowth). As shown in Fig 1 heat transfer and doing work tak e internal energy out of
the body, and then food puts it back. If you eat ju st the right amount of food, then your average inter nal energy remains constant.
Whatever you lose to heat transfer and doing work is replaced by food, so that, in the long run, ΔU=0. If y ou overeat repeatedly,
then ΔU is always positive, and your body stores this ext ra internal energy as fat. The reverse is true if you eat too little. If ΔU is
negative for a few days, then the body metabolizes i ts own fat to maintain body temperature and do work t hat takes energy from the
body. This process is how dieting produces weight loss.
Metabolism: (a) The first law of thermodynamics applied to metabolism. Heat transferred out of the body (Q) and work done by
the body (W) remove internal energy, while food intake re places it. (Food intake may be considered as work done on t he body.) (b)
Plants convert part of the radiant heat transfer in sunlig ht to stored chemical energy, a process called photosynth esis.
Metabolism
Life is not always this simple, as any dieter knows. The body stores fat or metabolizes it only if energy i ntake changes for a period
of several days. Once you have been on a major diet, the next one is less successful because your body al ters the way it responds to
low energy intake. Your basal metabolic rate is the rate at which food is converted into heat transfer a nd work done while the body
is at complete rest. The body adjusts its basal metabo lic rate to compensate (partially) for over-eating or under-eating. The body
will decrease the metabolic rate rather than elimina te its own fat to replace lost food intake. You will b ecome more easily chilledlearning objectives

14.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523and feel less energetic as a result of the lower meta bolic rate, and you will not lose weight as fast as befo re. Exercise helps with
weight loss because it produces both heat transfer fr om your body and work, and raises your metabolic rate even when you are at
rest.
Irreversibility
The body provides us with an excellent indication that many thermodynamic processes are irreversible. An irre versible process can
go in one direction but not the reverse, under a giv en set of conditions. For example, although body fat ca n be converted to do work
and produce heat transfer, work done on the body and heat transfer into it cannot be converted to body fa t. Otherwise, we could
skip lunch by sunning ourselves or by walking down st airs. Another example of an irreversible thermodynamic process is
photosynthesis. This process is the intake of one form o f energy—light—by plants and its conversion to chemi cal potential energy.
Both applications of the first law of thermodynamics are illustrated in. One great advantage of such conserv ation laws is that they
accurately describe the beginning and ending points o f complex processes (such as metabolism and photosynth esis) without regard
to the complications in between.
Key Points
The first law of thermodynamics is a version of the law of conservation of energy, specialized for thermodynamical systems.
In equation form, the first law of thermodynamics is.
Heat engines are a good example of the application of the 1st law; heat transfer into them takes place so that they can do work.
An isobaric process occurs at constant pressure. Since the pressure is constant, the force exerted is constant and the work done
is given as.
An isobaric expansion of a gas requires heat transfer to kee p the pressure constant.
An isochoric process is one in which the volume is held constan t, meaning that the work done by the system will be zero. Th e
only change will be that a gas gains internal energy.
For an ideal gas, the product of pressure and volume (PV) i s a constant if the gas is kept at isothermal conditions.
For an ideal gas, the work involved when a gas changes from state A to state B through an isothermal process is given as
For many systems, if the temperature is held constant, the internal energy of the system also is constant. It follows tha t
in this case.
Adiabatic processes can occur if the container of the sy stem has thermally-insulated walls or the process happens in an
extremely short time.
For an adiabatically expanding ideal monatomic gas whic h does work on its environment (W is positive), internal e nergy of the
gas should decrease.
In a sense, isothermal process can be considered as the o pposite extreme of adiabatic process. In isothermal proc esses, heat
exchange is slow enough so that the system’s temperatur e remains constant.
Human metabolism is a complicated process. The 1st law of t hermodynamics describes the beginning and ending points of
these processes.
Our body loses internal energy. There are three places t his internal energy can go—to heat transfer, to doing work, an d to stored
fat.
Our body provides a good example of irreversible processes. Although body fat can be converted to do work and produce h eat
transfer, work done on the body and heat transfer into it ca nnot be converted to body fat.
Key Terms
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
heat: energy transferred from one body to another by thermal i nteractions
law of conservation of energy: The law stating that the total amount of energy in a ny isolated system remains constant, and
cannot be created or destroyed, although it may change fo rms.
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
reversible: Capable of returning to the original state without consump tion of free energy and increase of entropy.

14.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
Boyle’s law: The observation that the pressure of an ideal gas is i nversely proportional to its volume at constant tempera ture.
ideal gas: A hypothetical gas whose molecules exhibit no interacti on and undergo elastic collision with each other and with t he
walls of the container.
metabolism: The complete set of chemical reactions that occur in livi ng cells.
oxidation: A reaction in which the atoms of an element lose elect rons and the valence of the element increases.
calorie: The energy needed to increase the temperature of 1 kilo gram of water by 1 kelvin. It is equivalent to 1,000 (smal l)
calories.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
First law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/First_l...thermodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
heat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/heat. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...nternal-energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
law of conservation of energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/law_of...tion_of_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
First Law of Thermodynamics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih1NJ0aQI6s. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. October 1, 20 12. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamic process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamic_process. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...nternal-energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
First Law of Thermodynamics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih1NJ0aQI6s. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. October 1, 20 12. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
reversible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reversible. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boyle's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Boyle's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
First Law of Thermodynamics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih1NJ0aQI6s. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

14.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. October 1, 20 12. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boyle's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Boyle's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
reversible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reversible. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
First Law of Thermodynamics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih1NJ0aQI6s. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. October 1, 20 12. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
metabolism. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/metabolism. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
calorie. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calorie. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
oxidation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oxidation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
First Law of Thermodynamics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih1NJ0aQI6s. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. October 1, 20 12. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simpl e Processes. February 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42233/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Isothermal process. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isothermal_process. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Law of Thermodynamics. February 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42232/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

14.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452414.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Contrast the concept of irreversibility between the First and Second Laws of Thermodynamics
Irreversibility
The second law of thermodynamics deals with the direc tion taken by spontaneous processes. Many processes occur spontaneously
in one direction only—that is, they areirreversible, u nder a given set of conditions. Although irreversibili ty is seen in day-to-day
life—a broken glass does not resume its original state, for instance—complete irreversibility is a statistic al statement that cannot be
seen during the lifetime of the universe. More preci sely, an irreversible process is one that depends on pa th. If the process can go in
only one direction, then the reverse path differs fundame ntally and the process cannot be reversible.
For example, heat involves the transfer of energy fro m higher to lower temperature. A cold object in cont act with a hot one never
gets colder, transferring heat to the hot object and making it hotter. Furthermore, mechanical energy, suc h as kinetic energy, can be
completely converted to thermal energy by friction, but the reverse is impossible. A hot stationary object never spontaneously cools
off and starts moving. Yet another example is the e xpansion of a puff of gas introduced into one corne r of a vacuum chamber. The
gas expands to fill the chamber, but it never regro ups in the corner. The random motion of the gas molec ules could take them all
back to the corner, but this is never observed to happ en.
One-Way Processed in Nature: Examples of one-way processes in nature. (a) Heat tr ansfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold
and not from cold to hot. (b) The brakes of this car convert its kinetic energy to heat transfer to the environment. The reverse
process is impossible. (c) The burst of gas let into th is vacuum chamber quickly expands to uniformly fill every part of the
chamber. The random motions of the gas molecules will never return them to the corner.
Second Law of Thermodynamics
The fact that certain processes never occur suggests tha t there is a law forbidding them to occur. The first law of thermodynamics
would allow them to occur—none of those processes viola te conservation of energy. The law that forbids these processes is called
the second law of thermodynamics. We shall see that th e second law can be stated in many ways that may seem different, but these
many ways are, in fact, equivalent. Like all natural la ws, the second law of thermodynamics gives insights int o nature, and its
several statements imply that it is broadly applicable, fundamentally affecting many apparently disparate processes. The already
familiar direction of heat transfer from hot to cold is the basis of our first version of the second law of thermodynam ics.learning objectives

14.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524
AP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and Heat EnginesAP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and Heat Engines
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines: A brief introduction to heat engines and thermodyna mic concepts such as the Carnot Engine
for students.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics(first expression): Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from higher- to lowe r-temperature
bodies but never spontaneously in the reverse direction.
The law states that it is impossible for any process to have as its sole result heat transfer from a cooler to a hotter object. We will
express the law in other terms later on, most importantly in t erms of entropy.
Heat Engines
In thermodynamics, a heat engine is a system that perfor ms the conversion of heat or thermal energy to mechanical work.
Justify why efficiency is one of the most important paramete rs for any heat engine
In thermodynamics, a heat engine is a system that pe rforms the conversion of heat or thermal energy to mechanical work. Gasoline
and diesel engines, jet engines, and steam turbines ar e all heat engines that do work by using part of the heat transfer from some
source. Heat transfer from the hot object (or hot res ervoir) is denoted as Q, while heat transfer into the cold object (or cold
reservoir) is Q, and the work done by the engine is W. The t emperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs are T and T, r espectively.
learning objectives
h
c h c

14.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524
Heat Transfer: (a) Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from a hot object to a cold one, consistent with the second law of
thermodynamics. (b) A heat engine, represented here by a circle, uses part of the heat transfer to do work. The hot a nd cold objects
are called the hot and cold reservoirs. Qh is the heat tr ansfer out of the hot reservoir, W is the work output, and Qc is the heat
transfer into the cold reservoir.
AP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and Heat EnginesAP Phy sics 2 - Thermody namics and Heat Engines

14.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524Thermodynamics and Heat Engines: A brief introduction to heat engines and thermodyna mic concepts such as the Carnot Engine
for students.
Because the hot reservoir is heated externally, which is energy intensive, it is important that the work is done as efficiently as
possible. In fact, we would like W to equal Q, and for there to be no heat transfer to the environment (Q = 0). Unfortunately, this is
impossible. The second law of thermodynamics (second e xpression) also states, with regard to using heat trans fer to do work: It is
impossible in any system for heat transfer from a reserv oir to completely convert to work in a cyclical proce ss in which the system
returns to its initial state.
A cyclical process brings a system, such as the gas in a cylinder, back to its original state at the end of every cycle. Most heat
engines, such as reciprocating piston engines and rota ting turbines, use cyclical processes. The second law, in its second form,
clearly states that such engines cannot have perfect con version of heat transfer into work done.
Efficiency
A cyclical process brings the system back to its orig inal condition at the end of every cycle. By definit ion, such a system’s internal
energy U is the same at the beginning and end of ever y cycle—that is,. The first law of thermodynamics stat es that
, where Q is the net heat transfer during the cycle () and W is the net work done by the system. Since
for a complete cycle, we have. Thus the net work done by t he system equals the net heat transfer into the system, or
(cyclical process),
just as shown schematically in (b).
Efficiency is one of the most important parameters fo r any heat engine. The problem is that in all process es, there is significant heat
transfer Q lost to the environment. In the conversion of energy to work, we are always faced with the problem of getting less out
than we put in. We define the efficiency of a heat engine (Eff) to be its net work output W divided by heat transfer to the engine Q
Since in a cyclical process, we can also express this as
(for cyclical process),
making it clear that an efficiency of 1, or 100%, is possi ble only if there is no heat transfer to the environment (Q =0).
Carnot Cycles
The Carnot cycle is the most efficient cyclical proces s possible and uses only reversible processes through its c ycle.
Analyze why the Carnot engine is considered the perfect engi ne
We know from the second law of thermodynamics that a heat engine cannot be 100 percent efficient, since t here must always be
some heat transfer Q to the environment. (See our atom on “Heat Engines. “) How efficient can a heat engine be then? This
question was answered at a theoretical level in 1824 by a young French engineer, Sadi Carnot (1796-1832), in his study of the thenemerging heat engine technology crucial to the Indu strial Revolution. He devised a theoretical cycle, now called the Carnot cycle,
which is the most efficient cyclical process possible. The second law of thermodynamics can be restated in terms of the Carnot
cycle, and so what Carnot actually discovered was this fundamental law. Any heat engine employing the Carno t cycle is called a
Carnot engine.
What is crucial to the Carnot cycle is that only rev ersible processes are used. Irreversible processes i nvolve dissipative factors, such
as friction and turbulence. This increases heat tra nsfer Q to the environment and reduces the efficien cy of the engine. Obviously,
then, reversible processes are superior.
The second law of thermodynamics (a third form): A Carnot engine operating between two given temperatu res has the greatest
possible efficiency of any heat engine operating bet ween these two temperatures. Furthermore, all engines employing only
reversible processes have this same maximum efficiency when ope rating between the same given temperatures.h c
c
h:
c
learning objectives
c
c

14.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524Efficiency
The Carnot cycle comprises two isothermal and two adi abatic processes. Recall that both isothermal and a diabatic processes are, in
principle, reversible.
PV Diagram for a Carnot Cycle: PV diagram for a Carnot cycle, employing only reve rsible isothermal and adiabatic processes.
Heat transfer Qh occurs into the working substance during the isothermal path AB, which takes place at constant t emperature Th.
Heat transfer Qc occurs out of the working substance dur ing the isothermal path CD, which takes place at const ant temperature Tc.
The net work output W equals the area inside the path ABCDA. Also shown is a schematic of a Carnot engine operat ing between
hot and cold reservoirs at temperatures Th and Tc.
Carnot also determined the efficiency of a perfect h eat engine—that is, a Carnot engine. It is always true that the efficiency of a
cyclical heat engine is given by:.
What Carnot found was that for a perfect heat engine, the ratio equals the ratio of the absolute
temperatures of the heat reservoirs. That is, for a Carnot engine, so that the maximum or Carnot efficie ncy Eff is given
by, where T and T are in kelvins. (Derivation of the formula is slightly beyond the scope of this atom.) No real
heat engine can do as well as the Carnot efficiency—a n actual efficiency of about 0.7 of this maximum is usually the best that can
be accomplished.
Heat Pumps and Refrigerators
A heat pump is a device that transfers heat energy from a heat source to a heat sink against a temperature gradie nt.
Explain how the the components of a heat pump cause heat t o transfer from a cold reservoir to a hot reservoir
Heat pumps, air conditioners, and refrigerators utiliz e heat transfer from cold to hot. Heat transfer (Q) oc curs from a cold reservoir
and into a hot one. This requires work input W, which i s also converted to heat transfer. Thus the heat tra nsfer to the hot reservoir is
Q =Q +W. A heat pump’s mission is for heat transfer Q to occur into a warm environment, such as a home in the winter. The
mission of air conditioners and refrigerators is for heat transfer Q to occur from a cool environment, suc h as chilling a room or
keeping food at lower temperatures than the environm ent. Actually, a heat pump can be used both to heat an d cool a space. It is
essentially an air conditioner and a heating unit al l in one. In this section we will concentrate on its heating m ode.
Heat Pumps
A working fluid such as a non-CFC refrigerant is used in a basic heat pump. The basic components of a heat pu mp in are a
condenser, an expansion valve, an evaporator and a c ompressor. In the outdoor coils (the evaporator), he at transfer Q occurs to the
working fluid from the cold outdoor air, turning it i nto a gas. The electrically driven compressor (work in put W) raises the
temperature and pressure of the gas and forces it i nto the condenser coils that are inside the heated space. Because the temperature
of the gas is higher than the temperature inside the room, heat transfer to the room occurs and the gas c ondenses to a liquid. The
liquid then flows back through a pressure-reducing v alve to the outdoor evaporator coils, being cooled th rough expansion. (In a
cooling cycle, the evaporator and condenser coils excha nge roles and the flow direction of the fluid is reversed.)Extra close brace or missing open brace
C
h c
learning objectives
c
h c h
c
c

14.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524
Simple Heat Pump: A simple heat pump has four basic components: (1) co ndenser, (2) expansion valve, (3) evaporator, and (4)
compressor.
Coefficient of Performance
The quality of a heat pump is judged by how much hea t transfer Q occurs into the warm space compared with h ow much work
input W is required. We define a heat pump’s coefficie nt of performance (COP) to be
Since the efficiency of a heat engine is Eff=W/Q, we see that COP =1/ Eff. Since the efficiency of any heat engine is less tha n 1, it
means that COP is always greater than 1—that is, a hea t pump always has more heat transfer Q than work put into it. Another
interesting point is that heat pumps work best when tem perature differences are small. The efficiency of a perfect engine (or Carnot
engine) is
thus, the smaller the temperature difference, the sma ller the efficiency and the greater the COP.
Air Conditioners and Refrigerators
Air conditioners and refrigerators are designed to co ol something down in a warm environment. As with heat pu mps, work input is
required for heat transfer from cold to hot. The qu ality of air conditioners and refrigerators is judg ed by how much heat transfer Q
occurs from a cold environment compared with how much work input W is required. What is considered the bene fit in a heat pump
is considered waste heat in a refrigerator. We thus d efine the coefficient of performance (COP) of an air conditioner or
refrigerator to be
Since and, we derive that
Also, from Q >Q, we see that an air conditioner will have a lower coefficient of performance than a heat pump.
Key Points
Many thermodynamic phenomena, allowed to occur by the fi rst law of thermodynamics, never occur in nature.
Many processes occur spontaneously in one direction onl y, and the second law of thermodynamics deals with the direct ion
taken by spontaneous processes.
According to the second law of thermodynamics, it is imp ossible for any process to have heat transfer from a cooler to a hotter
object as its sole result.h
hp
h hp
hp h
hp
c
ref
h c

14.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524A cyclical process brings a system, such as the gas in a c ylinder, back to its original state at the end of every cycle. Most heat
engines, such as reciprocating piston engines and rotating tu rbines, use cyclical processes.
The second law of thermodynamics can be expressed as the following: It is impossible in any system for heat trans fer from a
reservoir to completely convert to work in a cyclical process in which the system returns to its initial state.
The efficiency of a heat engine (Eff) is defined to be the engine’s net work output W divided by heat transfer t o the engine:
Eff=WQh=1−QcQhEff=WQh=1−QcQh, where Q and Q denotes heat trans fer to hot (engine) and cold (environment)
reservoir.
The second law of thermodynamics indicates that a Carno t engine operating between two given temperatures has the greatest
possible efficiency of any heat engine operating between t hese two temperatures.
Irreversible processes involve dissipative factors, which reduces the efficiency of the engine. Obviously, reversibl e processes
are superior from the efficiency perspective.
Carnot efficiency, the maximum achievable heat engine e fficiency, is given as Effc=1−TcThEffc=1−TcTh.
A heat pump ‘s mission is for heat transfer Qh to occur into a warm environment, such as a home in the winter.
The mission of air conditioners and refrigerators is for he at transfer Qc to occur from a cool environment, such as chi lling a
room or keeping food at lower temperatures than the envi ronment.
A heat pump can be used both to heat and cool a space. It is essentially an air conditioner and a heating unit all in on e. This is
made possible by reversing the flow of its refrigerant, ch anging the direction net heat transfer.
Key Terms
entropy: A measure of how evenly energy (or some analogous proper ty) is distributed in a system.
the first law of thermodynamics: A version of the law of conservation of energy, special ized for thermodynamical systems.
Usually expressed as ΔU=Q−W.
thermal energy: The internal energy of a system in thermodynamic equili brium due to its temperature.
internal energy: The sum of all energy present in the system, including kinetic and potential energy; equivalently, the energy
needed to create a system, excluding the energy necessary to displace its surroundings.
the second law of thermodynamics: A law stating that states that the entropy of an isolat ed system never decreases, because
isolated systems spontaneously evolve toward thermodynami c equilibrium—the state of maximum entropy. Equivalentl y,
perpetual motion machines of the second kind are impossi ble.
heat engine: Any device which converts heat energy into mechanical wor k.
CFC: An organic compound that was commonly used as a refrige rant. Not commonly used anymore because of its ozone
depletion effect.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
the first law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/the%20f...thermodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
entropy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/entropy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat engine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_engine. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlikec h

14.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14524Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...nternal-energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thermal energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...thermodynamics. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
heat engine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/heat_engine. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42236/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat pump. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_pump. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/cfc. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Thermodynamics and Heat Engines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4_AfJo17qQ. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42234/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42236/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

14.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452514.4: Entropy
Calculate the total change in entropy for a system in a rev ersible process
In this and following Atoms, we will study entropy. By ex amining it, we shall see that the directions associat ed with the second law
— heat transfer from hot to cold, for example—are re lated to the tendency in nature for systems to beco me disordered and for less
energy to be available for use as work. The entropy of a system can in fact be shown to be a measure of its d isorder and of the
unavailability of energy to do work.
Definition of Entropy
We can see how entropy is defined by recalling our d iscussion of the Carnot engine. We noted that for a Carnot cycle, and hence for
any reversible processes, Q /Q =T /T. Rearranging terms yi elds for any reversible process. Q and Q are absolute values
of the heat transfer at temperatures T and T, respe ctively. This ratio of Q/T is defined to be the change in entropy ΔS for a
reversible process,
where Q is the heat transfer, which is positive for hea t transfer into and negative for heat transfer out o f, and T is the absolute
temperature at which the reversible process takes plac e. The SI unit for entropy is joules per kelvin (J/K). If temperature changes
during the process, then it is usually a good appro ximation (for small changes in temperature) to take T to be the average
temperature, avoiding the need to use integral calculu s to find ΔS.
The definition of ΔS is strictly valid only for revers ible processes, such as used in a Carnot engine. However, we can find ΔS
precisely even for real, irreversible processes. The r eason is that the entropy S of a system, like internal energy U, depends only on
the state of the system and not how it reached that co ndition. Entropy is a property of state. Thus the cha nge in entropy ΔS of a
system between state one and state two is the same no m atter how the change occurs. We just need to find or imagine a reversible
process that takes us from state one to state two and ca lculate ΔS for that process. That will be the change i n entropy for any
process going from state one to state two.
Change in Entropy: When a system goes from state one to state two, its entrop y changes by the same amount ΔS, whether a
hypothetical reversible path is followed or a real irrever sible path is taken.
Example
Now let us take a look at the change in entropy of a C arnot engine and its heat reservoirs for one full cy cle. The hot reservoir has a
loss of entropy ΔSh=−Q /T, because heat transfer occur s out of it (remember that when heat transfers out, t hen Q has a negativelearning objectives
c h c h c h
c h
h h

14.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525sign). The cold reservoir has a gain of entropy ΔS =Q / T, because heat transfer occurs into it. (We assume the reservoirs are
sufficiently large that their temperatures are constant.) So the total change in entropy is
PV Diagram for a Carnot Cycle: PV diagram for a Carnot cycle, employing only reve rsible isothermal and adiabatic processes.
Heat transfer Qh occurs into the working substance during the isothermal path AB, which takes place at constant t emperature Th.
Heat transfer Qc occurs out of the working substance dur ing the isothermal path CD, which takes place at const ant temperature Tc.
The net work output W equals the area inside the path ABCDA. Also shown is a schematic of a Carnot engine operat ing between
hot and cold reservoirs at temperatures Th and Tc.
Thus, since we know that Q /T =Q /T for a Carnot engine,
This result, which has general validity, means that the tota l change in entropy for a system in any reversible proc ess is zero.
Stastical Interpretation of Entropy
According the second law of thermodynamics, disorder is vastly more likely than order.
Calculate the number of microstates for simple configur ations
The various ways of formulating the second law of the rmodynamics tell what happens rather than why it happen s. Why should heat
transfer occur only from hot to cold? Why should the universe become increasingly disorderly? The answer is that it is a matter of
overwhelming probability. Disorder is simply vastly mo re likely than order. To illustrate this fact, we wil l examine some random
processes, starting with coin tosses.
Coin Tosses
What are the possible outcomes of tossing 5 coins? E ach coin can land either heads or tails. On the larg e scale, we are concerned
only with the total heads and tails and not with the order in which heads and tails appear. The following table shows all possibilities
along with numbers of possible configurations (or mic rostate; a detailed description of every element of a system). For example, 4
heads and 1 tail instance may occur on 5 different c onfigurations, with any one of the 5 coins showing tai l and all the rest heads.
(HHHHT, HHHTH, HHTHH, HTHHH, THHHH)
5 heads, 0 tails: 1 microstate
4 heads, 1 tail: 5 microstates
3 heads, 2 tails: 10 microstates
2 heads, 3 tails: 10 microstates
1 head, 4 tails: 5 microstates
0 head, 5 tails: 1 microstatec c c
h h c c
learning objectives

14.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525Note that all of these conclusions are based on the cru cial assumption that each microstate is equally prob able. Otherwise, the
analysis will be erroneous.
The two most orderly possibilities are 5 heads or 5 tai ls. (They are more structured than the others.) They a re also the least likely,
only 2 out of 32 possibilities. The most disorderly pos sibilities are 3 heads and 2 tails and its reverse. (Th ey are the least structured.
) The most disorderly possibilities are also the most l ikely, with 20 out of 32 possibilities for the 3 head s and 2 tails and its reverse.
If we start with an orderly array like 5 heads and toss t he coins, it is very likely that we will get a less or derly array as a result, since
30 out of the 32 possibilities are less orderly. So e ven if you start with an orderly state, there is a stro ng tendency to go from order
to disorder, from low entropy to high entropy. The reverse can happen, but it is unlikely.
This result becomes dramatic for larger systems. Consi der what happens if you have 100 coins instead of jus t 5. The most orderly
arrangements (most structured) are 100 heads or 100 tails. The least orderly (least structured) is that of 50 heads and 50 tails. There
is only 1 way (1 microstate) to get the most orderly arrangement of 100 heads. The total number of diff erent ways 100 coins can be
tossed—is an impressively large 1.27×10. Now, if we st art with an orderly macrostate like 100 heads and to ss the coins, there is a
virtual certainty that we will get a less orderly macr ostate. If you tossed the coins once each second, you could expect to get either
100 heads or 100 tails once in 2×10 years! In contra st, there is an 8% chance of getting 50 heads, a 73 % chance of getting from
45 to 55 heads, and a 96% chance of getting from 40 to 60 h eads. Disorder is highly likely.
Real Gas
The fantastic growth in the odds favoring disorder tha t we see in going from 5 to 100 coins continues as th e number of entities in
the system increases. In a volume of 1 m, roughly 1 0 molecules (or the order of magnitude of Avogadro’ s number) are present in
a gas. The most likely conditions (or macrostate) for the gas are those we see all the time—a random dist ribution of atoms in space
with a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds in rand om directions, as predicted by kinetic theory as sho wn in (a). This is the
most disorderly and least structured condition we can imag ine.
3 23

14.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525Kinetic Theory: (a) The ordinary state of gas in a container is a disorde rly, random distribution of atoms or molecules with a
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds. It is so unlikely that these atoms or molecules would ever end up in one corner of the
container that it might as well be impossible. (b) With e nergy transfer, the gas can be forced into one corner an d its entropy greatly
reduced. But left alone, it will spontaneously increase its e ntropy and return to the normal conditions, because th ey are immensely
more likely.
In contrast, one type of very orderly and structured macrostate has all of the atoms in one corner of a container with identical
velocities. There are very few ways to accomplish this (very few microstates corresponding to it), and so it i s exceedingly unlikely
ever to occur. (See (b).) Indeed, it is so unlikely that we have a law saying that it is impossible, which has never been observed to
be violated—the second law of thermodynamics.
Order to Disorder
Entropy is a measure of disorder, so increased entropy mea ns more disorder in the system.
Discuss entropy and disorder within a system
Entropy is a measure of disorder. This notion was initia lly postulated by Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1800s. For ex ample, melting a
block of ice means taking a highly structured and or derly system of water molecules and converting it int o a disorderly liquid in
which molecules have no fixed positions. There is a large increase in entropy in the process.
Entropy of Ice: When ice melts, it becomes more disordered and less str uctured. The systematic arrangement of molecules in a
crystal structure is replaced by a more random and less or derly movement of molecules without fixed locations or ori entations. Its
entropy increases because heat transfer occurs into it. E ntropy is a measure of disorder.
As an example, suppose we mix equal masses of water origi nally at two different temperatures, say 20.0º C and 40. 0º C. The
result is water at an intermediate temperature of 30.0º C. T hree outcomes have resulted:
Entropy has increased.
Some energy has become unavailable to do work.
The system has become less orderly.
Entropy, Energy, and Disorder
Let us think about each of the results. First, entropy has increased for the same reason that it did in the example above. Mixing the
two bodies of water has the same effect as heat transfer from the hot one and the same heat transfer into t he cold one. The mixing
decreases the entropy of the hot water but increases the entropy of the cold water by a greater amount, producing an overall
increase in entropy.
Second, once the two masses of water are mixed, there is only one temperature—you cannot run a heat engine wi th them. The
energy that could have been used to run a heat engine is n ow unavailable to do work.learning objectives
Example:

14.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525Third, the mixture is less orderly, or to use another term, less structured. Rather than having two masses at different temperatures
and with different distributions of molecular speeds, we now have a single mass with a uniform temperature.
These three results—entropy, unavailability of energy, an d disorder—are not only related but are in fact essenti ally equivalent.
Heat Death
The entropy of the universe is constantly increasin g and is destined for thermodynamic equilibrium, call ed the heat death of the
universe.
Describe processes that lead to the heat death of the universe
In the early, energetic universe, all matter and ene rgy were easily interchangeable and identical in nat ure. Gravity played a vital role
in the young universe. Although it may have seemed diso rderly, there was enormous potential energy available t o do work—all the
future energy in the universe.
As the universe matured, temperature differences aros e, which created more opportunity for work. Stars are ho tter than planets, for
example, which are warmer than icy asteroids, which are wa rmer still than the vacuum of the space between them. Most of these
are cooling down from their usually violent births, at which time they were provided with energy of their own —nuclear energy in
the case of stars, volcanic energy on Earth and oth er planets, and so on. Without additional energy in put, however, their days are
numbered.
Infant Universe: The image of an infant universe reveals temperature flu ctuations (shown as color differences) that correspond to
the seeds that grew to become the galaxies.
As entropy increases, less and less energy in the univer se is available to do work. On Earth, we still have great stores of energy
such as fossil and nuclear fuels; large-scale tempera ture differences, which can provide wind energy; geot hermal energies due to
differences in temperature in Earth’s layers; and ti dal energies owing to our abundance of liquid water. As these are used, a certain
fraction of the energy they contain can never be co nverted into doing work. Eventually, all fuels will b e exhausted, all temperatures
will equalize, and it will be impossible for heat engines to function, or for work to be done.
Since the universe is a closed system, the entropy of the universe is constantly increasing, and so the a vailability of energy to do
work is constantly decreasing. Eventually, when all stars have died, all forms of potential energy have been utilized, and all
temperatures have equalized (depending on the mass of the universe, either at a very high temperature f ollowing a universal
contraction, or a very low one, just before all activity c eases) there will be no possibility of doing work.
Either way, the universe is destined for thermodynami c equilibrium—maximum entropy. This is often called the heat death of the
universe, and will mean the end of all activity. However, whether the universe contracts and heats up, or cont inues to expand and
cools down, the end is not near. Calculations of black holes suggest that entropy can easily continue for at least 1 0 years.
Living Systems and Evolution
It is possible for the entropy of one part of the univers e to decrease, provided the total change in entropy of th e universe increases.learning objectives

14.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525Formulate conditions that allow decrease of the entropy i n one part of the universe
Some people misunderstand the second law of thermodyn amics, stated in terms of entropy, to say that the pro cess of the evolution
of life violates this law. Over time, complex organism s evolved from much simpler ancestors, representing a l arge decrease in
entropy of the Earth’s biosphere. It is a fact that living organisms have evolved to be highly structur ed, and much lower in entropy
than the substances from which they grow. But it is a lways possible for the entropy of one part of the univ erse to decrease,
provided the total change in entropy of the universe inc reases. In equation form, we can write this as
Thus ΔS can be negative as long as ΔS is positive and grea ter in magnitude.
How is it possible for a system to decrease its entropy? Energy transfer is necessary. If I gather iron or e from the ground and
convert it into steel and build a bridge, my work (and used energy) has decreased the entropy of that syste m. Energy coming from
the Sun can decrease the entropy of local systems on Earth—that is, ΔS is negative. But the overall entrop y of the rest of the
universe increases by a greater amount—that is, ΔS i s positive and greater in magnitude. Thus, ΔS >0, and the second law of
thermodynamics is not violated.
Every time a plant stores some solar energy in the form of chemical potential energy, or an updraft of warm air lifts a soaring bird,
the Earth can be viewed as a heat engine operating be tween a hot reservoir supplied by the Sun and a cold re servoir supplied by
dark outer space—a heat engine of high complexity, c ausing local decreases in entropy as it uses part of the heat transfer from the
Sun into deep space. However, there is a large total in crease in entropy resulting from this massive heat t ransfer. A small part of this
heat transfer is stored in structured systems on Earth, p roducing much smaller local decreases in entropy.
Earth’s Entropy: Earth’s entropy may decrease in the process of inte rcepting a small part of the heat transfer from the Sun in to
deep space. Entropy for the entire process increases great ly while Earth becomes more structured with living systems and stored
energy in various forms.
Global Warming Revisited
The Second Law of Thermodynamics may help provide explan ation for the global warming over the last 250 years.
Describe effect of the heat dumped into the environment on the Earth’s atmospheric temperature
The Second Law of Thermodynamics may help provide exp lanation for why there have been increases in Earth’ s temperatures over
the last 250 years (often called “Global Warming”), an d many professionals are concerned that the entropy increase of the universe
is a real threat to the environment.learning objectives
sys env
sys
env tot
learning objectives

14.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525
Global Land-Ocean Temperature: Global mean land-ocean temperature change from 1880 – 2 012, relative to the 1951 – 1980
mean. The black line is the annual mean and the red line is the five-year running mean. The green bars show unc ertainty estimates.
As an engine operates, heat flows from a heat tank of greater temperature to a heat sink of lesser temper ature. In between these
states, the heat flow is turned into useful energy wit h the help of heat engines. As these engines operate, h owever, a great deal of
heat is lost to the environment due to inefficiencie s. In a Carnot engine, which is the most efficient theo retical engine based on
Carnot cycle, the maximum efficiency is equal to on e minus the temperature of the heat sink (T) divided by the temperature of the
heat source (T).
This ratio shows that for a greater efficiency to be achieved there needs to be the greatest difference i n temperature available. This
brings up two important points: optimized heat sinks are at absolute zero, and the longer engines dump heat into an isolated system
the less efficient engines will become.
Unfortunately for engine efficiency, day-to-day life never operates in absolute zero. In an average car e ngine, only 14% to 26% of
the fuel which is put in is actually used to make the car move forward. This means that 74% to 86% is lost heat or used to power
accessories. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, 70% to 72% of heat produced by burning fuel is heat lost by the engine.
The excess heat lost by the engine is then released into the heat sink, which in the case of many modern engines would be the
Earth’s atmosphere. As more heat is dumped into the env ironment, Earth’s atmospheric (or heat sink) tempera ture will increase.
With the entropy of the environment constantly incr easing, searching for new, more efficient technologi es and new non-heat
engines has become a priority.
Thermal Pollution
Thermal pollution is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature.
Identify factors that lead to thermal pollution and its ecol ogical effects
Thermal pollution is the degradation of water qualit y by any process that changes ambient water temperat ure. A common cause of
thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant, for example, by power plants and industrial manufacturers. When water used as a
coolant is returned to the natural environment at a higher temperature, the change in temperature decr eases oxygen supply, and
affects ecosystem composition.
As we learned in our Atom on “Heat Engines”, all heat eng ines require heat transfer, achieved by providing (a nd maintaining)
temperature difference between engine’s heat source and heat sink. Water, with its high heat capacity, work s extremely well as a
coolant. But this means that cooling water should be con stantly replenished to maintain its cooling capacity.c
h
learning objectives

14.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525
Cooling Tower: This is a cooling tower at Gustav Knepper Power Station, Dortm und, Germany. Cooling water is circulated inside
the tower.
Ecological Effects
Elevated water temperature typically decreases the lev el of dissolved oxygen of water. This can harm aquati c animals such as fish,
amphibians, and other aquatic organisms. An increased metabolic rate may result in fewer resources; the more adapted organisms
moving in may have an advantage over organisms that are not used to the warmer temperature. As a result, food chains of the old
and new environments may be compromised. Some fish spec ies will avoid stream segments or coastal areas adja cent to a thermal
discharge. Biodiversity can decrease as a result. Many aqu atic species will also fail to reproduce at elevated te mperatures.
Some may assume that by cooling the heated water, we ca n possibly fix the issue of thermal pollution. However, as we noted in our
previous Atom on “Heat Pumps and Refrigerators”, work requ ired for the additional cooling leads to more heat e xhaust into the
environment. Therefore, it makes the situation even worse.
Key Points
This ratio of Q/T is defined to be the change in entropy ΔS fo r a reversible process: ΔS=(QT)revΔS=(QT)rev.
Entropy is a property of state. Therefore, the change in en tropy ΔS of a system between two states is the same no matter how
the change occurs.
The total change in entropy for a system in any reversibl e process is zero.
Each microstate is equally probable in the example of coi n toss. However, as a macrostate, there is a strong tendency for the
most disordered state to occur.
When tossing 100 coins, if the coins are tossed once each s econd, you could expect to get either all 100 heads or al l 100 tails
once in 2×10 years.
Molecules in a gas follow the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution o f speeds in random directions, which is the most disorderly an d
least structured condition out of all the possibilities.
Mixing two systems may decrease the entropy of one system, bu t increase the entropy of the other system by a greater amount,
producing an overall increase in entropy.
After mixing water at two different temperatures, the energy in the system that could have been used to run a heat engine is now
unavailable to do work. Also, the process made the whole syst em more less structured.
Entropy, unavailability of energy, and disorder are not only related but are in fact essentially equivalent.
In the early, energetic universe, all matter and energy wer e easily interchangeable and identical in nature.
As entropy increases, less and less energy in the universe is available to do work.
The universe is destined for thermodynamic equilibrium — maximum entropy. This is often called the heat death of the
universe, and will mean the end of all activity.
Living organisms have evolved to be highly structured, and much lower in entropy than the substances from which t hey grow.
It possible for a system to decrease its entropy provided t he total change in entropy of the universe increases:
ΔStot=ΔSsys+ΔSenv>0ΔStot=ΔSsys+ΔSenv>0.
The Earth can be viewed as a heat engine operating between a hot reservoir supplied by the Sun and a cold reservoir supp lied
by dark outer space.22

14.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525As heat engines operate, a great deal of heat is lost to th e environment due to inefficiencies.
Even in a Carnot engine, which is the most efficient theo retical engine, there is a heat loss determined by the ra tio of
temperature of the engine and its environment.
As more heat is dumped into the environment, Earth’s atmosphe ric temperature will increase.
All heat engines require heat transfer, achieved by provi ding (and maintaining) temperature difference between engine’s heat
source and heat sink. Cooling water is typically used to maintain the temperature difference.
Elevated water temperature typically decreases the level o f dissolved oxygen of water, affecting ecosystem compositi on.
Cooling heated water is not a solution for thermal pollutio n because extra work is required for the cooling, leading t o more heat
exhaust into the environment.
Key Terms
Carnot cycle: A theoretical thermodynamic cycle. It is the most eff icient cycle for converting a given amount of thermal en ergy
into work.
reversible: Capable of returning to the original state without consump tion of free energy and increase of entropy.
disorder: Absence of some symmetry or correlation in a many-partic le system.
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution: A distribution describing particle speeds in gases, wher e the particles move freely without
interacting with one another, except for very brief elasti c collisions in which they may exchange momentum and k inetic energy.
entropy: A measure of how evenly energy (or some analogous proper ty) is distributed in a system.
geothermal: Pertaining to heat energy extracted from reservoirs in the Earth’s interior.
asteroid: A naturally occurring solid object, which is smaller than a planet and is not a comet, that orbits a star.
Carnot cycle: A theoretical thermodynamic cycle. It is the most eff icient cycle for converting a given amount of thermal en ergy
into work.
absolute zero: The coldest possible temperature: zero on the Kelvin sca le and approximately -273.15°C and -459.67°F. The
total absence of heat; the temperature at which motion o f all molecules would cease.
heat engine: Any device which converts heat energy into mechanical wor k.
heat pump: A device that transfers heat from something at a lower temperature to something at a higher temperature by doin g
work.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
reversible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reversible. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Carnot cycle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnot%20cycle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell...20distribution.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
disorder. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/disorder. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution

14.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
disorder. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/disorder. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
entropy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/entropy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
entropy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/entropy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
asteroid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/asteroid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
geothermal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/geothermal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat death of the universe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_de...f_the_universe. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
entropy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/entropy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat death of the universe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_de...f_the_universe. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

14.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14525Entropy and the environment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy...he_environment.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Carnot cycle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnot%20cycle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat death of the universe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_de...f_the_universe. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Global warming. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal pollution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_pollution. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
heat engine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/heat_engine. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
heat pump. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/heat_pump. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42235/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42238/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heat death of the universe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_de...f_the_universe. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42237/latest...ol11406/latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Global warming. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Thermal pollution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_pollution. License: CC BY:
Attribution
This page titled 14.4: Entropy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

14.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452614.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
Explain how absolute zero affects entropy
The third law of thermodynamics is sometimes stated a s follows: The entropy of a perfect crystal at absolute zero is exactly equal
to zero.
At zero kelvin the system must be in a state with the m inimum possible energy, thus this statement of the thir d law holds true if the
perfect crystal has only one minimum energy state. En tropy is related to the number of possible microstat es, and with only one
microstate available at zero kelvin the entropy is exactly zero.
The third law was developed by the chemist Walther Nern st during the years 1906-1912. It is often referred to as Nernst’s theorem
or Nernst’s postulate. Nernst proposed that the entropy of a system at absolute zero would be a well-defined con stant. Instead of
being 0, entropy at absolute zero could be a nonzero constant, due to the fact that a system may have deg eneracy (having several
ground states at the same energy).
In simple terms, the third law states that the entro py of a perfect crystal approaches zero as the absol ute temperature approaches
zero. This law provides an absolute reference point f or the determination of entropy. (diagrams the temp erature entropy of
nitrogen.) The entropy (S) determined relative to this point is the absolute entropy represented as follows:
Temperature Entropy of Nitrogen: Temperature–entropy diagram of nitrogen. The red cur ve at the left is the melting curve.
Absolute value of entropy can be determined shown here, than ks to the third law of thermodynamics.
where k is the Bolzmann constant and W is the number of microstates. Provided that the ground state is u nique (or), the
entropy of a perfect crystal lattice as defined by Nernst’s theorem is zer o provided that its ground state is unique, because
Adiabatic Processes
It is impossible to reduce the temperature of any system to z ero temperature in a finite number of finite operations.
Illustrate isentropic process, for example in terms of adi abtic demangetization
In our Atom on “Adiabatic Processes” (category: the First Law of Thermodynamics), we learned that an adiabatic process is any
process occurring without gain or loss of heat within a system. We also learned a monatomic ideal gas expa nds adiabatically. In thislearning objectives
B
learning objectives

14.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14526Atom, we discuss an adiabatic cooling process that can be used to cool a gas, as well as whether absolute zero can be obtained in
real systems.
Absolute Zero?
Previously, we learned about the third law of thermodyn amics, which states: the entropy of a perfect crystal at absolute zero is
exactly equal to zero.
According to the third law, the reason that T=0 canno t be reached is explained as follows: Suppose the temp erature of a substance
can be reduced in an isentropic process by changing t he parameter X from to. As an example, one can think of a multistage
adiabatic magnetization-demagnetization cycle setup where a magnetic field is switched on and off in a c ontrolled way. (See below.
The parameter X in this case would be the magnetization of th e gas.)
Assuming an entropy difference at absolute zero, T=0 c ould be reached in a finite number of steps. However, go ing back to the
third law, at T=0 there is no entropy difference, and therefore an infinite number of stepswould be neede d for this process
(illustrated in).
Can Absolute Zero be Reached?: Temperature-Entropy diagram. Horizontal lines represent isentropic processes, while vertical
lines represent isothermal processes. Left side: Absolute z ero can be reached in a finite number of steps if S(T=0,X1)≠S(T=0, X2).
Right: An infinite number of steps is needed since S(0,X1)= S(0,X2).
Adiabatic Demagnetization Cooling
In simple terms, the cooling scheme mentioned above occu rs by repeating the following steps:
1. A strong magnetic field is applied to adiabatically align magnetic moments of the particles in the gas.
2. The magnetic field is reduced adiabatically, and therm al energy of the gas causes “ordered” magnetic moments to become
random again.
In the second step, thermal energy in the gas is use d to cause disorder of magnetic moments. Therefore, th e temperature of the gas
is reduced (hence cooling works). This scheme is called adiabatic demagnetization cooling.
Key Points
Entropy is related to the number of possible microstates, and with only one microstate available at zero kelvin, the e ntropy is
exactly zero.
The third law of thermodynamics provides an absolute r eference point for the determination of entropy. The en tropy determined
relative to this point is the absolute entropy.
Absolute entropy can be written as, where W is the number o f available microstates.
Since at there is no entropy difference, an infinite n umber of steps in a thermodynamic cooling process is re quired to
reach T=0.
In adiabatic demagnetization cooling, energy transfer s from thermal entropy to magnetic entropy (or disorder o f the magnetic
moments).
The fact that T=0 cannot be achieved in reality is a di rect consequence of the third law of thermodynamics.

14.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14526Key Terms
microstate: The specific detailed microscopic configuration of a s ystem.
absolute zero: The coldest possible temperature: zero on the Kelvin sca le and approximately -273.15°C and -459.67°F. The
total absence of heat; the temperature at which motion o f all molecules would cease.
degeneracy: Two or more different quantum states are said to be degener ate if they are all at the same energy level.
isentropic: Having a constant entropy.
demagnetization: The process of removing the magnetic field from an objec t.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Third law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_l...thermodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
degeneracy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/degeneracy. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
microstate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/microstate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Entropy (classical thermodynamics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy...hermodynamics). License: CC BY: Attribution
absolute zero. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/absolute_zero. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnetic refrigeration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_refrigeration. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Third law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_l...thermodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
demagnetization. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/demagnetization. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
isentropic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isentropic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Entropy (classical thermodynamics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy...hermodynamics). License: CC BY: Attribution
Third law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_l...thermodynamics.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
15: Waves and Vibrations
This page titled 15: Waves and Vibrations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.15.1: Introduction
15.2: Hooke’s Law
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
15.5: Waves
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
15.7: Waves on StringsTopic hierarchy

15.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452915.1: Introduction
Contrast mechanical and electromagnetic waves
Overview
A wave is an oscillation that travels through space, accompanied by a transfer of energy. Wave motion tran sfers energy from one
point to another, often with no permanent displacemen t of the particles of the medium —that is, with little or no associated mass
transport. They consist, instead, of oscillations or vibr ations around almost fixed locations. There are two main types of waves.
Mechanical waves propagate through a medium, and the s ubstance of this medium is deformed. The deformation reverses itself
owing to restoring forces resulting from its deformation.
The second main type of wave, electromagnetic waves, do not require a medium (although they may still propa gate through a
medium). Instead, they consist of periodic oscillatio ns in electrical and magnetic fields generated by ch arged particles, and can
therefore travel through a vacuum.
Wave Equation
The shape of a wave can take the form of any functio n that repeats itself over some characteristic spat ial scale λλ, the wavelength
(see). More generally, waveforms are scalar function s uu which satisfy the wave equation,. This equation s imply
states that the acceleration of the waveform (Left: second derivative with respect to time) is proportional to the Laplacian (Right:
second spatial derivative) of the same waveform. The constant of proportionality,, is the square of the pr opagation speed of the
wave.
Common waveforms: A sample of several common, simple waveforms. A waveform is a function that repeats in space.
Sine Wave
Plot of Sine: The sine function graphed on the Cartesian plane. In this graph, the angle x is given in radians (π = 180°).learning objectives

15.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14529Consider one of the most common waveforms, the sinusoi d. A general form of a sinusoidal wave is,
where A is the amplitude of the wave, is the wave’s an gular frequency, k is the wavenumber, and is the pha se of the sine wave
given in radians. This waveform gives the displacement position (“y”) of a particle in a medium from its equ ilibrium as a function
of both position “x” and time “t”.
By taking derivatives, it is evident that the wave e quation given above holds for, which is also called the phase speed of the
wave. To find the velocity of a particle in the mediu m at x and t, we take the temporal derivative of the waveform to get
. Likewise, to find the acceleration of the displaced particle in the medium at x and t, we take the
second derivative to get. Note the phase relationsh ip among the trigonometric functions in
. When the particle displacement is maximum or mini mum, the velocity is 0. When the displacement is 0,
particle velocity is either maximum or minimum. Simila rly, the particle acceleration is maximum (or minimu m) when the particle
displacement is minimum (or maximum), respectively.
Arbitrary Wave
We looked closely into the sinusoidal wave. But how abou t waves that has a general form? One important aspect of the wave
equation is its linearity: the wave equation is linea r in u and it is left unaltered by translations in space a nd time. Since a wave with
an arbitrary shape can be represented by a sum of ma ny sinusoidal waves (this is called Fourier analysis), we can generate a great
variety of solutions of the wave equation by translating a nd summing sine waves that we just looked closely into.
Key Points
The wave equation requires that the second time derivativ e of the waveform be proportional to its second spatial der ivative.
Waveforms describe the shape of physical waves, and can t ake the form of any function that repeats in space.
One of the most common waveforms in physics is the sinusoid. Sin ce any arbitray waveform can be generated by adding a set
of sine waves, the physics governing a wave of an arbitrary shape can be described by using its sine wave components.
Key Terms
waveform: The shape of a physical wave, such as sound or electrom agnetic radiation. The shape can be any function that
repeats in space.
Fourier analysis: The study of the way general functions may be represented or approximated by sums of simpler
trigonometric functions.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sinusoidal wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinusoidal_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/waveform. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fourier analysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier%20analysis. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Waveforms.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Waveforms.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Plot of Sine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/a/a2/Sine.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 15.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

15.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453015.2: Hooke’s Law
Generate the mathematical expression of Hooke’s law
In mechanics (physics), Hooke’s law is an approximation of the response of elastic (i.e., springlike) bodies. It states: the extension
of a spring is in direct proportion with the load ap plied to it. For instance, the spring is pulled downwards with either no load, F, or
twice F.
Diagram of Hooke’s Law: The extension of the spring is linearly proportional to the force.
High School Phy sics - Springs and Hooke' s LawHigh School Phy sics - Springs and Hooke' s Lawlearning objectives
p
p

15.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14530Springs and Hooke’s Law: A brief overview of springs, Hooke’s Law, and elastic po tential energy for algebra-based physics
students.
Many materials obey this law of elasticity as long as th e load does not exceed the material’s elastic limit. Materials for which
Hooke’s law is a useful approximation are known as lin ear-elastic or “Hookean” materials. Hookean materials are broadly defined
and include springs as well as muscular layers of the h eart. In simple terms, Hooke’s law says that stress is dire ctly proportional to
strain. Mathematically, Hooke’s law is stated as:
where:
x is the displacement of the spring’s end from its equili brium position (a distance, in SI units: meters);
F is the restoring force exerted by the spring on that end (in SI units: N or kg·m/s); and
k is a constant called the rate or spring constant (in SI units: N/m or kg/s). When this holds, the behavior is sai d to be linear. If
shown on a graph, the line should show a direct variation.
It’s possible for multiple springs to act on the same point. In such a case, Hooke’s law can still be applied. As with any other set of
forces, the forces of many springs can be combined into o ne resultant force.
When Hooke’s law holds, the behavior is linear; if shown on a graph, the line depicting force as a function of displacement should
show a direct variation. There is a negative sign on t he right hand side of the equation because the resto ring force always acts in the
opposite direction of the displacement (for example, whe n a spring is stretched to the left, it pulls back to the ri ght).
Hooke’s law is named after the 17th century British p hysicist Robert Hooke, and was first stated in 1660 as a Latin anagram, whose
solution Hooke published in 1678 as Ut tensio, sic vis, meaning, “As the extension, so the force.”

15.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14530
Hooke’s Law: The red line in this graph illustrates how force, F, v aries with position according to Hooke’s law. The slop e of this
line corresponds to the spring constant k. The dotted li ne shows what the actual (experimental) plot of force might look like. The
pictures of spring states at the bottom of the graph corre spond to some points of the plot; the middle one is in t he relaxed state (no
force applied).
Elastic Potential Energy
If a force results in only deformation, with no thermal, sound, or kinetic energy, the work done is stored as elastic p otential energy.
Express elastic energy stored in a spring in a mathematical f orm
Elastic Potential Energy
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done. That is, a force must be exerted through a distance, whe ther you pluck a
guitar string or compress a car spring. If the only r esult is deformation and no work goes into thermal, so und, or kinetic energy,
then all the work is initially stored in the deforme d object as some form of potential energy. Elastic ene rgy is the potential
mechanical energy stored in the configuration of a material or physical system when work is performed to d istort its volume or
shape. For example, the potential energy PE stored in a s pring is
where k is the elastic constant and x is the displacement.
It is possible to calculate the work done in deformi ng a system in order to find the energy stored. This wo rk is performed by an
applied force F. The applied force is exactly opposi te to the restoring force (action-reaction), and so. A graph shows
the applied force versus deformation x for a system that can be described by Hooke’s law. Work done on th e system is force
multiplied by distance, which equals the area under th e curve, or (Method A in the figure). Another way to determine the
work is to note that the force increases linearly from 0 to, so that the average force is, the distance moved is x, and thuslearning objectives
el
app

15.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14530
Applied force versus deformation: A graph of applied force versus distance for the defor mation of a system that can be described
by Hooke’s law is displayed. The work done on the system equa ls the area under the graph or the area of the triangle, wh ich is half
its base multiplied by its height, or.
(Method B in the figure).
Elastic energy of or within a substance is static ener gy of configuration. It corresponds to energy stored p rincipally by changing the
inter-atomic distances between nuclei. Thermal energy is the randomized distribution of kinetic energy withi n the material,
resulting in statistical fluctuations of the materi al about the equilibrium configuration. There is som e interaction, however. For
example, for some solid objects, twisting, bending, and other distortions may generate thermal energy, c ausing the material’s
temperature to rise. This energy can also produce m acroscopic vibrations sufficiently lacking in randomi zation to lead to
oscillations that are merely the exchange between (e lastic) potential energy within the object and the k inetic energy of motion of
the object as a whole.
Key Points
Mathematically, Hooke’s Law can be written as.
Many materials obey this law as long as the load does not ex ceed the material’s elastic limit.
The rate or spring constant, k, relates the force to the e xtension in SI units: N/m or kg/s2.
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done.
The potential energy stored in a spring is given by, where k is the spring constant and x is the displacement.
Deformation can also be converted into thermal energy or cause an object to begin oscillating.
Key Terms
elasticity: The property by virtue of which a material deformed und er the load can regain its original dimensions when
unloaded
deformation: A transformation; change of shape.
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
oscillating: Moving in a repeated back-and-forth motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Hooke's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hooke's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Mechanical Properti es of Matter: Deformation of Materials. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39533/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
elasticity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elasticity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

15.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14530HookesLawForSpring-English.png. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/f/f0/HookesLawForSpring -English.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dinamometro. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dinamometro.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Springs and Hooke's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MhaPzGxfV8. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
deformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deformation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
oscillating. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillating. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
HookesLawForSpring-English.png. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/f/f0/HookesLawForSpring -English.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dinamometro. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dinamometro.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Springs and Hooke's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MhaPzGxfV8. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 15.2: Hooke’s Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

15.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453115.3: Periodic Motion
Practice converting between frequency and period
Period and Frequency
The usual physics terminology for motion that repea ts itself over and over is periodic motion, and the time required for one
repetition is called the period, often expressed as the letter T. (The symbol P is not used because of the possible confusion with
momentum.) One complete repetition of the motion is called a cycle. The frequency is defined as the numbe r of cycles per unit
time. Frequency is usually denoted by a Latin letter f or by a Greek letter ν (nu). Note that period and frequency are reciprocals of
each other.
Sinusoidal Waves of Varying Frequencies: Sinusoidal waves of various frequencies; the bottom waves have higher frequencies
than those above. The horizontal axis represents time.
For example, if a newborn baby’s heart beats at a freq uency of 120 times a minute, its period (the interval between beats) is half a
second. If you calibrate your intuition so that you expect large frequencies to be paired with short periods, and vice versa, you may
avoid some embarrassing mistakes on physics exams.
Units
Locomotive Wheels: The locomotive’s wheels spin at a frequency of f cycles per second, which can also be described as ω radians
per second. The mechanical linkages allow the linear vibra tion of the steam engine’s pistons, at frequency f, to dr ive the wheels.
In SI units, the unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), named after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz: 1 Hz indicates that an event
repeats once per second. A traditional unit of measur e used with rotating mechanical devices is revolutio ns per minute, abbreviated
RPM. 60 RPM equals one hertz (i.e., one revolution per second, o r a period of one second). The SI unit for period is the second.
Angular Frequency
Often periodic motion is best expressed in terms of a ngular frequency, represented by the Greek letter ω (o mega). Angular
frequency refers to the angular displacement per uni t time (e.g., in rotation) or the rate of change of t he phase of a sinusoidal
waveform (e.g., in oscillations and waves), or as the rate of c hange of the argument of the sine function.
Angular frequency is often represented in units of radians per second (recall there are 2π radians in a circle).learning objectives

15.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Period of a Mass on a Spring
The period of a mass m on a spring of spring constant k can be calculated as.
Identify parameters necessary to calculate the period and frequency of an oscillating mass on the end of an ideal spring
Understanding the Restoring Force
Newton’s first law implies that an object oscillating b ack and forth is experiencing forces. Without force, the object would move in
a straight line at a constant speed rather than osci llate. It is important to understand how the force on the object depends on the
object’s position. If an object is vibrating to the ri ght and left, then it must have a leftward force on i t when it is on the right side,
and a rightward force when it is on the left side. In on e dimension, we can represent the direction of the for ce using a positive or
negative sign, and since the force changes from posi tive to negative there must be a point in the middle where the force is zero.
This is the equilibrium point, where the object would s tay at rest if it was released at rest. It is common c onvention to define the
origin of our coordinate system so that x equals zero at equilibrium.
Oscillating Ruler: When displaced from its vertical equilibrium position, this plastic ruler oscillates back and forth because of th e
restoring force opposing displacement. When the ruler i s on the left, there is a force to the right, and vice ve rsa.
Consider, for example, plucking a plastic ruler shown in the first figure. The deformation of the ruler cr eates a force in the opposite
direction, known as a restoring force. Once released, the restoring force causes the ruler to move back toward its stable equilibrium
position, where the net force on it is zero. However, b y the time the ruler gets there, it gains momentum an d continues to move to
the right, producing the opposite deformation. It is then forced to the left, back through equilibrium, a nd the process is repeated
until dissipative forces (e.g., friction) dampen the mo tion. These forces remove mechanical energy from the system, gradually
reducing the motion until the ruler comes to rest.
learning objectives

15.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Restoring force, momentum, and equilibrium: (a) The plastic ruler has been released, and the restoring force is returning the
ruler to its equilibrium position. (b) The net force is zer o at the equilibrium position, but the ruler has momentu m and continues to
move to the right. (c) The restoring force is in the opp osite direction. It stops the ruler and moves it back toward equilibrium again.
(d) Now the ruler has momentum to the left. (e) In the absen ce of damping (caused by frictional forces), the ruler re aches its
original position. From there, the motion will repeat itse lf.
Hooke’s Law
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring fo rce is directly proportional to displacement. The na me that was given to this
relationship between force and displacement is Hooke’s law:
Here, F is the restoring force, x is the displacement f rom equilibrium or deformation, and k is a constant related to the difficulty in
deforming the system (often called the spring consta nt or force constant). Remember that the minus sign indicates the restoring
force is in the direction opposite to the displaceme nt. The force constant k is related to the rigidity (o r stiffness) of a system—the
larger the force constant, the greater the restoring force, and the stiffer the system. The units of k are newtons per meter (N/m). For
example, k is directly related to Young’s modulus when we stretch a string. A typical physics laboratory exe rcise is to measure
restoring forces created by springs, determine if the y follow Hooke’s law, and calculate their force constants if they do.
Mass on a Spring
A common example of an objecting oscillating back an d forth according to a restoring force directly prop ortional to the
displacement from equilibrium (i.e., following Hooke’s Law) is the case of a mass on the end of an ideal sp ring, where “ideal”
means that no messy real-world variables interfere with th e imagined outcome.
The motion of a mass on a spring can be described as Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM), the name given to oscillato ry motion for a
system where the net force can be described by Hooke’s law. We can now determine how to calculate the period and frequency of
an oscillating mass on the end of an ideal spring. T he period T can be calculated knowing only the mass, m, and the force constant,
k:
When dealing with, the frequency is given by:
We can understand the dependence of these equations on m and k intuitively. If one were to increase the mass on an oscillating
spring system with a given k, the increased mass will pro vide more inertia, causing the acceleration due to the restoring force F to
decrease (recall Newton’s Second Law:). This will lengthe n the oscillation period and decrease the frequency. In contrast,
increasing the force constant k will increase the re storing force according to Hooke’s Law, in turn causi ng the acceleration at each
displacement point to also increase. This reduces the period and increases the frequency. The maximum di splacement from
equilibrium is known as the amplitude X.

15.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531
Motion of a mass on an ideal spring: An object attached to a spring sliding on a frictionles s surface is an uncomplicated simple
harmonic oscillator. When displaced from equilibrium, th e object performs simple harmonic motion that has an amplitu de X and a
period T. The object’s maximum speed occurs as it passes through equilibrium. The stiffer the spring is, the small er the period T.
The greater the mass of the object is, the greater the peri od T. (a) The mass has achieved its greatest displacement X to the right and
now the restoring force to the left is at its maximum magni tude. (b) The restoring force has moved the mass back to it s equilibrium
point and is now equal to zero, but the leftward velocity i s at its maximum. (c) The mass’s momentum has carried it to its
maximum displacement to the right. The restoring forc e is now to the right, equal in magnitude and opposite in dir ection compared
to (a). (d) The equilibrium point is reach again, this time with momentum to the right. (e) The cycle repeats.
Simple Harmonic Motion
Simple harmonic motion is a type of periodic motion where the restoring force is directly proportional to the displa cement.
Relate the restoring force and the displacement during the simple harmonic motion
Simple Harmonic Motion
Simple harmonic motion is a type of periodic motion where the restoring force is directly proportional t o the displacement (i.e., it
follows Hooke’s Law). It can serve as a mathematical mo del of a variety of motions, such as the oscillation of a spring. In addition,
other phenomena can be approximated by simple harmo nic motion, such as the motion of a simple pendulum, or molecular
vibration.
AP Phy sics C - Simple Harmonic MotionAP Phy sics C - Simple Harmonic Motionlearning objectives

15.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Simple Harmonic Motion: A brief introduction to simple harmonic motion for ca lculus-based physics students.
Simple harmonic motion is typified by the motion of a mass on a spring when it is subject to the linear el astic restoring force given
by Hooke’s Law. A system that follows simple harmonic motio n is known as a simple harmonic oscillator.
Dynamics of Simple Harmonic Oscillation
For one-dimensional simple harmonic motion, the equat ion of motion (which is a second-order linear ordinar y differential equation
with constant coefficients) can be obtained by means of Newton’s second law and Hooke’s law.
where m is the mass of the oscillating body, x is its displacement from the equilibrium position, and k is the spring constant.
Therefore:
Solving the differential equation above, a solution which is a sinusoidal function is obtained.
where
In the solution, c and c are two constants determine d by the initial conditions, and the origin is set to be the equilibrium position.
Each of these constants carries a physical meaning of the motion: A is the amplitude (maximum displacemen t from the equilibrium
position), is the angular frequency, and φ is the phase.
We can use differential calculus and find the velocity and a cceleration as a function of time:
Acceleration can also be expressed as a function of displa cement:
1 2

15.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Then since,
Recalling that,
Using Newton’s Second Law, Hooke’s Law, and some differential Calculus, we were able to derive the period and freque ncy of the
mass oscillating on a spring that we encountered in the last section! Note that the period and frequency are completely independent
of the amplitude.
The below figure shows the simple harmonic motion of a n object on a spring and presents graphs of x(t),v(t), and a(t) versus time.
You should learn to create mental connections betwee n the above equations, the different positions of the object on a spring in the
cartoon, and the associated positions in the graphs of x(t), v(t), and a(t).
Visualizing Simple Harmonic Motion: Graphs of x(t),v(t), and a(t) versus t for the motion of a n object on a spring. The net force
on the object can be described by Hooke’s law, and so the obj ect undergoes simple harmonic motion. Note that the init ial position
has the vertical displacement at its maximum value X; v i s initially zero and then negative as the object moves down; and the initial
acceleration is negative, back toward the equilibrium p osition and becoming zero at that point.

15.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Simple Harmonic Motion and Uniform Circular Motion
Simple harmonic motion is produced by the projection of uniform circular motion onto one of the axes in the x-y plane.
Describe relationship between the simple harmonic motion and uniform circular motion
Uniform Circular Motion
Uniform circular motion describes the motion of a bod y traversing a circular path at constant speed. The di stance of the body from
the center of the circle remains constant at all tim es. Though the body’s speed is constant, its velocity i s not constant: velocity (a
vector quantity) depends on both the body’s speed a nd its direction of travel. Since the body is constan tly changing direction as it
travels around the circle, the velocity is changing also. This varying velocity indicates the presence o f an acceleration called the
centripetal acceleration. Centripetal acceleration is of constant magnitude and directed at all times t owards the center of the circle.
This acceleration is, in turn, produced by a centripetal f orce —a force in constant magnitude, and directed toward s the center.
Velocity
The above figure illustrates velocity and accelerat ion vectors for uniform motion at four different po ints in the orbit. Since velocity
v is tangent to the circular path, no two velocities p oint in the same direction. Although the object has a constant speed, its direction
is always changing. This change in velocity is due to an acceleration, a, whose magnitude is (like that of the velocity) held
constant, but whose direction also is always changing. Th e acceleration points radially inwards (centripetally) and is perpendicular
to the velocity. This acceleration is known as centripeta l acceleration.
Uniform Circular Motion (at Four Different Point in the Orbit): Velocity v and acceleration a in uniform circular moti on at
angular rate ω; the speed is constant, but the velocity is always tangent to the orbit; the acceleration has const ant magnitude, but
always points toward the center of rotation
Displacement around a circular path is often given i n terms of an angle θ. This angle is the angle between a straight line drawn
from the center of the circle to the objects starti ng position on the edge and a straight line drawn fro m the objects ending position
on the edge to center of the circle. See for a visua l representation of the angle where the point p start ed on the x- axis and moved to
its present position. The angle θ describes how far it moved.learning objectives

15.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531
Projection of Uniform Circular Motion: A point P moving on a circular path with a constan t angular velocity ω is undergoing
uniform circular motion. Its projection on the x-axi s undergoes simple harmonic motion. Also shown is the vel ocity of this point
around the circle, v−max, and its projection, which is v. Note that these velocities form a similar trian gle to the displacement
triangle.
For a path around a circle of radius r, when an angle θ(measured in radians) is swept out, the distance trave led on the edge of the
circle is s = rθ. You can prove this yourself by remembering that t he circumference of a circle is, so if the object t raveled
around the whole circle (one circumference) it will h ave gone through an angle of radians and traveled a distance of.
Therefore, the speed of travel around the orbit is:
where the angular rate of rotation is ω. (Note that.) Thus, v is a constant, and the velocity vector v also rotates with constant
magnitude v, at the same angular rate ω.
Acceleration
The acceleration in uniform circular motion is always di rected inward and is given by:
This acceleration acts to change the direction of v, but not the speed.
Simple Harmonic Motion from Uniform Circular Motion
There is an easy way to produce simple harmonic motio n by using uniform circular motion. The figure below demonstrates one
way of using this method. A ball is attached to a uni formly rotating vertical turntable, and its shadow is projected onto the floor as
shown. The shadow undergoes simple harmonic motion.

15.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531
Shadow of a Ball Undergoing Simple Harmonic Motion: The shadow of a ball rotating at constant angular velo city ω on a
turntable goes back and forth in precise simple harmonic mot ion.
The next figure shows the basic relationship between u niform circular motion and simple harmonic motion. T he point P travels
around the circle at constant angular velocity ω. The point P is analogous to the ball on a turntable in the figur e above. The
projection of the position of P onto a fixed axis undergoes simple harmonic motion and is analogous to the shadow of the object. At
a point in time assumed in the figure, the projectio n has position x and moves to the left with velocity v. The velocity of the point P
around the circle equals |v |. The projection of |v | on the x-axis is the velocity v of the simple harmonic motion along the xaxis.
To see that the projection undergoes simple harmonic mot ion, note that its position x is given by:
where θ=ωt, ω is the constant angular velocity, and X is the radius of the circular path. Thus,
The angular velocity ω is in radians per unit time; in this case 2π radians is the time for one revoluti on T. That is,.
Substituting this expression for ω, we see that the positio n x is given by:
Note: This equation should look familiar from our earli er discussion of simple harmonic motion.
The Simple Pendulum
A simple pendulum acts like a harmonic oscillator with a p eriod dependent only on L and g for sufficiently small amplitudes.max max

15.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Identify parameters that affect the period of a simple p endulum
The Simple Pendulum
A pendulum is a weight suspended from a pivot so that it can swing freely. When a pendulum is displaced si deways from its resting
equilibrium position, it is subject to a restoring fo rce; after it reaches its highest point in its swing, gravity will accelerate it back
toward the equilibrium position. When released, the res toring force combined with the pendulum’s mass causes it to oscillate about
the equilibrium position, swinging back and forth.
Simple Pendulum: A simple pendulum has a small-diameter bob and a string that has a very small mass but is strong enough not to
stretch appreciably. The linear displacement from equili brium is s, the length of the arc. Also shown are the forces on t he bob,
which result in a net force of −mgsinθ toward the equilibri um position—that is, a restoring force.
For small displacements, a pendulum is a simple harmo nic oscillator. A simple pendulum is defined to have an object that has a
small mass, also known as the pendulum bob, which is sus pended from a wire or string of negligible mass, such as shown in the
illustrating figure. Exploring the simple pendulum a bit further, we can discover the conditions under whi ch it performs simple
harmonic motion, and we can derive an interesting expressi on for its period.
AP Phy sics C - PendulumsAP Phy sics C - Pendulumslearning objectives

15.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Pendulums: A brief introduction to pendulums (both ideal and physical) for calculus-based physics students from the standpoint of
simple harmonic motion.
We begin by defining the displacement to be the arc length s. We see from the figure that the net force on the bob is tangent to the
arc and equals − mgsinθ. (The weight mg has components mgcosθ along the string and mgsinθ tangent to the arc.) Tension in the
string exactly cancels the component mgcosθ parallel to the string. This leaves a net restoring force drawing the pendulum back
toward the equilibrium position at θ = 0.
Now, if we can show that the restoring force is directl y proportional to the displacement, then we have a si mple harmonic oscillator.
In trying to determine if we have a simple harmonic oscillator, we should note that for small angles (less than about 15º), sin θ≈θ
(sinθ and θ differ by about 1% or less at smaller angles). Thus, for angles less than about 15º, the restoring force F is
The displacement s is directly proportional to θ. When θ is expressed in radians, the arc length in a circle is related to its radius (L
in this instance) by:
s=Lθs=Lθ
so that
For small angles, then, the expression for the restoring fo rce is:
This expression is of the form of Hooke’s Law:
where the force constant is given by k=mg/L and the displacement is given by x=s. For angles less than about 15º, the restoring
force is directly proportional to the displacement, and th e simple pendulum is a simple harmonic oscillator.
Using this equation, we can find the period of a pendulum for amplitudes less than about 15º. For the simple pendulum:
Thus,

15.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531or the period of a simple pendulum. This result is i nteresting because of its simplicity. The only things that affect the period of a
simple pendulum are its length and the acceleration due to gravity. The period is completely independent of other factors, such as
mass. Even simple pendulum clocks can be finely adjuste d and accurate. Note the dependence of T on g. If the length of a
pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used t o measure the acceleration due to gravity. If θ is less than about 15º, the
period T for a pendulum is nearly independent of amplitude, as with simple harmonic oscillators. In this case, the m otion of a
pendulum as a function of time can be modeled as:
For amplitudes larger than 15º, the period increases gr adually with amplitude so it is longer than given by the simple equation for T
above. For example, at an amplitude of θ = 23° it is 1% larger. The period increases asympto tically (to infinity) as θapproaches
180°, because the value θ = 180° is an unstable equilibrium point for the pendul um.
The Physical Pendulum
The period of a physical pendulum depends upon its mo ment of inertia about its pivot point and the dista nce from its center of
mass.
Identify parameters that affect the period of a physica l pendulum
The Physical Pendulum
Recall that a simple pendulum consists of a mass susp ended from a massless string or rod on a frictionless pivot. In that case, we
are able to neglect any effect from the string or ro d itself. In contrast, a physical pendulum (sometimes called a compound
pendulum) may be suspended by a rod that is not massl ess or, more generally, may be an arbitrarily-shaped, rigid body swinging by
a pivot (see). In this case, the pendulum’s period depe nds on its moment of inertia around the pivot point.
AP Phy sics C - PendulumsAP Phy sics C - Pendulums0 0
learning objectives

15.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Pendulums – Physical Pendulum: A brief introduction to pendulums (both ideal and physical) for calculus-based physics students
from the standpoint of simple harmonic motion.
A Physical Pendulum: An example showing how forces act through center of mass. We can calculate the period of this pendulum
by determining the moment of inertia of the object aro und the pivot point.
Gravity acts through the center of mass of the rigid body. Hence, the length of the pendulum used in equati ons is equal to the linear
distance between the pivot and the center of mass (h).
The equation of torque gives:
where α is the angular acceleration, τ is the torque, and I is the moment of inertia.
The torque is generated by gravity so:
where h is the distance from the center of mass to the pivot point and θ is the angle from the vertical.
Hence, under the small-angle approximation sin\theta \ap prox \theta,
This is of the same form as the conventional simple pendulu m and this gives a period of:
And a frequency of:
\[\mathrm{f=\dfrac{1]{T}=\dfrac{1}{2π}\sqrt{\dfrac{ mgh}{I}}.}\]

15.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531In case we know the moment of inertia of the rigid bo dy, we can evaluate the above expression of the period for the physical
pendulum. For illustration, let us consider a uniform rigid rod, pivoted from a frame as shown (see). Clear ly, the center of mass is
at a distance L/2 from the point of suspension:
Uniform Rigid Rod: A rigid rod with uniform mass distribution hangs from a pi vot point. This is another example of a physical
pendulum.
The moment of inertia of the rigid rod about its center is:
However, we need to evaluate the moment of inertia abou t the pivot point, not the center of mass, so we appl y the parallel axis
theorem:
Plugging this result into the equation for period, we have:
The important thing to note about this relation is t hat the period is still independent of the mass of th e rigid body. However, it is not
independent of the mass distribution of the rigid body. A change in shape, size, or mass d istribution will change the moment of
inertia. This, in turn, will change the period.
As with a simple pendulum, a physical pendulum can be used to measure g.
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator
The total energy in a simple harmonic oscillator is th e constant sum of the potential and kinetic energies.
Explain why the total energy of the harmonic oscillator is constant
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator
To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator, we first consider all the forms of energy it can ha ve. Recall that the potential
energy (PE), stored in a spring that follows Hooke’s Law is:
where PE is the potential energy, k is the spring constant, and x is the magnitude of the displacement or deformation. Because a
simple harmonic oscillator has no dissipative forces, the other important form of energy is kinetic ener gy (KE). Conservation oflearning objectives

15.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531energy for these two forms is:
which can be written as:
This statement of conservation of energy is valid fo r all simple harmonic oscillators, including ones where the gravitational force
plays a role. For example, for a simple pendulum we repl ace the velocity with v=Lω, the spring constant with k=mg/L, and the
displacement term with x=Lθ. Thus:
In the case of undamped, simple harmonic motion, the e nergy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and p otential, going
completely from one to the other as the system oscill ates. So for the simple example of an object on a frict ionless surface attached
to a spring, as shown again (see), the motion starts with all of the energy stored in the spring. As the obj ect starts to move, the
elastic potential energy is converted to kinetic en ergy, becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equil ibrium position. It is then
converted back into elastic potential energy by the spring, the velocity becomes zero when the ki netic energy is completely
converted, and so on. This concept provides extra in sight here and in later applications of simple harmo nic motion, such as
alternating current circuits.
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator: The transformation of energy in simple harmonic moti on is illustrated for an object
attached to a spring on a frictionless surface. (a) Th e mass has achieved maximum displacement from equilibrium. All energy is
potential energy. (b) As the mass passes through the equilib rium point with maximum speed all energy in the system i s in kinetic
energy. (c) Once again, all energy is in the potential form, stored in the compression of the spring (in the first panel the energy was
stored in the extension of the spring). (d) Passing through e quilibrium again all energy is kinetic. (e) The mass has completed an
entire cycle.
The conservation of energy principle can be used to derive an expression for velocity v. If we start our s imple harmonic motion
with zero velocity and maximum displacement (x=X), then the total energy is:
This total energy is constant and is shifted back an d forth between kinetic energy and potential energy, at most times being shared
by each. The conservation of energy for this system in equa tion form is thus:
Solving this equation for v yields:

15.3.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Manipulating this expression algebraically gives:
and so:
where:
From this expression, we see that the velocity is a max imum (v) at x=0. Notice that the maximum velocity depends on three
factors. It is directly proportional to amplitude. As you might guess, the greater the maximum displacement, the greater the
maximum velocity. It is also greater for stiffer sys tems because they exert greater force for the same dis placement. This observation
is seen in the expression for v; it is proportional to the square root of the force constant k. Finally, the maximum velocity is
smaller for objects that have larger masses, becaus e the maximum velocity is inversely proportional to the square root of m. For a
given force, objects that have large masses accelerat e more slowly.
A similar calculation for the simple pendulum produce s a similar result, namely:
Joy Phy sics- exp #13 Spring-mass oscJoy Phy sics- exp #13 Spring-mass oscmax
max

15.3.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator: A known mass is hung from a spring of known spring constant a nd allowed to
oscillate. The time for one oscillation (period) is measu red. This value is compared to a predicted value, based on the mass and
spring constant.
Sinusoidal Nature of Simple Harmonic Motion
The solutions to the equations of motion of simple harmo nic oscillators are always sinusoidal, i.e., sines and cosines.
Review factors responsible for the sinusoidal behavior of uniform circular motion
Sinusoidal Nature of Simple Harmonic Motion
Why are sine waves so common?
If the mass -on-a-spring system discussed in previous sections were to be constructed and its motion were m easured accurately, its
x–t graph would be a near-perfect sine-wave shape, as shown in. It is called a “sine wave” or “sinusoidal” even if it is a cosine, or a
sine or cosine shifted by some arbitrary horizontal a mount. It may not be surprising that it is a wiggle of t his general sort, but why
is it a specific mathematically perfect shape? Why is it not a sawtooth shape, like in (2); or some other sha pe, like in (3)? It is
notable that a vast number of apparently unrelated vibrating systems show the same mathematical feature. A tuning fork, a sapling
pulled to one side and released, a car bouncing on its shock absorbers, all these systems will exhibit sine -wave motion under one
condition: the amplitude of the motion must be small.
Sinusoidal and Non-Sinusoidal Vibrations: Only the top graph is sinusoidal. The others vary with const ant amplitude and period,
but do no describe simple harmonic motion.
learning objectives

15.3.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Hooke’s Law and Sine Wave Generation
The key to understanding how an object vibrates is to know how the force on the object depends on the objec t’s position. If a
system follows Hooke’s Law, the restoring force is propo rtional to the displacement. As touched on in previo us sections, there
exists a second order differential equation that relates acc eleration and displacement.
When this general equation is solved for the position, v elocity and acceleration as a function of time:
These are all sinusoidal solutions. Consider a mass on a spring that has a small pen inside running across a moving strip of paper as
it bounces, recording its movements.
Mass on Spring Producing Sine Wave: The vertical position of an object bouncing on a spring is recorded on a strip of moving
paper, leaving a sine wave.
The above equations can be rewritten in a form applicable to the variables for the mass on spring system in the figur e.
Recall that the projection of uniform circular moti on can be described in terms of a simple harmonic osc illator. Uniform circular
motion is therefore also sinusoidal, as you can see from.

15.3.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531
Sinusoidal Nature of Uniform Circular Motion: The position of the projection of uniform circular mo tion performs simple
harmonic motion, as this wavelike graph of x versus t in dicates.
Instantaneous Energy of Simple Harmonic Motion
The equations discussed for the components of the to tal energy of simple harmonic oscillators may be co mbined with the
sinusoidal solutions for x(t), v(t), and a(t) to model the changes in kinetic and potential energy in sim ple harmonic motion.
The kinetic energy K of the system at time t is:
The potential energy U is:
Summing K(t) and U(t) produces the total mechanical energy seen before:
Key Points
Motion that repeats itself regularly is called periodic m otion. One complete repetition of the motion is called a cy cle. The
duration of each cycle is the period.
The frequency refers to the number of cycles completed in an interval of time. It is the reciprocal of the period a nd can be
calculated with the equation f=1/T.
Some motion is best characterized by the angular frequency (ω). The angular frequency refers to the angular displac ement per
unit time and is calculated from the frequency with the equation.
If an object is vibrating to the right and left, then it must have a leftward force on it when it is on the right side, an d a rightward
force when it is on the left side.
The restoring force causes an oscillating object to move back toward its stable equilibrium position, where the net force on it is
zero.
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring forc e is directly proportional to displacement. In this case the force can be
calculated as, where F is the restoring force, k is the force constant, and x is the displacement.

15.3.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531The motion of a mass on a spring can be described as Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM): oscillatory motion that follows Hooke’s
Law.
The period of a mass on a spring is given by the equation
Simple harmonic motion is often modeled with the example of a mass on a spring, where the restoring force obey’s Hooke’ s
Law and is directly proportional to the displacement of a n object from its equilibrium position.
Any system that obeys simple harmonic motion is known as a simple harmonic oscillator.
The equation of motion that describes simple harmonic m otion can be obtained by combining Newton’s Second Law and
Hooke’s Law into a second-order linear ordinary diffe rential equation:
Uniform circular motion describes the movement of an objec t traveling a circular path with constant speed. The onedimensional projection of this motion can be described as simple harmonic motion.
In uniform circular motion, the velocity vector v is al ways tangent to the circular path and constant in magnitude. The
acceleration is constant in magnitude and points to the cen ter of the circular path, perpendicular to the velocity vector at every
instant.
If an object moves with angular velocity ω around a circ le of radius r centered at the origin of the x-y plane, th en its motion
along each coordinate is simple harmonic motion with ampl itude r and angular frequency ω.
A simple pendulum is defined as an object that has a small mas s, also known as the pendulum bob, which is suspended from a
wire or string of negligible mass.
When displaced, a pendulum will oscillate around its equi librium point due to momentum in balance with the res toring force of
gravity.
When the swings (amplitudes) are small, less than about 15 º, the pendulum acts as a simple harmonic oscillator with p eriod
, where L is the length of the string and g is the accelerati on due to gravity.
A physical pendulum is the generalized case of the simple pendulum. It consists of any rigid body that oscillates abo ut a pivot
point.
For small amplitudes, the period of a physical pendulum o nly depends on the moment of inertia of the body around t he pivot
point and the distance from the pivot to the body’s c enter of mass. It is calculated as:.
The period is still independent of the total mass of the rigid body. However, it is not independent of the mass dist ribution of the
rigid body. A change in shape, size, or mass distribution wil l change the moment of inertia and thus, the period.
The sum of the kinetic and potential energies in a simple harmonic oscillator is a constant, i.e.,. The energy
oscillates back and forth between kinetic and potential, going completely from one to the other as the system os cillates.
In a spring system, the conservation equation is written as:, where X is the maximum
displacement.
The maximum velocity depends on three factors: amplitud e, the stiffness factor, and mass:.
For simple harmonic oscillators, the equation of motion i s always a second order differential equation that relates th e
acceleration and the displacement. The relevant variabl es are x, the displacement, and k, the spring constant.
Solving the differential equation above always produces s olutions that are sinusoidal in nature. For example,
and all have sinusoidal solutions for simple harmon ic motion.
Uniform circular motion is also sinusoidal because the projection of this motion behaves like a simple harmonic oscillator.
Key Terms
period: The duration of one cycle in a repeating event.
angular frequency: The angular displacement per unit time.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs: f = n / t.
Restoring force: A variable force that gives rise to an equilibrium in a physical system. If the system is perturbed away from
the equilibrium, the restoring force will tend to bring the system back toward equilibrium. The restoring forc e is a function only
of position of the mass or particle. It is always directed b ack toward the equilibrium position of the system
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
simple harmonic oscillator: A device that implements Hooke’s law, such as a mass t hat is attached to a spring, with the other
end of the spring being connected to a rigid support, suc h as a wall.
oscillator: A pattern that returns to its original state, in the same orientation and position, after a finite number of gen erations.

15.3.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531centripetal acceleration: Acceleration that makes a body follow a curved path: it is always perpendicular to the velocity of a
body and directed towards the center of curvature of th e path.
uniform circular motion: Movement around a circular path with constant speed.
simple pendulum: A hypothetical pendulum consisting of a weight suspen ded by a weightless string.
physical pendulum: A pendulum where the rod or string is not massless, and may have extended size; that is, an arbitrarilyshaped, rigid body swinging by a pivot. In this case, the pe ndulum’s period depends on its moment of inertia aroun d the pivot
point.
mass distribution: Describes the spatial distribution, and defines the cente r, of mass in an object.
elastic potential energy: The energy stored in a deformable object, such as a s pring.
dissipative forces: Forces that cause energy to be lost in a system undergoing motion.
sinusoidal: In the form of a wave, especially one whose amplitude varie s in proportion to the sine of some variable (such as
time).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Period (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Period_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
period. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/period. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
angular frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/angular%20frequency. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Mass_on_a_spring. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Restoring force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Restoring%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

15.3.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Mass_on_a_spring. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
simple harmonic oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple+harmonic+oscillator.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Uniform_circular_mo tion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/uniform-circularmotion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/centripetal-acceleration.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

15.3.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
simple pendulum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physical pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_pendulum%23Compound_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
mass distribution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/mass%20distribution. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
physical pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/physical%20pendulum. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

15.3.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/elastic-potential-energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/dissipative-forces.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

15.3.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuv24zcc5kI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Harmonic oscillator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonic_oscillator. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
sinusoidal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinusoidal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

15.3.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14531Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuv24zcc5kI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 15.3: Periodic Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

15.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453215.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Describe the time evolution of the motion of the damped harmonic oscillator
The Physical Situation
The simple harmonic oscillator describes many physica l systems throughout the world, but early studies of p hysics usually only
consider ideal situations that do not involve fricti on. In the real world, however, frictional forces – suc h as air resistance – will
slow, or dampen, the motion of an object. Sometimes, the se dampening forces are strong enough to return an o bject to equilibrium
over time.
Damped Harmonic Motion: Illustrating the position against time of our object mov ing in simple harmonic motion. We see that for
small damping, the amplitude of our motion slowly decrease s over time.
The simplest and most commonly seen case occurs when the frictional force is proportional to an object’ s velocity. Note that other
cases exist which may lead to nonlinear equations which go be yond the scope of this example.
Consider an object of mass m attached to a spring of constant k. Let the damping force be proportional to the mass’ v elocity by a
proportionality constant, b, called the vicious damping coefficient. We can describe this situation using Newton’s second law, which
leads to a second order, linear, homogeneous, ordinary differential equation. We simply add a term descri bing the damping force to
our already familiar equation describing a simple harm onic oscillator to describe the general case of damped harm onic motion.
This notation uses, the acceleration of our object,, the velocity of our object,, undamped angular freq uency of oscillation,
and ɣ, which we can call the damping ratio.
Solving the Differential Equation; Interpreting Results
We solve this differential equation for our equation of motion of the system, x(t). We assume a solution i n the form of an
exponential, where a is a constant value which we will solve fo r.
Plugging this into the differential equation we find that there are three results for a, which will dictate the motion of our system. We
can solve for a by using the quadratic equation.learning objectives

15.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14532The physical situation has three possible results dep ending on the value of a, which depends on the value o f what is under our
radical. This expression can be positive, negative, or equal to zero which will result in overdamping, underd amping, and critical
damping, respectively.
is the Over Damped case. In this case, the system returns to equilibrium by exponentially decaying towards zero. The
system will not pass the equilibrium position more than o nce.
is the Under Damped case. In this case, the system oscillates as it slowly returns to equilibrium and the amplitude
decreases over time. Figure 1 depicts an underdamped case.
is the Critically Damped case. In this case, the system returns to equilibriu m very quickly without oscillating and without
passing the equilibrium position at all.
Driven Oscillations and Resonance
Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators further affected by an externally applied force.
Describe a driven harmonic oscillator as a type of dam ped oscillator
In classical mechanics, a harmonic oscillator is a syst em that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring
force, F, proportional to the displacement, where k is a positive constant. If a frictional force (dampi ng) proportional
to the velocity is also present, the harmonic oscillator is d escribed as a damped oscillator.
Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators fu rther affected by an externally applied force F(t). Ne wton’s second law takes
the form. It is usually rewritten into the form. T his equation can be solved
exactly for any driving force, using the solutions z (t) which satisfy the unforced equation:, and which ca n
be expressed as damped sinusoidal oscillations in the c ase where. The amplitude A and
phase φ determine the behavior needed to match the i nitial conditions. In the case and a unit step inp ut with the
solution is: with phase φ given by. The time an osci llator needs to adapt to changed external
conditions is of the order \(\mathrm{τ =\frac{1}{(ζ_)}}\). In physics, the adaptation is called relaxat ion, and τ is called the
relaxation time.
In the case of a sinusoidal driving force:, where is the driving amplitude and ωω is the driving
frequency for a sinusoidal driving mechanism. This t ype of system appears in AC driven RLC circuits (resi stor-inductor-capacitor)
and driven spring systems having internal mechanical resistance or external air resistance. The general sol ution is a sum of a
transient solution that depends on initial condition s, and a steady state that is independent of initial conditions and depends only on
the driving amplitude, driving frequency ωω, undampe d angular frequency, and the damping ratio. For a particular driving
frequency called the resonance, or resonant frequenc y, the amplitude (for a given) is maximum. This reson ance
effect only occurs when, i.e. for significantly und erdamped systems. For strongly underdamped systems the value of the
amplitude can become quite large near the resonance freque ncy (see).learning objectives

15.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14532
Resonance: Steady state variation of amplitude with frequency and damping of a driven simple harmonic oscillator.
Key Points
To describe a damped harmonic oscillator, add a velocity dependent term, bx, where b is the vicious dampingcoefficient.
Solve the differential equation for the equation of moti on, x(t).
Depending on the values of the damping coefficient and u ndamped angular frequency, the results will be one of three cases: an
under damped system, an over damped system, or a critically damped system.
Newton’s second law takes the form for driven harmonic osci llators.
The resonance effect occurs only in the underdamped sys tems.
For strongly underdamped systems the value of the amplitud e can become quite large near the resonance frequency.
Key Terms
Under Damped: “The condition in which damping of an oscillator caus es it to return to equilibrium with the amplitude
gradually decreasing to zero; system returns to equilib rium faster but overshoots and crosses the equilibrium po sition one or
more times. “
Critically Damped: “The condition in which the damping of an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as possible to its
equilibrium position without oscillating back and forth abo ut this position. “
Over Damped: “The condition in which damping of an oscillator caus es it to return to equilibrium without oscillating;
oscillator moves more slowly toward equilibrium than in the critically damped system. “
oscillator: A pattern that returns to its original state, in the same orientation and position, after a finite number of gen erations.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body which is measured in a unit dim ensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/under-damped. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/over-damped. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/critically-damped.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

15.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14532OpenStax College, Damped Harmonic Motion. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42246/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Driven oscillations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Driven_oscillations%23Driven_harmonic_oscill ators. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Damped Harmonic Motion. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42246/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/Resonance.PNG/80 0px-Resonance.PNG. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

15.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453315.5: Waves
Describe process of energy and mass transfer during wave mot ion
Vibrations and waves are extremely important phenome na in physics. In nature, oscillations are found everywh ere. From the
jiggling of atoms to the large oscillations of sea waves, we find examples of vibrations in almost every ph ysical system. In physics
a wave can be thought of as a disturbance or oscillati on that travels through space-time, accompanied by a transfer of energy. Wave
motion transfers energy from one point to another, of ten with no permanent displacement of the particles of the medium —that is,
with little or no associated mass transport. They consist, i nstead, of oscillations or vibrations around almost fixe d locations.
The emphasis of the last point highlights an importan t misconception of waves. Waves transfer energy not mass. An easy way to
see this is to imagine a floating ball a few yards o ut to sea. As the waves propagate (i.e., travel) towards the shore, the ball will not
come towards the shore. It may come to shore eventuall y due to the tides, current or wind, but the waves the mselves will not carry
the ball with them. A wave only moves mass perpendicu lar to the direction of propagation—in this case up a nd down, as illustrated
in the figure below:
Wave motion: The point along the axis is analogous to the floati ng ball at sea. We notice that while it moves up and down it does
not move in the direction of the wave’s propagation.
A wave can be transverse or longitudinal depending o n the direction of its oscillation. Transverse waves o ccur when a disturbance
causes oscillations perpendicular (at right angles) t o the propagation (the direction of energy transfer). Longitudinal waves occur
when the oscillations are parallel to the direction o f propagation. While mechanical waves can be both tra nsverse and longitudinal,
all electromagnetic waves are transverse. Sound, for exampl e, is a longitudinal wave.
The description of waves is closely related to their physical origin for each specific instance of a wave process. For example,
acoustics is distinguished from optics in that sound waves are related to a mechanical rather than an el ectromagnetic (light) wave
transfer caused by vibration. Therefore, concepts such as mass, momentum, inertia or elasticity become crucia l in describing
acoustic (as distinct from optic) wave processes. Thi s difference in origin introduces certain wave chara cteristics particular to the
properties of the medium involved. In this chapter we will closely examine the difference between longitudi nal and transverse
waves along with some of the properties they possess. We will also learn how waves are fundamental in describ ing motion of many
applicable physical systems.
High School Phy sics - The Wave EquationHigh School Phy sics - The Wave Equationlearning objectives

15.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533The Wave Equation: A brief introduction to the wave equation, discussin g wave velocity, frequency, wavelength, and period.
Transverse Waves
Transverse waves propagate through media with a speed →vwv→w orthogonally to the direction of energy transfer.
Describe properties of the transverse wave
A transverse wave is a moving wave that consists of osci llations occurring perpendicular (or right angled) t o the direction of energy
transfer. If a transverse wave is moving in the positive x-direction, its oscillations are in up and down dire ctions that lie in the y–z
plane. Light is an example of a transverse wave. For tr ansverse waves in matter, the displacement of the me dium is perpendicular
to the direction of propagation of the wave. A ripple on a pond and a wave on a string are easily visualized tra nsverse waves.
Transverse waves are waves that are oscillating perpendi cularly to the direction of propagation. If you anch or one end of a ribbon
or string and hold the other end in your hand, you ca n create transverse waves by moving your hand up and down. Notice though,
that you can also launch waves by moving your hand si de-to-side. This is an important point. There are two i ndependent directions
in which wave motion can occur. In this case, these are the y and z directions mentioned above. depicts the motion of a transverse
wave. Here we observe that the wave is moving in t and oscillating in the x-y plane. A wave can be thought as comprising many
particles (as seen in the figure) which oscillate up and down. In the figure we observe this motion to be in x-y plane (denoted by the
red line in the figure). As time passes the oscillatio ns are separated by units of time. The result of thi s separation is the sine curve
we expect when we plot position versus time.
Sine Wave: The direction of propagation of this wave is along the t axis.
learning objectives

15.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533When a wave travels through a medium–i.e., air, water, etc., or the standard reference medium (vacuum)–it d oes so at a given
speed: this is called the speed of propagation. The speed at which the wave propagates is denoted and can be found using the
following formula:
where v is the speed of the wave, f is the frequency, and is the wavelength. The wavelength spans crest to crest while the amplitude
is 1/2 the total distance from crest to trough. Tran sverse waves have their applications in many areas o f physics. Examples of
transverse waves include seismic S (secondary) waves, and the motion of the electric (E) and magnetic (M) fiel ds in an
electromagnetic plane waves, which both oscillate per pendicularly to each other as well as to the directio n of energy transfer.
Therefore an electromagnetic wave consists of two transver se waves, visible light being an example of an electromag netic wave.
Wavelength and Amplitude: The wavelength is the distance between adjacent crests. The amplitude is the 1/2 the distance from
crest to trough.
Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves | Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves |

15.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse: Even ocean waves!
Longitudinal Waves
Longitudinal waves, sometimes called compression waves, oscil late in the direction of propagation.
Give properties and provide examples of the longitudina l wave
Longitudinal Waves
Longitudinal waves have the same direction of vibrati on as their direction of travel. This means that the movement of the medium
is in the same direction as the motion of the wave. Som e longitudinal waves are also called compressional wav es or compression
waves. An easy experiment for observing longitudinal wa ves involves taking a Slinky and holding both ends. Aft er compressing
and releasing one end of the Slinky (while still holding o nto the end), a pulse of more concentrated coils will trave l to the end of the
Slinky.
Longitudinal Waves: A compressed Slinky is an example of a longitudinal wave. The wve propagates in the same direction of
oscillation.
Like transverse waves, longitudinal waves do not displace mass. The difference is that each particle which mak es up the medium
through which a longitudinal wave propagates oscillate s along the axis of propagation. In the example of th e Slinky, each coil will
oscillate at a point but will not travel the length of the Slinky. It is important to remember that energ y, in this case in the form of a
pulse, is being transmitted and not the displaced mass.
Longitudinal waves can sometimes also be conceptualize d as pressure waves. The most common pressure wave is th e sound wave.
Sound waves are created by the compression of a medium, usually air. Longitudinal sound waves are waves of a lternating pressure
deviations from the equilibrium pressure, causing loc al regions of compression and rarefaction. Matter in t he medium is
periodically displaced by a sound wave, and thus oscil lates. When people make a sound, whether it is through speaking or hitting
something, they are compressing the air particles to some significant amount. By doing so, they create tra nsverse waves. When
people hear sounds, their ears are sensitive to the pressure differences and interpret the waves as different tones.
learning objectives

15.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533
Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves | Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves |
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse: Even ocean waves!
Water Waves
Water waves can be commonly observed in daily life, and co mprise both transverse and longitudinal wave motion.
Describe particle movement in water waves
Water waves, which can be commonly observed in our dai ly lives, are of specific interest to physicists. Descri bing detailed fluid
dynamics in water waves is beyond the scope of introd uctory physics courses. Although we often observe water wave propagating
in 2D, in this atom we will limit our discussion to 1D propagatio n.
learning objectives

15.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533Water waves: Surface waves in water
The uniqueness of water waves is found in the observat ion that they comprise both transverse and longitud inal wave motion. As a
result, the particles composing the wave move in clo ckwise circular motion, as seen in. Oscillatory motion is highest at the surface
and diminishes exponentially with depth. Waves are gen erated by wind passing over the surface of the sea. As l ong as the waves
propagate slower than the wind speed just above the wa ves, there is an energy transfer from the wind to the waves. Both air
pressure differences between the upwind and the lee sid e of a wave crest, as well as friction on the water surface by the wind
(making the water to go into the shear stress), contribute to th e growth of the waves.
In the case of monochromatic linear plane waves in d eep water, particles near the surface move in circula r paths, creating a
combination of longitudinal (back and forth) and tr ansverse (up and down) wave motions. When waves propag ate in shallow water
(where the depth is less than half the wavelength), th e particle trajectories are compressed into ellipses. As the wave amplitude
(height) increases, the particle paths no longer fo rm closed orbits; rather, after the passage of each crest, particles are displaced
slightly from their previous positions, a phenomenon known a s Stokes drift.
Plane wave: We see a wave propagating in the direction of the phase v elocity. The wave can be thought to be made up of planes
orthogonal to the direction of the phase velocity.
Since water waves transport energy, attempts to generat e power from them have been made by utilizing the ph ysical motion of such
waves. Although larger waves are more powerful, wave power is also determined by wave speed, wavelength, and wate r density.
Deep water corresponds with a water depth larger than h alf the wavelength, as is a common case in the sea and ocean. In deep
water, longer-period waves propagate faster and transp ort their energy faster. The deep-water group velocit y is half the phase
velocity. In shallow water for wavelengths larger than about twenty times the water depth (as often found ne ar the coast), the group
velocity is equal to the phase velocity. These metho ds have proven viable in some cases but do not provide a fully sustainable form
of renewable energy to date.
Water waves: The motion water waves causes particles to follow clock wise circular motion. This is a result of the wave having
both transverse and longitudinal properties.
Wavelength, Freqency in Relation to Speed
Waves are defined by its frequency, wavelength, and a mplitude among others. They also have two kinds of ve locity: phase and
group velocity.

15.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533Identify major characteristic properties of waves
Characteristics of Waves
Waves have certain characteristic properties which ar e observable at first notice. The first property to n ote is the amplitude. The
amplitude is half of the distance measured from cre st to trough. We also observe the wavelength, which is t he spatial period of the
wave (e.g. from crest to crest or trough to trough). We denot e the wavelength by the Greek letter λλ.
The frequency of a wave is the number of cycles per unit time — one can think of it as the number of cr ests which pass a fixed
point per unit time. Mathematically, we make the observa tion that,
Frequencies of different sine waves.: The red wave has a low frequency sine there is very lit tle repetition of cycles. Conversely
we say that the purple wave has a high frequency. Note that t ime increases along the horizontal.
where T is the period of oscillation. Frequency and wavele ngth can also be related-* with respects to a “speed” of a wa ve. In fact,
\[\mathrm{v=fλ}]
where v is called the wave speed, or more commonly,the phase velocity, the rate at which the phase of the wa ve propagates in
space. This is the velocity at which the phase of an y one frequency component of the wave travels. For su ch a component, any
given phase of the wave (for example, the crest) will appea r to travel at the phase velocity.
Finally, the group velocity of a wave is the velocity with which the overall shape of the waves’ amplitudes — known as the
modulation or envelope of the wave — propagates thro ugh space. In, one may see that the overall shape (o r “envelope”) propagates
to the right, while the phase velocity is negative.
Fig 2: This shows a wave with the group velocity and phase ve locity going in different directions. (The group ve locity is positive
and the phase velocity is negative.)
Energy Transportation
Waves transfer energy which can be used to do work.
Relate direction of energy and wave transportation
Energy transportion is essential to waves. It is a co mmon misconception that waves move mass. Waves carry ener gy along an axis
defined to be the direction of propagation. One easy example is to imagine that you are standing in the su rf and you are hit by alearning objectives
learning objectives

15.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533significantly large wave, and once you are hit you ar e displaced (unless you hold firmly to your ground!). In this sense the wave
has done work (it applied a force over a distance). Since work is done over time, the energy carried by a wave can be used to
generate power.
Water Wave: Waves that are more massive or have a greater velocity tr ansport more energy.
Similarly we find that electromagnetic waves carry ener gy. Electromagnetic radiation (EMR) carries energy—som etimes called
radiant energy—through space continuously away from the source (this is not true of the near-field part of the EM field).
Electromagnetic waves can be imagined as a self-propag ating transverse oscillating wave of electric and ma gnetic fields. EMR also
carries both momentum and angular momentum. These p roperties may all be imparted to matter with which it interacts (through
work). EMR is produced from other types of energy when created, and it is converted to other types of energ y when it is destroyed.
The photon is the quantum of the electromagnetic in teraction, and is the basic “unit” or constituent of all forms of EMR. The
quantum nature of light becomes more apparent at hi gh frequencies (or high photon energy). Such photons b ehave more like
particles than lower-frequency photons do.
Electromagnetic Wave: Electromagnetic waves can be imagined as a self-propagat ing transverse oscillating wave of electric and
magnetic fields. This 3D diagram shows a plane linearly pola rized wave propagating from left to right.
In general, there is a relation of waves which states that the velocity () of a wave is proportional to th e frequency () times the
wavelength ():
We also know that classical momentum pp is given by p=mv p=mv which relates to force via Newton’s second law:
EM waves with higher frequencies carry more energy. Thi s is a direct result of the equations above. Since we find that higher
frequencies imply greater velocity. If velocity is in creased then we have greater momentum which implies a greater force (it gets a
little bit tricky when we talk about particles moving close to the speed of light, but this observation ho lds in the classical sense).
Since energy is the ability of an object to do work, we find that for a greater force correlates to more e nergy transfer.
Again, this is an easy phenomenon to experience empirically; just stand in front of a faster wave and feel the differ ence!
Key Points
A wave can be thought of as a disturbance or oscillation that travels through space-time, accompanied by a tran sfer of energy.
The direction a wave propagates is perpendicular to the d irection it oscillates for transverse waves.

15.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533A wave does not move mass in the direction of propagati on; it transfers energy.
Transverse waves oscillate in the z-y plane but travel alon g the x axis.
A transverse wave has a speed of propagation given by the e quation.
The direction of energy transfer is perpendicular to the motion of the wave.
While longitudinal waves oscillate in the direction of pr opagation, they do not displace mass since the oscillati ons are small and
involve an equilibrium position.
The longitudinal ‘waves’ can be conceptualized as pulse s that transfer energy along the axis of propagation.
Longitudinal waves can be conceptualized as pressure wave s characterized by compression and rarefaction.
The particles which make up a water wave move in circula r paths.
If the waves move slower than the wind above them, energy is transfered from the wind to the waves.
The oscillations are greatest on the surface of the wav e and become weaker deeper in the fluid.
The wavelength is the spatial period of the wave.
The frequency of a wave refers to the number of cycles per unit time and is not to be confused with angular frequenc y.
The phase velocity can be expressed as the product of wave length and frequency.
Waves which are more massive transfer more energy.
Waves with greater velocities transfer more energy.
Energy of a wave is transported in the direction of the waves transportation.
Key Terms
medium: The material or empty space through which signals, wav es or forces pass.
direction of propagation: The axis along which the wave travels.
wave: A moving disturbance in the energy level of a field.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
trough: A long, narrow depression between waves or ridges.
speed of propagation: The speed at which a wave moves through a medium.
crest: The ridge or top of a wave.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
rarefaction: a reduction in the density of a material, especially th at of a fluid
Longitudinal: Running in the direction of the long axis of a body.
compression: to increase in density; the act of compressing, or the st ate of being compressed; compaction
phase velocity: The velocity of propagation of a pure sine wave of infi nite extent and infinitesimal amplitude.
group velocity: The propagation velocity of the envelope of a modulat ed travelling wave, which is considered as the
propagation velocity of information or energy contained in it.
plane wave: A constant-frequency wave whose wavefronts (surfaces of con stant phase) are infinite parallel planes of constant
peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velocity ve ctor.
wave speed: The absolute value of the velocity at which the phase of any one frequency component of the wave travels.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
energy: A quantity that denotes the ability to do work and is me asured in a unit dimensioned in mass × distance²/time² (ML ²/T²)
or the equivalent.
power: A measure of the rate of doing work or transferring ene rgy.
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

15.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
direction of propagation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/direction%20of%20propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
medium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
crest. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/crest. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/speed-of-propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
direction of propagation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/direction%20of%20propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
trough. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trough. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Longitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Longitudinal_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_waves%23Longitudinal_and_transverse_waves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Longitudinal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Longitudinal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
compression. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/compression. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

15.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533rarefaction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rarefaction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wind wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
plane wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/plane%20wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
phase velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phase_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
group velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/group_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

15.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripples.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Phase velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wave speed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave%20speed. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripples.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/energy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/power. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

15.5.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripple s.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Waves in pacifica 1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Waves_in_pacifica_1.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Electromagneticwave3Dfromside. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3Dfromside.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 15.5: Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

15.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453415.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
Distinguish transmission and reflection phenomena
When the medium through which a wave travels suddenly changes, the wave often experiences partial transmiss ion and partial
refection at the interface. Reflection is a wave phen omenon that changes the direction of a wavefront at a n interface between two
different media so that the wavefront returns into t he medium from which it originated. Transmission permits the passage of wave,
with some or none of the incident wave being absorbed. Refl ection and transmission often occur at the same time.
Partial Transmittance and Partial Reflectance: A wave experiences partial transmittance and partial re flectance when the
medium through which it travels suddenly changes.
Consider a long string made by connecting two sub-str ings with different density. When the string is driv en by an external
force, partial reflection and transmission occur as i n the figure above. For the incoming, reflected, and transmitted waves, we can
try a solution of the following forms:
Two Strings With Different Density: Two strings with different density are connected and driv en by an external driving force.
k and k are determined by the speed of the wave in e ach medium. We choose our coordinates such that the junction of two substrings is located at x=0. In choosing a trial solutio n for the waves, we assumed that the incident and transmi tted waves travel to the
right, while the reflected waves travel to the left. (This is why the ‘+’ sign is chosen before ωtωt in the reflected wave. On the left
side of the junction, we have
On the right side, we have
We will impose additional restriction on the waves by applying “boundary conditions” at x=0. At the boundary x=0, the wave must
be continuous and there should be no kinks in it. Thus we must have
From the first equation, we get. From the second equation, we get.
Thus, we get the following result.learning objectives
1 2

15.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534We can define the transmission (t) and reflection (r) coefficients as
Superposition and Interference
A wave may have a complicated shape that can result fro m superposition and interference of several waves.
Distinguish destructive and constructive interference and identify conditions that are required for the super position of
waves
Most waves do not look very simple. They look are often more complex than the simple water waves often consid ered in
textbooks. Simple waves may be created by a simple ha rmonic oscillation, and thus have a sinusoidal shape. Complex waves are
more interesting, even beautiful, but they look for midable. Most waves appear complex because they resul t from several simple
waves adding together. Luckily, the rules for adding waves ar e quite simple.
Complex Pattern of Waves: These waves result from the superposition of several waves f rom different sources, producing a
complex pattern.
Superposition
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they s uperimpose themselves on one another. More specifical ly, the disturbances
of waves are superimposed when they come together—a p henomenon called superposition. Each disturbance co rresponds to a
force, and forces add. If the disturbances are alon g the same line, then the resulting wave is a simple a ddition of the disturbances of
the individual waves—that is, their amplitudes add.
Interference
As a result of superposition of waves, interference can be o bserved. Interference is an effect caused by two or more waves.learning objectives

15.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534
High School Phy sics - Wave InterferenceHigh School Phy sics - Wave Interference
Wave Interference: A brief introduction to constructive and destructive wave interference and the principle of superposition.
When two identical waves arrive at the same point exa ctly in phase the crests of the two waves are precisel y aligned, as are the
troughs. This superposition produces pure constructiv e interference. Because the disturbances add, constru ctive interference may
produce a wave that has twice the amplitude of the indivi dual waves, but has the same wavelength.

15.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534Constructive Interference: Pure constructive interference of two identical waves prod uces one with twice the amplitude, but the
same wavelength.
If two identical waves that arrive exactly out of pha se—that is, precisely aligned crest to trough—they ma y produce pure
destructive interference. Because the disturbances are in the opposite direction for this superposition, the resulting amplitude may
be zero for destructive interference, and the waves comple tely cancel.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interf erence do occur, they require precisely aligned ident ical waves. The
superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can v ary from place to place
and time to time. Here again, the disturbances add and subtra ct, producing a more complicated looking wave.
Superposition of Non-Identical Waves: Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constr uctive and destructive
interference.
Standing Waves and Resonance
A standing wave is one in which two waves superimpose to produ ce a wave that varies in amplitude but does not propagate.
Describe properties of a standing wave
Standing Wave
Sometimes waves do not seem to move, but rather they jus t vibrate in place. These waves are formed by the supe rposition of two or
more moving waves for two identical waves moving in opp osite directions. The waves move through each other with their
disturbances adding as they go by. If the two waves hav e the same amplitude and wavelength then they alterna te between
constructive and destructive interference. The resu ltant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called a st anding wave.
Standing Wave: A standing wave (black) depicted as the sum of two propa gating waves traveling in opposite directions (red and
blue).
Standing waves are found on the strings of musical instr uments and are due to reflections of waves from the en ds of the string.
shows seven standing waves that can be created on a st ring that is fixed at both ends. Nodes are the points wh ere the string does not
move; more generally, nodes are where the wave disturban ce is zero in a standing wave. The fixed ends of stri ngs must be nodes,learning objectives

15.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534too, because the string cannot move there. The word a ntinode is used to denote the location of maximum am plitude in standing
waves. Standing waves on strings have a frequency that is related to the propagation speed v of the disturba nce on the string. The
wavelength λ is determined by the distance between the poi nts where the string is fixed in place.
Standing Waves: Standing waves in a string, the fundamental mode and the f irst six overtones.
The lowest frequency, called the fundamental frequenc y, is thus for the longest wavelength, twice the lengt h of the string. The
overtones or harmonics are multiples of the fundamental frequency. shows the fundamental mode along with six overto nes.
Resonance
A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for conditions appropriate for resonance: standing waves, and constructive and
destructive interference. A building may be vibrated for several seconds with a driving frequency matchin g that of the natural
frequency of the vibration of the building—producin g a resonance resulting in one building collapsing wh ile neighboring buildings
do not. Often buildings of a certain height are devas tated while other taller buildings remain intact. The building height matches the
condition for setting up a standing wave for that par ticular height. As the earthquake waves travel along t he surface of Earth and
reflect off denser rocks, constructive interference occurs at certain points. Often areas closer to the e picenter are not damaged while
areas farther away are damaged.w

15.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534
High School Phy sics - ResonanceHigh School Phy sics - Resonance
Resonance: A brief overview of resonance, targeted toward introd uctory physics students.
Harmonic Wave Functions
When vibrations in the string are simple harmonic motion, wa ves are described by harmonic wave functions.
Express relationship between the wave number and the waveleng th, and frequency and period, of the harmonic wave
function
In this Atom we shall consider wave motion resulting fro m harmonic vibrations and discuss harmonic transvers e wave in the
context of a string. We assume there is no loss of energy during transmission of wave along the string. This can be approximated
when the string is light and taught. In such condition, if we oscillate the free end in harmonic manner, the n the vibrations in the
string are simple harmonic motion (SHM), perpendicular to the direction of wave motion. The amplitude of wave form remains
intact through its passage along the string.
We know that a traveling wave function representing moti on in x-direction has the form:
learning objectives

15.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534(Read our Atom on “Mathematical Representation of a T raveling Wave. “) For the case of harmonic vibration, we represent
harmonic wave motion in terms of either harmonic sine or co sine function:
Harmonic Oscillatory Properties
Each particle (or a small segment of string) vibrate s in SHM. The particle attains the greatest speed at th e mean position and
reduces to zero at extreme positions. On the other h and, acceleration of the particle is greatest at ex treme positions and zero at the
mean position. The vibration of particle is represented b y a harmonic sine or cosine function. For x=0:
Harmonic Waves: Harmonic waves are described by sinusoidal functions. The wa velength is equal to linear distance between
repetitions of transverse disturbance or phase.
Clearly, the displacement in y-direction is described by the bounded sine or cosine function. The importa nt point here is to realize
that oscillatory attributes (like time period, angula r and linear frequency) of wave motion is same as that of vibration of a particle in
transverse direction.
We know that time period in SHM is equal to time taken by the particle to complete one oscillation. It mean s that displacement of
the particle from the mean position at a given position su ch as x=0 has same value after time period “T” for:
. Therefore,.
Similarly, displacement of the particle from the mea n position at a given time such as t=0 has same valu e by change the position by
“, where. k is called wavenumber.
We can determine speed of the wave by noting that wav e travels a linear distance ” in one period (T). Th us, speed of wave is given
by:
Refraction
Refraction is a surface phenomenon that occurs as the change in direction of a wave due to a change in its medium.
Formulate the law of conservation of energy and momentum as it is applied to refraction
Refraction is the change in direction of a wave due to a change in its medium. Essentially, it is a surfac e phenomenon—mainly in
governance to the law of conservation of energy and m omentum. Due to change of medium, the phase velocity o f the wave is
changed but its frequency remains constant (most com monly observed when a wave passes from one medium to another at any
angle other than 90° or 0°). Refraction of light is the most commonly observed phenomenon, but any type o f wave can refract when
it interacts with a medium (e.g., when sound waves pass from one medium into another or when water waves move i nto water of a
different depth). Refraction is described by Snell’s law, which states that for a given pair of media and a wave with a single
frequency, the ratio of the sines of the angle of in cidence θ1 and angle of refraction θ2 is equivalent to the ratio of phase velocities
(v /v) in the two media, or equivalently, to the opposite ratio of the indices of refraction (n /n):learning objectives
1 2 2 1

15.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534In optics, refraction is a phenomenon that often occ urs when waves travel from a medium with a given refrac tive index to a
medium with another at an oblique angle. For example, a light ray will refract as it enters and leaves glass, assuming there is a
change in refractive index. A ray traveling along th e normal (perpendicular to the boundary) will change speed, but not direction.
Refraction still occurs in this case. Understanding of ref raction led to the invention of lenses and the refracting telescope.
Refraction can be seen when looking into a bowl of wat er, as illustrated in. Air has a refractive index of ab out 1.0003, and water
has a refractive index of about 1.33. If a person lo oks at a straight object, such as a pencil or straw, pl aced partially in the water at a
slant, the object appears to bend at the water’s sur face. This is due to the bending of light rays as they move from the water to the
air. Once the rays reach the eye, the eye traces them back as straight lines (lines of sight). The lines o f sight (shown as dashed lines)
intersect at a higher position than where the actual rays originated (causing the pencil to appear highe r and the water to appear
shallower than they actually are).
Refraction in Water: An object (in this case a pencil) partially immersed in wat er looks bent due to refraction: the light waves
from X change direction and so seem to originate at Y. (More a ccurately, for any angle of view, Y should be vertically a bove X, and
the pencil should appear shorter, not longer as shown.)
Diffraction
Diffraction refers to various phenomena such as the b ending of waves around obstacles and the spreading ou t of waves past small
openings.
Describe the phenomenon of diffraction, according to c lassical physics
Diffraction refers to various phenomena which occur whe n a wave encounters an obstacle. In classical physics, t he diffraction
phenomenon is described as the apparent bending of wa ves around small obstacles and the spreading out of waves past small
openings. Similar effects occur when a light wave travels through a medium with a varying refractive index, or a sound wave
travels through one with varying acoustic impedance.
Diffraction occurs with all waves, including sound waves, water waves, and electromagnetic waves such as visible light, X-rays
and radio waves. As physical objects have wave-like prop erties (at the atomic level), diffraction also occur s with matter and can be
studied according to the principles of quantum mechan ics.
Diffraction effects are generally most pronounced for waves whose wavelengths are roughly similar to the dime nsions of the
diffracting objects. If the obstructing object provi des multiple, closely-spaced openings, a complex patt ern of varying intensity can
result. This is due to the superposition, or interfe rence, of different parts of a wave that travel to t he observer by different paths. A
good example would be diffraction gratings.learning objectives

15.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534
Intensity Pattern: Intensity pattern formed on a screen by diffraction fro m a square aperture.
The effects of diffraction are often seen in everyd ay life. The most striking examples of diffraction a re those involving light. For
example, the closely spaced tracks on a CD or DVD act as a diffraction grating to form the familiar rainbow pat tern seen when
looking at a disk. This principle can be extended t o engineer a grating with a structure such that it wil l produce any diffraction
pattern desired, like the hologram on a credit card. Diffraction in the atmosphere by small particles ca n cause a bright ring to be
visible around a bright light source like the sun or the moon. A shadow of a solid object, using light from a compact source, shows
small fringes near its edges. The speckle pattern wh ich is observed when laser light falls on an optical ly rough surface is also a
diffraction phenomenon. All these effects are a consequ ence of the fact that light propagates as a wave.
Mathematical Represenation of a Traveling Wave
The most general solution of the wave equation is gi ven as, where f and g are arbitrary
functions.
Formulate solution of the wave equation for a traveling wav e
In general, one dimensional waves satisfy the 1D wave equation:
For example, a sinusoidal form
is a solution of the wave equation for. In this atom, we will obtain a general mathematical form of a traveling wa ve.
Solving the Wave Equation
First, we notice that any function u(x,t) satisfying
is a solution to the wave equation. To show this, note that
In the middle, we used the equation 1 along with the fact tha t partial derivatives are interchangeable.
To solve the equation 1, let’s introduce new variables: Fr om the chain rules,learning objectives

15.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534With the change of variables, the equation 1 become s for the equation with the “+” sign and for the “-” sign.
Therefore, we see that
where f and g are arbitrary functions. Converting back to the original variables of x and t, we conclude tha t the solution of the
original wave equation is
f(x+ct) represents a left-going traveling wave, while g (x-ct) represents a right-going traveling wave. In oth er words, solutions of the
1D wave equation are sums of a left traveling functio n f and a right traveling function g. “Traveling” m eans that the shape of these
individual arbitrary functions with respect to x stays constant, however the functions are translated left and right with time at the
speed c. This solution was derived by Jean le Rond d’Alembe rt.
Boundary Condition
Any function that contains “x+ct” or “x-ct” can be a solution of the wave equation. The wave function is fur ther determined by
taking additional information, usually given as bou ndary conditions and some others. For example, in the case of a string in a
guitar, we know that the wave has zero amplitude at bot h ends: u(x=0)=u(x=L)=0. Also, the shape of the funct ion at an instance can
be provided to determine the function.
Wave Equation in Two Dimensions: A solution of the wave equation in two dimensions with a zero-displacement boundary
condition along the entire outer edge.
Energy, Intensity, Frequency, and Amplitude
The energy in a wave is proportional to its amplitude sq uared and the intensity of a wave is defined as power per unit area.
Describe relationship between the energy and the amplitu de, and energy and intensity, of a wave
All waves carry energy. This is seen in practical applicatio ns (e.g., in medicine), as well as effects in nature. Some ex amples of are:
ultrasound used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strain s
a laser beam to burn away malignant tissue
water waves that erode beaches
earthquakes that topple cities
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its ampli tude. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce large grou nd displacements, as
seen in. Loud sounds have higher pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source vibrations tha n soft sounds. Large
ocean breakers erode the shore more than small ones. More quantitatively, a wave is a displacement that is resisted by a restoring
force. The larger the displacement x, the larger th e force F=-kx needed to create it. Because work W is re lated to force multiplied
by distance (Fx) and energy is put into the wave by th e work done to create it, the energy in a wave is rela ted to amplitude. In fact,
a wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplit ude squared because:learning objectives

15.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534
Earthquake Destruction: The destructive effect of an earthquake is palpable e vidence of the energy carried in these waves. The
Richter scale rating of earthquakes is related to both t heir amplitude and the energy they carry.
The energy effects of a wave depend on time as well as amplitude. For example, the longer deep-heat ultrasoun d is applied, the
more energy it transfers. Therefore, power is more appr opriate than energy to describe the “intensity” of a wave. Waves can also be
concentrated or spread out. Sunlight, for example, can be focused to burn wood. Earthquakes “spread out” so th ey do less damage
the farther they spread from their source. In both cas es, changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All these pertinent
factors are included in the definition of intensity I as power (P) per unit area:
where P is the power carried by the wave through area A.
Energy vs. Frequency
In classic wave theory, energy of a wave doesn’t depend on the frequency of the wave. However, this is not the case in the
microscopic world, as shown in experiments on photoele ctric effects (see our Atom on “Photoelectric Effect”). As Einstein
postulated to explain photoelectric effects, a quantu m of light (photon) carries a specific amount of ene rgy proportional to the
frequency of light. Although you can increase the num ber of photons by increasing the intensity of a beam, the energy of individual
photons in the beam is determined by the frequency of the beam.
Key Points
Reflection is a wave phenomenon that changes the directi on of a wavefront at an interface between two different me dia so that
the wavefront returns into the medium from which it origi nated.
At the boundary, a wave must be continuous and there should be n o kinks in it.
By imposing boundary conditions, we can solve wave equat ion and get the form of the waves. Reflection and transm ission
coefficients are defined as ratio of reflected/transmitt ed amplitudes and the incoming amplitude.
The disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come tog ether—a phenomenon called superposition.
As a result of superposition of waves, inteference can be ob served. Interference is an effect caused by two or more waves.
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively.
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can var y from place
to place and time to time.
If two waves with the same amplitude and wavelength travel in opposite directions they alternate between construc tive and
destructive interference. The resultant looks like a wav e standing in place and, thus, is called a standing wave.
Nodes are points of no motion in standing waves. An antinod e is the location of maximum amplitude of a standing wave.
During an earthquake, buildings with a certain height ma y collapse more easily. This occurs when the building hei ght matches
the condition for setting up a standing wave for that partic ular height.
We represent harmonic wave motion in terms of either harmo nic sine or cosine function:.
k and ω in the harmonic wave functinon are related to wavelen gth and period as follows:
The speed of a harmonic wave is given by ω/k.

15.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534Refraction is mainly in governance to the law of conserva tion of energy and momentum. Due to change of medium, the p hase
velocity of the wave is changed but its frequency remains co nstant.
Refraction is described by Snell’s law, which states that fo r a given pair of media and a wave with a single frequency,
An object partially immersed in water looks bent due to refraction.
Diffraction is a wave phenomenon. It occurs with all waves, in cluding sound waves, water waves, and electromagnetic waves
such as visible light, X-rays and radio waves.
Diffraction effects are generally most pronounced for waves whose wavelengths are roughly similar to the dimensio ns of the
diffracting objects.
The effects of diffraction are often seen in everyday life. All these effects are a consequence of the fact that light propagates as a
wave.
Any function u(x,t) satisfying is a solution the wave e quation. To solve this new equation, we introduced new
variables.
The solutions of the 1D wave equation are sums of a left trav eling function and a right traveling function.
The wave function is further determined by taking addit ional information, usually given as boundary conditions a nd some
others.
The energy effects of a wave depend on the amplitude and duration (time) of the wave. Waves can also be concentrat ed or
spread out. Considering all these factors, intensity is d efined as power per unit area.
In the classical wave theory, energy of a wave doesn’t depe nd on the frequency of the wave. However, the energy of indivi dual
photons in a beam is determined by the frequency of the b eam.
Wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplitude squared.
Key Terms
boundary condition: A set of restraints at the boundaries, used to solve a differential equation.
superposition: The summing of two or more field contributions occupy ing the same space.
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
resonance: The increase in the amplitude of an oscillation of a sy stem under the influence of a periodic force whose frequency
is close to that of the system’s natural frequency.
simple harmonic motion: (SHM) — Oscillating motion (as of a pendulum) in which the acc eleration of the oscillator has an
equal magnitude but opposite direction to the displacement of it from the equilibrium position.
Snell’s law: A formula used to describe the relationship between the an gles of incidence and refraction.
refractive index: The ratio of the speed of light in air or vacuum to that in another medium.
wave equation: An important second-order linear partial differentia l equation for the description of waves such as sound waves,
light waves, and water waves.
Restoring force: If the system is perturbed away from the equilibrium, the re storing force will tend to bring the system back
toward equilibrium. The restoring force is a function onl y of position of the mass or particle. It is always direct ed back toward
the equilibrium position of the system.An example is the acti on of a spring. An idealized spring exerts a force that is
proportional to the amount of deformation of the spring f rom its equilibrium length, exerted in a direction to oppo se the
deformation. Pulling the spring to a greater length causes i t to exert a force that brings the spring back toward its equilibrium
length. The amount of force can be determined by multipl ying the spring constant of the spring by the amount o f stretch.
ultrasound: Sound with a frequency greater than the upper limit of h uman hearing; approximately 20 kilohertz.
photoelectric effects: In photoelectric effects, electrons are emitted from ma tter (metals and non-metallic solids, liquids or
gases) as a consequence of their absorption of energy fro m electromagnetic radiation.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS

15.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
boundary condition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/boundary%20condition. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resonance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resonance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

15.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. September 17, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Snell's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Snell's%20law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
refractive index. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/refractive_index. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

15.6.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
boundary condition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/boundary%20condition. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave%20equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license

15.6.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14534Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42250/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Restoring force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Restoring%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
photoelectric effects. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photoelectric%20effects. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/ultrasound. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42250/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

15.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1560015.7: Waves on Strings
Calculate the speed of a wave on a string
When studying waves, it is helpful to use a string to o bserve the physical properties of waves visually. Imag ine you are holding one
end of a string, and the other end is secured and th e string is pulled tight. Now, if you were to flick the string either up and down.
The wave that occurs due to this motion is called a transverse wave. A transverse wave is defined as a wave whe re the movement of
the particles of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of the wave. Figure 1 sh ows this in a diagram. In
this case, the medium through which the waves propagate is the rope. The wave traveled from one end to the ot her, while the rope
moved up and down.
Figure 1: In transverse waves, the media the wave is traveling in move s perpendicular to the direction of the wave.
Wave Properties
Transverse waves have what are called peaks and troughs. The peak is the crest, or top point of the wave and the trough is the
valley or bottom point of the wave. Refer to Figure 2 f or a visual representation of these terms.The ampli tude is the maximum
displacement of a particle from its equilibrium posi tion.Wavelength, usually denoted with a lambda (λ) an d measured in meters, is
the distance from either one peak to the next peak, or one trough to the next trough.Period, usually deno ted as T and measured in
seconds, is the time it takes for two successive peaks, or one wavelength, to pass through a fixed point.Fre quency, f, is the number
of wavelengths that pass through a given point in 1 second. Fr equency is measured by taking the reciprocal of a perio d:
Figure 2: Peaks are the top most points of the waves and troughs are the bottom, or valleys of the waves.
Speed of a Wave on a String
Velocity is found by dividing the distance traveled by the time it took to travel that distance. In wave s, this is found by dividing the
wavelength by the period: v=λTv=λTWe can take the inverse proportionality to period and frequency and apply it to this situation:
Speed of a Wave on a Vibrating String
Another example of waves on strings are of the waves on vibrating strings, such as in musical instruments. Pi anos and guitars both
use vibrating strings to produce music. In these cas es, the frequency is what characterizes the pitch an d therefore the note. The
speed of a wave on this kind of string is proportiona l to the square root of the tension in the string an d inversely proportional to the
square root of the linear density of the string:
Reflections
When transverse waves in strings meet one end, they a re reflected, and when the incident wave meets the refl ected wave,
interference occurs.learning objectives

15.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15600Explain when a standing wave occurs
Overview
Imagine you are holding one end of a string, and the other end is secured and the string is pulled tight. Now, if you were to flick the
string either up and down. The wave that occurs due t o this motion is called a transverse wave. A transverse wave is defined as a
wave where the movement of the particles of the mediu m is perpendicular to the direction of the propagat ion of the wave. shows
this in a diagram. In this case, the medium through wh ich the waves propagate is the rope. The wave traveled from one end to the
other, while the rope moved up and down.
Transverse Wave: Diagram of a transverse wave. The wave motion moves perpendic ular to the medium it is traveling in.
Properties of Waves
Transverse waves have what are called peaks and troughs. Th e peak is the crest, or top point of the wave and the tro ugh is the
valley or bottom point of the wave.
The amplitude is the maximum displacement of a particle from its equilibrium position.
Wavelength, usually denoted with a lambda (λ) and measured in meters, is the distance from either one peak to the next p eak, or
one trough to the next trough.
Period, usually denoted as T and measured in seconds, is t he time it takes for two successive peaks, or one wavelength, to pass
through a fixed point.
Frequency, f, is the number of wavelengths that pass throug h a given point in 1 second. Frequency is measured by takin g the
reciprocal of a period:
Transverse waves can occur while being fixed at the end poi nt or while being free at the end point.
Reflections of Transverse Waves
The way in which a transverse wave reflects depends on whether or not it is fixed at both ends. First we will l ook at waves that are
fixed at both ends:
shows an image of a transverse wave that is reflected fr om a fixed end. When a transverse wave meets a fixed e nd, the wave is
reflected, but inverted. This swaps the peaks with the t roughs and the troughs with the peaks.
Transverse Wave With a Fixed End Point: A transverse wave that is fixed at the end point. The refle cted wave is inverted.
is an image of a transverse wave on a string that meet s a free end. The wave is reflected, but unlike a tr ansverse wave with a fixed
end, it is not inverted.
Transverse Wave With a Free End: When a transverse wave meets a free end, it is reflected.learning objectives

15.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15600Standing Waves
When either of the two scenarios of wave reflection o ccurs, the incident wave meets the reflected wave. The se waves move past
each other in opposite directions, causing interferenc e. When these two waves have the same frequency, the p roduct of this is called
the standing waves. Standing waves appear to be standing still, hence the name. To understand how standing waves occur, we can
analyze them further: When the incident wave and ref lected wave first meet, both waves have an amplitude is zero. As the waves
continue to move past each other, they continue to inter fere with each other either constructively of destructive ly.
As you may remember from previous atoms, when waves are completely in phase and interfere with each other co nstructively, they
are amplified, and when they are completely out of p hase and interfere destructively they cancel out. As t he waves continue to
move past each other, and are reflected from the oppo site end, they continue to interfere both ways, and a standing wave is
produced.
Every point in the medium containing a standing wave oscillates up and down and the amplitude of the oscil lations depends on the
location of the point. When we observe standing waves on strings, it looks like the wave is not moving and standing still. The
principle of standing waves is the basis of resonance a nd how many musical instruments get their sound. The p oints in a standing
wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. The points which reach the maximum osc illation height are
called antinodes.
Key Points
The type of wave that occurs in a string is called a tran sverse wave. In a transverse wave, the wave direction is per pendicular
the the direction that the string oscillates in.
The period of a wave is indirectly proportional to the freq uency of the wave:.
The speed of a wave is proportional to the wavelength and ind irectly proportional to the period of the wave:.
This equation can be simplified by using the relationship b etween frequency and period:.
When a transverse wave on a string is fixed at the end point, the reflected wave is inverted from the incident wave. When a
transverse wave on a string is free at the end point, the r eflected wave is not inverted from the incident wave.
A standing wave occurs when an incident wave meets a reflec ted wave on a string.
The points in a standing wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. The points which reach the
maximum oscillation height are called antinodes.
Every point in the medium containing a standing wave osc illates up and down and the amplitude of the oscillations depends on
the location of the point.
A standing wave has some points that remain flat due to de structive interference. These are called antinodes.
The points on a standing wave that have reached maximum oscillation do so from constructive interference, and ar e called
nodes.
Key Terms
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
oscillate: To swing back and forth, especially if with a regular rhythm.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
standing wave: A wave form which occurs in a limited, fixed medium in s uch a way that the reflected wave coincides with the
produced wave. A common example is the vibration of the strings on a musical stringed instrument.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution

15.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15600Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave%23Waves_on_strings. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
oscillate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
standing wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/standing_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
15.7: Waves on Strings is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
16: Sound
This page titled 16: Sound is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.16.1: Introduction
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
16.5: Further TopicsTopic hierarchy

16.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453616.1: Introduction
Explain how humans can characterize sound
Before delving too far into the physics of calculati ng sound waves (studying things like the Doppler Effect, for example), lets
address some basics of sound. Sound is a wave—a longitud inal wave of pressure that travels through compressibl e medias (i.e.,
solid, liquid, gaseous, or made of plasma). There is no sound in a vacuum; by definition, a vacuum is a spac e free of any particles
or matter. Thus there in a vacuum, there is no media t hrough which sound waves can travel. Following are some ch aracteristics of
sound:
Sound travels in longitudinal waves. When drawn these are als o called sinusoidal waves, a visual example of which is shown in
(we will cover this in more detail in a different section).
Sound waves have frequency; that is, the pitch of sounds goes u p or down.
The amplitude of a sound determines its volume (loudn ess).
Tone is a measure of the quality of a sound wave.
Sound travels faster in a hot meduim, or in a solid. It also travels faster at sea level (where air pressure is higher).
Sound intensity is the energy transmitted over a certain area. Intensity is a measure of the sound’s frequency.
Ultrasound uses sound waves with high frequencies to see thin gs normally hard to detect, like tumors. Animals, like bats an d
dolphins, use ultrasound (echolocation) to navigate and locate things. Ships also use a similar technique (known as SONAR) to
locate things underwater. (This point will be discussed f urther in a more advanced Atom.)
Sound Perception
Every sound wave has properties that define its frequenc y, such as wavelength, amplitude and intensity. Calculati ng these
properties is outside the scope of this atom and will be addressed later. For now, it is important to know t he basics of sound. As
with light waves, sound frequencies have a range. Each living creature has a different level of sound per ception. For example,
consider the following examples of sound ranges (in Hz, He rtz):
Humans 20 – 20,000 Hz
Dogs 50 – 45,000 Hz
Bats 20 – 120,000 Hz
By this comparison, humans have a relatively low sound p erception.
Sound Speed
Breaking the Sound Barrier: This familiar image is of a plane that is moving faster than the speed of sound.
As mentioned previously, the speed at which sound trave ls depends on the media through which the sound is tra veling. It is much
faster in a solid than in a liquid or gas. The general for mula for calculating the speed of sound is given as:
where K is the coefficient of stiffness of the materia l (also called the Bulk modulus) and p is the densit y of the material. We will
examine this further in another section. Generally, t he expression ‘faster than the speed of sound’ refe rs to 344 m/s. is an image
demonstrating a plane moving faster than the speed o f sound. This general measurement is taken at sea le vel—at a temperature of
21 degrees Celsius under normal atmospheric conditions.learning objectives

16.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536Frequency of Sound Waves
Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating even t per unit of time. The perception of frequency is called pitch.
Relate frequency with the wavelength and speed of sound
Sound waves, like all other waves, have a property calle d frequency. Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event
per unit of time. The perception of frequency is called pitch.
Frequency is dependent on wavelength and the speed of sound. It is calculated with the following equation:
This figure,, shows how the frequency is connected to wavelen gth.
Frequency: A sound wave emanates from a source vibrating at a fre quency f, propagates at v, and has a wavelength λ.
Alternatively, you can use the frequency and the wavel ength to find the speed of sound in a specific mediu m. Remember that sound
travels at different speeds in different mediums; so und moves fastest through a solid. The following equat ion is used to find the
specific speed of sound, and is often easier to use than t he standard speed of sound equation: vs=f∗λv_s=f*\lambda
A period is the duration of one cycle of a repeating event, and is the reciprocal or inverse of the frequ ency. The following animation
shows different frequencies and their periods, from lowes t to highest.
Frequency Animation: Three flashing lights, from lowest frequency (top) t o highest frequency (bottom). f is the frequency in hertz
(Hz); or the number of cycles per second. T is the period in seconds (s); or the number of seconds per cycle. T and f are reciprocals.learning objectives

16.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536Hertz
The SI unit of frequency is called a Hertz, denoted Hz. A hertz is defined as the number of cycles per secon d. For example, 100 Hz
signifies 100 cycles per second.
Different species can hear different frequency range s. Humans can only hear from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz, while dog s can hear up to
60,000 Hz. Bats can hear the highest ranges, up to 1 20,000 Hz. Bats use this super hearing, or ultrasound, t o locate objects and
prey. By bouncing sound waves off of another object and hearing how long it takes for the sound to echo back to them, they are
able to approximate the distance between themselves and the object. This is called echolocation.
Sound Production: Vibrating String and Air Columns
Sound can be produced by many different devices. A vib rating string or air column can both create music a nd have unique
properties.
Calculate the frequency of the sound wave produced by the string and a column of air
Sound can be produced in many ways, by many different instruments and devices. A vibrating string or air colu mn can both make
interesting music and it is good to understand the physic s behind both.
Vibrating Strings
There are many instruments that produce sound based on strings. Guitars, cellos, pianos and many other exam ples. These sounds
are produced by standing waves in the strings. These wav es and their frequencies are constant, and therefor th e sound and pitch
produced by them is constant. This figure shows a vis ual of a standing wave in a string: The speed of the wave is proportional to
the root of the string tension, and inversely proport ional to the root of the string density, shown by the following equation
Pitch, and the way the sound is perceived depends on t he frequency of the sound wave. Using the wave velocity, you can find the
frequency using this equation:, where L is the length of t he string.
Standing Waves in a String: Vibration, standing waves in a string. The fundamental and the first 6 overtones form a harmonic
series.
Air Columns
Many instruments make music by causing a vibration t o a column of air in a resonator. These are usually c alled wind instruments.
Examples of these are flutes, recorders, and saxophones. They are either open at both ends, or closed at one end and open at thelearning objectives

16.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536other. The pitch of the sound is a function of the frequency. There are many factors that go into findi ng the frequency. Lets start
with the tubes that are closed at one end and open at the other.
Closed Air Tubes:The maximum displacement of the air occurs at the open end of the tube, and is called the antinode. The air
movement is constrained at the closed end, and there is no displacement, and this is called the node. The distance from the node to
the antinode is 1/4 the length of one wavelength, and equal to the length of the tube, as shown in this equa tion: This can also
be seen in this figure: The frequency is equal to the speed of sound in the air divided by the wavelength, or:, where v
is the speed of sound in the air, which we learned how to fin d in a previous atom.
An Air column in a tube closed at one end: The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube cl osed at one end. All have
maximum air displacements at the open end and none at the closed end.
Open Air tubes:Air tubes can also be open at both ends. They are very similar to the ones we talked about abov e, but there is an
antinode at both ends, since they are both open, as sho wn in this figure: Since there is an antinode at both ends, we can see that the
length of a wavelength is found by this equation: And the frequency can be found in the following equation:
Quality of Sound
Sound quality is an assessment of accuracy or enjoyabilit y of how a sound is perceived.
Identify factors that influence the sound quality of a repr oduction of music
Sound quality is an assessment of accuracy or enjoyabi lity of how a sound is perceived. It can be measured o bjectively or
subjectively. What is the difference? Objective measu rement is taken when tools are used to gauge accurac y. Subjective
measurement is more of an opinion. When human listen ers hear a sound and compare it to another sound th ey have heard, and
decide which one they enjoy more, this is a subjective meas urement of sound quality.
Music Sound Quality
The quality of sound of live music is referred to as its tone. What makes this tone? Why does the same not e being played on a piano
sound different from that note played on a flute, o r a guitar? When you hear a note, you mostly hear th e fundamental frequency.
But there are other harmonics present. You hear these, but they are much, much fainter than the fundamenta l, or main frequency.
These are called overtones.
Each instrument has a different mix of these overton es, and this is why the sounds of similar notes sound di fferent. The quality of
this sound depends on these overtones to not take over what you are hearing. The overtones and fundamental frequency combine to
make a unique frequency that you hear, which is illustrat ed in.w
Skills to Develop

16.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536
Sound Frequencies: The quality of a tone depends on its mixture of harmon ics.
Reproduced Sound Quality
The sound quality of a reproduction of music depends o n many factors. These include:
Recording equipment
Processing and mastering
Reproduction equipment
Listening environment
When you listen to a recording of music, you are hear ing not only the music itself, but also any interfere nce that may have been
mistakenly recorded as well. The simplest form of digital ly-stored audio is PCM.
As samples are placed closer together in time, higher fre quencies can be reproduced. According to the sampling t heorem, any
signal with bandwidth B can be perfectly described by more than 2B samples per second. Audio must be sampled at above 4 0kHz:
44.1kHz for CD recordings and 48kHz for DVD recordings.
The amount of space required to store PCM depends on the number of bits per sample, the number of sample s per second, and the
number of channels. For CD audio, this is 44,100 samples per second, 16 bits per sample, and 2 channels for stereo audio leading
to 1,411,200 bits per second.
Speed of Sound
The speed of sound is is the distance traveled in a unit of time by a sound wave through an elastic medi um, and is usually given as
344 m/s.
Calculate the speed of sound from the properties of the me dia
Speed of Soud
The speed of sound is is the distance traveled in a uni t of time by a sound wave through an elastic medium. This medium can be a
solid, liquid, gas or even plasma. The speed of sound is dependent on the properties of the media the soun d is travelling through.
The general value given for the speed of sound is the speed of a sound wave in air, at sea level, at norma l atmospheric pressure; that
number is 344 m/s. However, this number is not constant. Sound travels faster in a solid than in a liquid, and faster in a liquid that
in a gas.
Types of Sound Waves: Compression and Shear
There are two different kinds of sound waves: compression waves and shear waves. Compression waves can travel through any
media, but shear waves can only travel through solids. The speed of a compression wave is determined by th e media’s compression
capacity, shear modulus, and density, while the speed of the shear wave is only determined by the shear modul us and density. TheSkills to Develop

16.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536shear modulus is a measurement of the elasticity or rigidity of a material. Calculating this is outside o f the scope of this atom, but
there are tables which tell you its value for materials.
Calculating the Speed of Sound
The speed of sound is usually denoted by cc, and a gen eral equation can be used to calculate it. This is c alled the Newton-Laplace
equation:c=√Kρc=KρK is the coefficient of stiffness, and p is the density of the media. From this equation, it is easy to see that the
speed of sound will increase with stiffness and decrea se with density. This is a very general equation, the re are more specific
derivations, for example:
The speed of sound in air at sea level is given by the follo wing equation: T is the temperature in Kelvin.
Mach Number
You may have heard the term Mach number in relation to speed of space craft or jets before. This is a ratio of an object’s speed in
relation to the speed of sound. The Mach number is gi ven by the following, dimensionless equation: – Mach numberv –
Velocity of object a – Speed of sound in medium. If s omething is travelling at the speed of sound, that wou ld make the equation
equal to 1, and can be denoted as Mach 1. shows a jet that is travelling at the speed of sound or faster. The vapor cone is made just
before it reaches the speed of sound and is caused by a sudd en drop in air pressure.
Faster than the Speed of Sound: This is a jet that is just about to break the sound barrie r.
Key Points
Sound travels in longitudinal sinusoidal waves.
Humans can characterize sound by frequency, amplitude and tone.
The speed at which sound travels depends on the media thr ough which the sound is traveling. It can be calculated using:
, where K is the coefficient of stiffness of the material (als o called the Bulk modulus) and p is the density of the
material.
Frequency is dependent on wavelength and the speed of sound. It is calculated with the following equation:
A period is the duration of one cycle of a repeating eve nt, and is the reciprocal or inverse of the frequency.
The SI unit of frequency is called a Hertz, denoted Hz. A h ertz is defined as the number of cycles per second. For exa mple, 100
Hz signifies 100 cycles per second.
The frequency, and therefore the pitch of a string in strument depends on the velocity of the sound wave and th e length of the
string. The frequency is found by:
Sound in a tube of air that is closed at one end is found b y the following equation:.
Sound in a tube of air that is open at one end is found by the following equation:.
Objective measurement is taken when tools are used to gauge accuracy. Subjective measurement is more of an opinion. When
human listeners hear a sound and compare it to another so und they have heard, and decide which one they enjoy mor e, this is a
subjective measurement of sound quality.
The quality of sound of live music is referred to as its tone. When you hear a note, you mostly hear the fundament al frequency.
But there are other harmonics present. You hear these, bu t they are much, much fainter than the fundamental, or main frequency.
These are called overtones.
The sound quality of a reproduction of music depends o n many factors. These include: recording equipment, proc essing and
mastering,reproduction equipment, and even listening envi ronment.
Sound can travel through any compressible material. Thes e media can be solid, liquid, gas, or even plasma.

16.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536The speed of sound is dependent on the properties of the material it travels through. It will travel faster throug h a solid than a
liquid, and faster through a liquid than a gas.
The general number given for the speed of sound is calc ulated at sea level, in air, at normal atmospheric pressure. T hat value is
344 m/s.
Key Terms
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
Hertz: Measurement of sound frequency.
media: General term for different types of materials.
period: The duration of one cycle in a repeating event.
node: Point on a wave where there is no displacement.
antinode: A region of maximum amplitude situated between adjacen t nodes of a vibrating body, such as a string
Subjective measurement: Based on a comparison to a previous experience, opini on.
Objective measurement: Taken by tools to gauge accuracy.
elasticity: The property by virtue of which a material deformed und er the load can regain its original dimensions when
unloaded
kelvin: in the International System of Units, the base unit of thermo dynamic temperature; 1/273.16 of the thermodynamic
temperature of the triple point of water; symbolized as K
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
media. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/media. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vacuum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vacuum. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/hertz--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Hertz. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hertz. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. Se ptember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
period. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/period. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/hertz--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public

16.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Wind instrument. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_instrument. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/node. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
antinode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/antinode. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound quality. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_quality. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. September 17, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/subjectivemeasurement. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/objective-measurement.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. December 23, 2012. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

16.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14536Speed of sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_sound. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
elasticity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elasticity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Shear modulus. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shear_modulus. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mach number. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mach_number. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. Se ptember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kelvin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kelvin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. December 23, 2012. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 16.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

16.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453716.2: Sound Intensity and Level
Calculate sound intensity from power
Overview of Intensity
Sound Intensity is the power per unit area carried by a wav e. Power is the rate that energy is transferred by a wave.
Sound Intensity and Decibels Distinctly De ned, DuSound Intensity and Decibels Distinctly De ned, Du
Sound Intensity and Decibels
The equation used to calculate this intensity, I, is:I W here P is the power going through the area, A. The SI un it for intensity is
watts per meter squared or,Wm2Wm2. This is the general intensi ty formula, but lets look at it from a sound perspective.
Sound Intensity
Sound intensity can be found from the following equati on:. Δp – change in pressure, or amplitudeρ – densi ty of the
material the sound is traveling throughv – speed of observed sound.Now we have a way to calculate the sound intensity, so lets
talk about observed intensity. The pressure variati on, amplitude, is proportional to the intensity, So it is safe to say that the larger
your sound wave oscillation, the more intense your sound wi ll be. This figure shows this concept.learning objectives
w

16.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14537
Sound Intensity: Graphs of the gauge pressures in two sound waves of differen t intensities. The more intense sound is produced by
a source that has larger-amplitude oscillations and has gr eater pressure maxima and minima. Because pressures are hi gher in the
greater-intensity sound, it can exert larger forces on the objects it encounters
Although the units for sound intensity are technical ly watts per meter squared, it is much more common for it to be referred to as
decibels, dB. A decibel is a ratio of the observed amp litude, or intensity level to a reference, which is 0 dB. The equation for this is:
\(\mathrm{β=10 \log _{10} \frac{I}{I_0} β}\) – decibel levelI – Observed intensityI – Reference inte nsity.For more on decibels,
please refer to the Decibel Atom.
For a reference point on intensity levels, below are a list of a few different intensities:
0 dB, I = 1×10 –> Threshold of human hearing
10 dB, I = 1×10 –> Rustle of leaves
60 dB, I = 1×10 –> Normal conversation
100 dB, I = 1×10 –> Loud siren
160 dB, I = 1×10 –> You just burst your eardrums
Human Perception of Sound
The study of human perception of sound is called psycho acoustics.
Explain how frequency is perceived by humans
The study of the human perception of sound is calle d psychoacoustics. Many factors go into hearing, inclu ding wave properties,
sensory and brain processes. First, the wave has to be made, and it has a specific wavelength and frequency. Then the sound wave
reaches the human ear, and is processed through many areas. Finally, the sound wave makes it through the ea r and to the human
brain, where even more action happens. You might thin k that when something makes a noise that you hear it i nstantaneously but, in
reality, it goes through many steps first.
Wave Properties
We are not going to go into too much detail about t he wave’s physical properties, since it is out of the sco pe of this atom, but
remember:
Frequency is perceived by humans as pitch;
The sound intensity is the amplitude;
Humans can only hear a specific range of sound, usually from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz;
The factors that go into a sound are its intensity, frequenc y and overtones (which are like interference, or background no ises).0
-12
-11
-6
-2
Skills to Develop

16.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14537The Human Ear
The human ear is made up of three main sections, as shown i n:
The Human Ear: A detailed diagram of the human ear.
1. The outer ear
2. The middle ear
3. The inner ear
We are going to start where a sound wave would start a nd follow it on its journey from outside your ear al l the way to your brain.
When you look at someone’s ear, you are really only se eing the pinna, the outer most portion of the ear. I t collects and focuses the
sound wave. The wave then goes through your ear canal to the eardrum. The sound waves cause the eardrum to v ibrate. Then we
are in the middle ear, which has three very, very sma ll bones: the malleus, incus and stapes. These can also be referred to as the
hammer, anvil and stirrup, respectively. These three bo nes transmit the signal to the elliptical window. Thi s is the beginning of the
inner ear. The sound waves are then transmitted from the elliptical window through the inner ear’s semicircu lar canals, the cochlea,
and the audio nerve, which is filled with fluid. This fluid is what allows the body to detect movements an d maintain balance. Your
cochlea is shaped like a snail, and is full of teeny tiny hairs. These hairs vibrate differently depending on the frequencies. These
vibrations release electrical impulses to the audito ry nerve and are then sent to your brain, where they are understood as sound. So
while this seems to happen very quickly, sound waves have t o travel a long way before you ever hear anything!
Decibels
The decibel is a logarithmic unit used to quantify sound levels, by comparing a physical quantity to a reference le vel.
Identify how decibel is quantified in acoustics
The decibel, dB, is commonly used to quantify sound levels, although it is not a unit of sound, but a un it of pressure. The decibel is
a logarithmic unit that indicates the ratio if a phy sical quantity to a reference level. It is one tenth of a Bel, which was named after
the inventor of the telephone, Alexander Graham Bell. The word decibell comes from the prefix, deci, that is 1/10 of the word it
precedes For more information on how to convert units, refer to the unit conversion atom. Although the decib el can be used to talk
about a number of different subjects, in this atom we are going to cover its use in acoustics and sound level.
In acoustics, the decibel is quantified relative to a reference which has been set at a sound pressure le vel of 20 micropascals, and is
called a 0 dB. This reference level is a typical th reshold of human hearing perception. The following eq uation is used to calculate
the sound pressure level, or amplitude: s is the refe rence pressure which is 20 micropascals or 0 dB, and
s is the observed sound pressure.The human ear has a st andard sound threshold of 120 dB, which expressed loga rithmically is
around 10. This is a standard threshold, but it also depends on frequency. Loudness is a measure of soun d intensity takingSkills to Develop
o

16.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14537frequency into account, and is called a A-weighted dec ibel, dB(A), or a phon. This figure shows The Fletcher Mu nson Chart, which
demonstrates the different sound frequencies and decibe ls that the human ear perceives as the same.
The Fletcher Munson Chart: The Fletcher-Munson equal-loudness contours. Phons are l abelled in blue
Key Points
Sound intensity can be found from the following equation:. Δ p – change in pressure, or amplitude ρ – density of t he
material the sound is traveling through v – speed of obse rved sound.
The larger your sound wave oscillation, the more intense your sound will be.
Although the units for sound intensity are technically watts p er meter squared, it is much more common for it to be referr ed to
as decibels, dB.
Frequency is perceived by humans as pitch. The sound inte nsity is what humans can hear, and is generally only a specifi c range
of sound, usually from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. The factors tha t go into a sound are its intensity, frequency and overtones (which
are like interference or background noises).
Your ear is made up of three major sections: the inner, mi ddle and outer ear.
Your cochlea, which is in your inner ear, not only transm its sound waves to your brain, but also contains a liquid th at helps
humans maintain their balance.
In acoustics, the decibel is quantified relative to a r eference which has been set at a sound pressure level of 20 micropascals,
and is called a 0 dB.
The following equation is used to calculate the sound pres sure level, or amplitude:. is the
reference pressure which is 20 micropascals or 0 dB, and s is the observed sound pressure.
The human ear has a standard sound threshold of 120 dB, which expressed logarithmically is around 1012. This is a standard
threshold, but it also depends on frequency. Loudness is a me asure of sound intensity taking frequency into account, and is
called a A-weighted decibel, dB(A), or a phon.
Key Terms
decibel: A common measure of sound intensity that is one tenth of a b el on the logarithmic intensity scale. It is defined a s
, where and are the relative powers of the sound.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
eardrum: A thin membrane that separates the outer ear from the middle ear and transmits sound from the air to the mall eus.
cochlea: The complex, spirally coiled, tapered cavity of the i nner ear in which sound vibrations are converted into nerve
impulses.
phon: A unit of apparent loudness, equal in number to the intensity in decibels of a 1,000-hertz tone judged to be as loud as the
sound being measured.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikew

16.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14537CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
decibel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decibel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Psychoacoustics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychoacoustics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
cochlea. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cochlea. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
eardrum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/eardrum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. December 24,
2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physics Study Guide/Sound. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_Study_Guide/Sound.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Decibels. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Decibels. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
phon. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
decibel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decibel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. December 24,
2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physics Study Guide/Sound. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_Study_Guide/Sound.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 16.2: Sound Intensity and Level is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

16.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453816.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
Identify parameters required to calculate the frequency perceived by the observer moving towards the sound sour ce
In this atom, we are going to cover the Doppler effect, bu t specifically when the observer is the one in motion.
Sound and the Doppler Effect, Sound Lesson 2 of 2Sound and the Doppler Effect, Sound Lesson 2 of 2
Sound and the Doppler Effect: This video introduces sound waves. The first video describ es the basics of sound while the second
video looks at the Doppler Effect.learning objectives

16.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same frequ ency
as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
When the observer moves toward an sound source, each successive wave is encountered sooner than the previou s wave. Thus, it
will take just a little less time for the observer to hear the next one. Since the time between waves is redu ced, the frequency is
increased. Similarly if the observer is moving away from the sound source, the frequency, and therefor pitch, is decreased. While
the frequency will change whether the observer or sou nd source is moving, it is easier to show with the soun d source as the one
moving. This figure demonstrated the sound source mov ing:
Unless the observer is moving directly towards the sou nd source, this angle needs to be taken into account wh en calculating the
newly perceived frequency. Before we can start this calc ulation, we must know:
The original sound wave frequency, f
The velocity of the observer, v
The speed of sound in the air, or medium, c
The angle of the line of sight from the observer to t he sound source, θθ
Although the sound waves are being emitted from the so und source at a uniform frequency, the observer is p erceiving them
differently. The equation for the perceived wave fre quency is as follows: And the equation for v, is:
If the observer is moving towards the sound source, yo u are going to use a plus sign in front of the observ ers velocity. If the
observer is moving away from sound source, you are going t o use a negative sign in front of the observers velocity.
Moving Source
The Doppler effect is the apparent change in frequen cy of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to
each other.
Identify parameters required to calculate the perceived f requency of the sound source moving towards an observe r
The Doppler Effect —When the Sound Source is in Motion
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same fr equency0
r
r
learning objectives

16.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
When the sound source moves toward an observer, each s uccessive wave is emitted closer to the observer than the previous wave
and takes just a little less time to reach the observ er than the previous one. Since the time between waves i s reduced, the frequency
is increased. Similarly, if the sound source is moving away from the observer, the frequency (and therefore pitch) is decreased.
While the frequency will change whether the observer or sound source is moving, the effect is more easily demonstrated by the
sound source. This Doppler Effect is illustrated in.
Unless the observer is moving directly towards the sound source, this angle must be considered when calculat ing the newly
perceived frequency. Before attempting this calculati on, we must know:
The original sound wave frequency, f
The velocity of the observer, v
The speed of sound in the air, or medium, c
The angle of the line of sight from the observer to t he sound source,
Although the sound waves are being emitted from the so und source at a uniform frequency, the observer is p erceiving them
differently. The equation for the perceived wave frequenc y is as follows: And the equation for v, is:
If the sound source is moving towards the observer, a plus sign is used in front of the sound source’s v elocity. If the sound source is
moving away from the observer, then a negative sign is used in front of the sound source’s velocity.
General Case
The Doppler effect is the apparent change in frequen cy of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to
each other.
Compare change in the frequency due to the doppler effect when the object in motion moves towards or away from the
other object
Have you ever wondered why as a firetruck speeds by, th e sound of the siren seems to change? Or where the ver y distinguishable
sound at a race track comes from as the cars whisk by you? Well believe it or not, this is science! The nam e of this is called the
Doppler effect, named for the scientist who discovered it. His name was Christian Doppler, and he discovered i t around 1840 in
Prague. He preformed the experiment in two segments. In th e first experiment, he had a band play music while ab oard a moving
train, and would have observers listen to the music in a stationary location while the train went by. In the second experiment, he
had a group of observers sit aboard a moving train, wh ile the band played in a stationary location. In bo th cases, observers noticed
the phenomenon. The change in sound perception can be e xplained through relativity.
When the sound source moves toward an observer, each successive wave is emitted closer to the observer tha n the previous wave.
Thus, it will take just a little less time to reach th e observer than the previous one. Since the time bet ween waves is reduced, the
frequency is increased. Similarly if the sound source is moving away from the observer, the frequency, and ther efor pitch, is
decreased. If the observer is moving away from the sou nd source, the frequency will be lowered, and if the o bserver moves closer
to the sound source, the frequency is increased. Whil e the frequency will change whether the observer or so und source is moving, it
is easier to show with the sound source as the one moving. Thi s figure demonstrated the sound source moving:0
r
s
learning objectives

16.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same frequ ency
as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
In classical physics, where the speeds of source and th e receiver relative to the medium are lower than the velocity of waves in the
medium, the relationship between observed frequency (f) and emitted frequency (f) is given by: where c – velocity
of the sound waves in the medium, v – velocity of the observer or reciever, v – velocity of the sound source, and f – original
frequency of the sound waves.
The above formula assumes that the source is either di rectly approaching or receding from the observer. If the source approaches
the observer at an angle (but still with a constant v elocity), the observed frequency that is first heard is higher than the object’s
emitted frequency. Thereafter, there is a monotonic de crease in the observed frequency as it gets closer to the observer, through
equality when it is closest to the observer, and a con tinued monotonic decrease as it recedes from the obse rver. When the observer
is very close to the path of the object, the transi tion from high to low frequency is very abrupt. When the observer is far from the
path of the object, the transition from high to low frequ ency is gradual.
If the speeds and are small compared to the speed of the wave, the relationship between observed frequency and emitted frequency
is approximately
Observed frequency:
Change in frequency:
where is the velocity of the receiver relative to t he source: it is positive when the source and the rec eiver are moving towards
each other.
Sonic Booms
A sonic boom is the sound associated with the shock wav es created by an object traveling through the air fa ster than the speed of
sound.
Identify conditions that lead to a sonic boom and discus s its properties
Sonic Booms
A sonic boom is a sound associated with the shock waves c reated by an object traveling through the air faste r than the speed of
sound. It can be viewed as a Doppler effect on steroi ds; sonic booms generate an enormous amount of energ y and sound like
explosions. The first man-made object to ever create th is phenomenon was a bullwhip. The ‘crack’ of the whip i s a result of this
sonic boom. This version of a Doppler effect is demonstr ated by.o
r s 0
learning objectives

16.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538
Sonic Boom Gif: The sound source has now broken through the sound speed b arrier, and is traveling at 1.4 times the speed of
sound, (Mach 1.4). Since the source is moving faster (with a speed) than the sound waves it creates, it actually leads the advancing
wavefront. The sound source will pass by a stationary observe r (with a speed) before the observer actually hears the so und it
creates.
When the sound source passes through the air, it creat es a series of pressure waves. These waves are travellin g at the speed of
sound, and as the speed of the sound source increas es, the waves, not being able to get out of each other ’s way, are forced together.
They eventually merge into a single shock wave travel ing at the speed of sound. This is a critical speed, known as Mach. The shock
waves radiate out from the sound source, and create a “Mach cone’. The half-angle, αα, can be found using the equatio n
Sonic Boom: A sonic boom produced by an aircraft moving at M=2.9 2, calculated from the cone angle of 20 degrees. An observer
hears the boom when the shock wave, on the edges of the cone, crosses his or her location
From previous atoms, we know that is the sound source’s Mach number.
At the front of the sound source, there is a sudden rise in pressure, while at the end of the source there is a decreasing pressure. This
‘overpressure profile’ is known as an N-wave. There is a big boom when there is a sudden change in pressure, an d since the
pressure changes twice, this is a double boom.
Key Points
When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened. Therefore the pitch is higher.
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened. Therefor the pitch is lowered.
Unless the objects are in each other’s direct path, you need to account for the angle they are at relative to eac h other. The
following equation needs to be substituted for the ‘movers’ velocity. The angle used needs to be the angle from the line of sight
of the observer to the sound source. vradial=v ∗cosθvradial=v ∗cosθ.

16.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened (therefore the pitch is higher).
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened (therefore the pitch is lowered).
Unless the objects are in each other’s direct path, you need to account for their angle relative to each other. T he following
equation must be substituted for the ‘movers’ velocity. The angle used must be the angle from the line of sight of t he observer to
the sound source.
When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened. Therefore the pitch is higher.
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened. Therefor the pitch is lowered.
If the speeds and are small compared to the speed of the wa ve, the relationship between observed frequency and emitte d
frequency is approximately: where is the velocity o f the receiver relative to the source: it is positive when the
source and the receiver are moving towards each other.
A sonic boom happens when a sound source passes an obser ver at a speed either very close to, or faster than th e speed of sound.
Sonic booms generate an enormous amount of energy, and so und like explosions.
The half angle of the cone of sound waves produced by the sonic boom can be found by taking the inverse sine of the o bject’s
Mach number.
Key Terms
Doppler's effect: Apparent change in frequency of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to each
other.
classical physics: All aspects of physics developed before the rise of quan tum mechanics.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
Mach number: The ratio of the velocity of a body to that of sound in the surrounding medium.
sonic boom: The audible effect of a shock wave in the air, especially one caused by an aircraft flying faster than the speed of
sound
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

16.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/the-doppler-effect.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
classical physics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/classical_physics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mach number. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Mach_number. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
sonic boom. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

16.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14538Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sonic_boom.svg. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
This page titled 16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

16.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453916.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
Identify conditions required for the superposition of two waves
Waves are most commonly described by variations in s ome parameter through space and time—height in a wate r wave, pressure in
a sound wave, or the electromagnetic field in a light wave. The value of this parameter is called the ampl itude of the wave; the
wave itself is a function specifying the amplitude at each po int.
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they superimpose themselves onto one another. More specifica lly, the
disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come together (a phenomenon called superposition). Each di sturbance
corresponds to a force, or amplitude (and the forces add). If the disturbances are along the same line, th e resulting wave is a simple
addition of the disturbances of the individual waves. That is, their amplitudes add.
Superposition: Superposition is when two waves add together. In this figure, the two waves add together and cancel out leaving no
wave. This is destructive interference.
Superposition of waves leads to what is known as interfe rence, which manifests in two types: constructive and des tructive.
Constructive interference occurs when two waves add tog ether in superposition, creating a wave with cumulati vely higher
amplitude, as shown in. In destructive interference, the two waves add together but cancel out (like adding a positive and negative
number). Destructive interference is shown in.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interf erence do occur, they require precisely aligned ident ical waves. The
superposition of most waves produces a combination o f constructive and destructive interference, and can vary from place to place
and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot but quiet in another. Varyin g loudness means the sound
waves add partially constructively and partially dest ructively at different locations. A stereo has at l east two speakers creating
sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All thes e waves superimpose. An example of sounds that vary ove r time from
constructive to destructive is found in the combined whine of airplane jets heard by a stationary passeng er. The combined sound
can fluctuate up and down in volume as the sound from th e two engines varies in time from constructive to destruct ive.
These examples are of waves that are similar. illustr ates that when non-identical waves superimpose, the ou tcome is a mixture of
constructive and destructive interference.learning objectives

16.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539
Superposition of Non-Identical Waves: Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constr uctive and destructive
interference.
Interference
Interference occurs when multiple waves interact with each other, and is a change in amplitude caused by several wav es meeting.
Contrast constructive and destructive interference
Unlike solid objects, two waves can share a point in sp ace. In physics, interference is a phenomenon in whic h two waves (passing
through the same point) superimpose to form a resul tant wave of greater or lower amplitude. Interference usually refers to the
interaction of waves that are correlated or coherent with each other (i.e, “interfere” with each other), either because they come from
the same source or because they have the same or nearly the same frequency.
The effects of interference can be observed with all types of waves, for example, light, radio, acoustic and surface water waves.
The idea that interference is caused by superposition means that when two waves meet their two amplitudes (the ir maximum
absolute value) combine together.
Interference: Two overlapping waves exhibit interference.
Interference can be constructive or destructive. In constructive interference, the two amplitudes of the waves add together and
result in a higher displacement than would have been the case if there were only one wave. An example of const ructive interference
may be seen in.learning objectives

16.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539
Constructive Interference: Pure constructive interference of two identical waves prod uces one with twice the amplitude, but the
same wavelength.
Destructive interference is when two waves add together and the result is a smaller displacement than would h ave been the case. An
example of destructive interference can be seen in. When the waves have opposite amplitudes at the point they meet they can
destructively interfere, resulting in no amplitude a t that point. For example, this is how noise cancelli ng headphones work. By
playing a sound with the opposite amplitude as the in coming sound, the two sound waves destructively interfere and this cancel
each other out.
Beats
The superposition of two waves of similar but not identi cal frequencies produces a pulsing known as a beat.
Identify superposition conditions that lead to beat
Striking two adjacent keys on a piano produces a warbli ng combination (usually considered unpleasant to the e ar). The culprit is
the superposition of two waves of similar but not iden tical frequencies. When two waves of similar frequency arrive at the same
point and superimpose, they alternately constructively and destructively interfere. This alternating is kn own as a beat because it
produces an unpleasant pulsing sound.
Another example is often noticeable in a taxiing jet aircraft (particularly the two-engine variety). The loudness of the combined
sound of the engines increases and decreases. This va rying loudness occurs because the sound waves have sim ilar but not identical
frequencies. The discordant warbling of the piano and the fluctuating loudness of the jet engine noise are both due to alternately
constructive and destructive interference as the two wav es go in and out of phase. illustrates this phenomenon g raphically.
Beat Frequency: Beats are produced by the superposition of two waves of slightly different frequencies but identical
amplitudes.The waves alternate in time between constructi ve interference and destructive interference, giving th e resulting wave a
time-varying amplitude.
The wave resulting from the superposition of two simila r-frequency waves has a frequency that is the average of the two. This
wave fluctuates in amplitude, or beats, with a frequenc y called the beat frequency. We can determine the b eat frequency
mathematically by adding two waves together.
One can also measure the beat frequency directly. Wh en you hear a beat coming from two discordant sounds (say, two notes on a
piano) you can count the number of beats per second. The number of beats per second, or the beat frequ ency, shows the difference
in frequency between the two notes. Musicians often u se this phenomena to ensure that two notes are in tun e (if they are in tune
then there are no beats).learning objectives

16.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539The Ear
The ear is the sensory organ that picks up sound waves fro m the air and turns them into nerve impulses that can be sent to the brain.
Describe how sound waves are collected and transformed i nto nerve impulses
Sound waves are vibrations in the air. The ear is the sensory organ that picks up sound waves from the surrou nding air and turns
them into nerve impulses, which are then sent to the brain. The sound waves carry a lot of information — language, music, and
noise — all mixed together. The task of the ear is t o turn the signals in these waves of bouncing air mol ecules into electrical nerve
signals while keeping as much of the information in th e signal as possible. (It’s the brain’s job to then sort the signals and make
sense of them.) It’s not easy to turn one kind of sig nal into another without losing information, but the ear is well designed for the
task.
Anatomy of the Human Ear: Anatomy of the human ear; the length of the auditory can al is exaggerated for viewing purposes
Air surrounds the head and fills the ear canal and m iddle ear. Therefore, when the outer part of the ear c ollects sound and the
middle ear amplifies this sound pressure, these proc esses occur in the medium of air. However, the hollow c hannels of the inner ear
(which is embedded in the temporal bone, the densest b one of the body) are filled with liquid. So as the sou nd travels into the inner
ear, it passes from the medium of air into a liquid m edium. These inner-ear channels contain a sensory e pithelium that is studded
with hair cells. The microscopic “hairs” are structur al protein filaments that project out into the flui d. The hair cells release a
chemical neurotransmitter when stimulated. Sound waves moving through fluid push the filaments; if the fil aments bend over
enough, the hair cells fire chemical signals. In this way sound waves are transformed into nerve impulses. The n erve impulses
travel from the left and right ears through the eig hth cranial nerve to both sides of the brain stem an d up to the part of the cerebral
cortex dedicated to sound (auditory cortex, located in t he temporal lobe).
Applications: Ultrasound, Sonar, and Medical Imaging
Sound waves reflect off different materials differentl y (when the reflections are collected, they can provid e information and
images).
Discuss application of sound waves in medicine and navigati on
The controlled use of sound waves has many applicatio ns in science. Controlled reflection of such waves all ows images to be
received.learning objectives
learning objectives

16.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539Ultrasound
Ultrasound is sound with a frequency higher than 20 kHz. This is above the human range of hearing. The most common use of
ultrasound, creating images, has industrial and medica l applications. The use of ultrasound to create imag es is based on the
reflection and transmission of a wave at a boundary. When an ultrasound wave travels inside an object that is made up of different
materials (such as the human body), each time it enco unters a boundary (e.g., between bone and muscle, or mus cle and fat), part of
the wave is reflected and part of it is transmitted. Th e reflected rays are detected and used to construct an imag e of the object.
Sonar
illustrates how a ship on the ocean utilizes the ref lecting properties of sound waves to determine the d epth of the ocean. A sound
wave is transmitted and bounces off the seabed. Because the speed of sound is known and the time lapse between sending and
receiving the sound can be measured, the distance fr om the ship to the bottom of the ocean can be deter mined. This technique is
called sonar (originally an acronym for SOund Navigation And Ranging).
Sonar: Ships on the ocean make use of the reflecting properties of sound waves to determine the depth of the ocean. A sou nd wave
is transmitted and bounces off the seabed. Because the spee d of sound is known and the time lapse between sending a nd receiving
the sound can be measured, the distance from the ship to t he bottom of the ocean can be determined.
Just as ships on the ocean, certain animals, like dolphin s and bats, make use of sounds waves (sonar) to navigate or find their way.
Ultrasound waves are sent out then reflected off the ob jects around the animal. Bats or dolphins then use th e reflected sounds to
form a “picture” of their surroundings (this is known as ec holocation).
Key Points
When two waves occupy the same point, superposition occurs. Supe rposition results in adding the two waves together.
Constructive interference is when two waves superimpose an d the resulting wave has a higher amplitude than the pr evious
waves.
Destructive interference is when two waves superimpose and c ancel each other out, leading to a lower amplitude.
Most wave superpositions involve a mixture of constructi ve and destructive interference since the waves are not perfectly
identical.
Interference is a phenomenon of wave interactions. When t wo waves meet at a point, they interfere with each other.
There are two types of interference, constructive and de structive.
In constructive interference, the amplitudes of the two wa ves add together resulting in a higher wave at the point the y meet.
In destructive interference, the two waves cancel out resul ting in a lower amplitude at the point they meet.
When two waves of similar frequencies interfere, the result i s a beat frequency.
A beat frequency is a pulsing sound that goes up and down in loudness.
As the two waves go in and out of phase, the varying construc tive and destructive interference makes the wave grow and shrink
in amplitude. For sound waves this produces a beating sound.
The task of the ear is to turn the signals in the waves of bouncing air molecules into electrical nerve signals whi le keeping as
much of the information in the signals as possible.

16.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539Sound is collected in the outer part of the ear; sound pressu re is amplified through the middle part of the ear an d is passed from
the medium of air into a liquid medium.
That sound pressure is amplified through the middle porti on of the ear and passed from the medium of air into a liquid medium.
Sound waves moving through the fluid in the inner ear stimul ate hair cells, making them release chemical neurotransmi tters. In
this way sound waves are transformed into nerve impulses.
When waves encounter a boundary between two materials, part o f the wave is reflected and part is transmitted.
By using high frequency sound waves, doctors can create i mages of parts of the body normally not visible.
By transmitting sound waves and measuring the time betwee n the transmission and receiving the reflection, ships can use sound
waves to navigate. This is called sonar.
Key Terms
superimpose: To place an object over another object.
displacement: A vector quantity that denotes distance with a direct ional component.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
coherent: Of waves having the same direction, wavelength and phase, as light in a laser.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time tt in which it occurs: \
(\mathrm{f=n/t\).
interfere: (of waves) To be correlated with each other when overlappe d or superposed.
superposition: The summing of two or more field contributions occupy ing the same space.
epithelium: a membranous tissue composed of one or more layers of cel ls that forms the covering of most internal and external
surfaces of the body and its organs (internally, the lining of vessels and other small cavities; externally, the sk in)
nerve impulse: the signal transmitted along a nerve fiber, either in r esponse to a stimulus (such as touch, pain, or heat), or a s an
instruction (such as causing a muscle to contract)
neurotransmitter: any substance, such as acetylcholine or dopamine, respons ible for sending nerve signals across a synapse
between two neurons
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Superposition principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition_principle%23Application_to_waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
superimpose. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superimpose. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Superposition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
coherent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coherent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

16.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539displacement. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/displacement. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
interfere. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interfere. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Catherine Schmidt-Jones, Sound and Ears. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12365/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
epithelium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/epithelium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
neurotransmitter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/neurotransmitter. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nerve impulse. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nerve_impulse. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Anatomy of the Human Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anatomy_of_the_Human_Ear.svg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

16.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14539frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Anatomy of the Human Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anatomy_of_the_Human_Ear.svg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/PG11C5_005.png. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

16.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454016.5: Further Topics
Identify sources of spherical and plane wave patterns
Spherical Waves
Christiaan Huygens was a Dutch scientist who developed a useful technique for determining how and where waves p ropagate. In
1678, he proposed that every point that a luminous d isturbance touches becomes itself a source of a sphe rical wave; the sum of
these secondary waves determines the form of the wave at any subsequent time. The Huygen-Fresnel Principle shows that as the
waves interact with each other, they interfere either constructively or destructively. Constructive inter ference occurs when waves
are completely in phase with each other and amplifie s the waves. Destructive interference occurs when waves are exactly out of
phase with either other, and if waves are perfectly o ut of phase with each other, the wave will be canceled out completely. Since the
waves all come from one point source, the waves happen in a spherical pattern. All the waves come from a singl e point source and
are spherical.
Spherical Wave: When waves are produced from a point source, they are sphe rical waves.
Huygen-Fresnel Principle: The Huygen-Fresnel Principle uses the law of refracti on. Each point on the wave produces waves
which interfere with each other either constructively or d estructively.
Plane Waves
A plane wave is a constant-frequency wave whose wavefron ts (surfaces of constant phase) are infinite parallel planes of constant
peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velocity vector. It is not possible in practice to have a true plane wave; only a plane
wave of infinite extent will propagate as a plane wave. However, many waves are approximately plane waves in a l ocalized region
of space. For example, a localized source such as an a ntenna produces a field that is approximately a pla ne wave far from thelearning objectives

16.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540antenna in its far-field region. Similarly, if the l ength scales are much longer than the wave’s wavelengt h, as is often the case for
light in the field of optics, one can treat the waves as li ght rays which correspond locally to plane waves.
Plane Wave: Plane waves are an infinite number of wavefronts normal to the direction of the propogation.
Standing Waves on a String
Standing wave occurs due to the interference when trans verse waves in strings are reflected and the incident and reflected waves
meet.
Identify when a standing wave occurs
A standing wave is a wave that appears stationary, me aning it remains in a constant position. In a string, a standing wave is a type
of transverse wave—where the movement of the particles o f the medium is perpendicular to the direction of th e propagation of the
wave. A standing wave can occur when two identical waves moving i n different directions along the string interfere.
There are two scenarios of waves in strings: the string is fixed at both ends, or the string is fixed at one end and free at the other. A
transverse wave will move along the string until it rea ches the other end. It is then reflected from that e nd and starts to move back
towards the original direction; at this point interf erence occurs. shows a transverse wave that is reflec ted from a fixed end. When a
transverse wave meets a fixed end, the wave is reflected, but inverted. This swaps the peaks with the troughs an d the troughs with
the peaks. diagrams a transverse wave on a string that meets a free end. The wave is reflected, but unlike a transverse wave with a
fixed end, it is not inverted.
Free End Reflection: The wave is reflected, but unlike a transverse wave with a f ixed end, it is not inverted.
Fixed End Reflection: When a transverse wave meets a fixed end, the wave is reflec ted, but inverted.
Standing Waves
When either of the two scenarios of wave reflection o ccurs, the incident wave meets the reflected wave. The se waves move past
each other in opposite directions, causing interferenc e. When these two waves have the same frequency, the p roduct of this is called
the standing waves. Standing waves appear to be standing still, hence the name. illustrates a very slow moving s tanding wave. (One
application of the principle of standing waves is in music with the concept of resonance—and how many musi cal instruments, like
guitars and pianos, get their sound.) Let us now examine how standing waves occur.
learning objectives

16.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540Standing Wave on a String: This is what a standing wave would look like if you were t o slow it down. The wave is caused by an
incident wave on a string being reflected and then tra veling back in the direction it came from. The two waves then meet and
interfere with each other causing this phenomenon.
Constructive vs. Destructive Interference
When the incident wave and reflected wave first meet, both waves have an amplitude is zero. As the waves cont inue to move past
each other they continue to interfere with each othe r, either constructively of destructively. As discussed in previous atoms, when
waves are completely in phase and interfere with each other constructively they are amplified, and when th ey are completely out of
phase and interfere destructively they cancel out. As the waves continue to move past each other, and are reflected from the
opposite end, they continue to interfere both ways; a standing wave is produced. Every point in the medium containing a standing
wave oscillates up and down, and the amplitude of the oscillations depends on the location of the point. When we observe a
standing wave on strings, it appears the wave is not moving b ut standing still. In summary:
The points which reach the maximum oscillation height are called antinodes, and are results of complete construct ive
interference.
The points in a standing wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. These are due to complete
destructive interference.
Standing Waves in Air Columns
Standing waves in air columns is the physical phenomenon that gives wind instruments their resonance and, therefore, sound.
Identify the type of a standing wave in an air column
Standing Waves
A standing wave is a wave that appears to be stationary, m eaning it remains in a constant position. In an air co lumn, a standing
wave can form as either a longitudinal or transverse wave. A transverse wave, you may remember, is a wave whe re the movement
of the particles of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of the wave. A longi tudinal wave, on the other
hand, is parallel to the direction of propagation. A standing wave can occur when two identical waves moving in different
directions interfere.
Air Columns
When a standing wave is formed in a tube, the standing wave has a maximum air displacement at the open end called an antinode.
Here, the motion is unconstrained. At the closed end, t here is no displacement; this is called a node, and th e air is halted. The
distance from a node to antinode is 1/4 of a wavelength, and is equal to the length of the tube.
shows that this resonance can be produced by a vibra tion introduced at or near the closed end of the tu be as well. This is considered
to be a natural vibration of the air column indepen dently of how it is induced. Given that maximum air di splacements are possible
at the open end and none at the closed end, there a re other, shorter wavelengths that can resonate in the tube. For example, a
standing wave can have three-fourths of its wavelength in the tube, or L=(3/4)λ. This can be rendered as follows:learning objectives

16.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540
Standing Wave in Air Column: The same standing wave is created in the tube by a vibr ation introduced near its closed end.
Continuing this process reveals a whole series of shor ter-wavelength and higher-frequency sounds that reso nate in the tube. We use
specific terms for the resonances in any system. The lo west resonant frequency is called the fundamental, wh ile all higher resonant
frequencies are called overtones. All resonant freque ncies are integral multiples of the fundamental, and they are collectively called
harmonics. The fundamental is the first harmonic, the first overtone is the second harmonic, and so on. sh ows hows the
fundamental and the first three overtones (the first fo ur harmonics) in a tube closed at one end.
The First Four Harmonics: The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube cl osed at one end. All have maximum air
displacements at the open end and none at the closed end.
Now let us look for a pattern in the resonant frequenci es for a simple tube that is closed at one end. The f undamental has =4L, and
frequency is related to wavelength and the speed of soun d as given by the following:
Solving for f in this equation gives a more helpful form:
Here, f is frequency, v is speed of sound in air, λ i s wavelength, and L is the length of the air column. The first overtone has =
4L/3. From this, we can deduce the following:
Because f′ = 3f, we call the first overtone the third harmonic. Continuing this process, we see a pattern t hat can be generalized in a
single expression. The resonant frequencies of a tube c losed at one end are:
Here, f1 is the fundamental, f3 is the first overtone, and so on. It is interesting that the resonant freq uencies depend on the speed of
sound and, hence, on temperature. This dependence pos es a noticeable problem for organs in old unheated cathedrals, and it is also
the reason why musicians commonly bring their wind instrume nts to room temperature before playing them.w

16.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540The fundamental and overtones can be present simultan eously in a variety of combinations. For example, midd le C on a
trumpet has a sound distinctively different from mid dle C on a clarinet, both instruments being modified versions of a tube
closed at one end. The fundamental frequency is the sa me (and usually the most intense), but the overtones and their mix of
intensities are different and subject to shading by t he musician. This mix is what gives various musical inst ruments (and human
voices) their distinctive characteristics, whether they have air columns, strings, sounding boxes, or drumhead s. In fact, much of
our speech is determined by shaping the cavity form ed by the throat and mouth and positioning the tong ue to adjust the
fundamental and combination of overtones. Simple reso nant cavities can be made to resonate with the sound of the vowels, for
example.
Forced Vibrations and Resonance
The phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency eq ual to its natural frequency is called resonance.
Explain the relationship between the resonance curve and d amping
Forced Vibration and Resonance
Many people have played with toys involving an object supported by an elastic band: something like the pa ddle ball suspended
from a finger in. Say a person drives the paddle ball by moving his or her finger up and down at a certain frequency. In this
example, he or she is causing a forced oscillation (or vibration). At first the finger is held steady, an d the ball bounces up and down
with a small amount of damping. If the finger is moved up and down slowly, the ball will follow along without b ouncing much on
its own.
Paddle Balls and Frequencies: The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response t o the finger supporting it. If the finger
moves with the natural frequency f0 of the ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s
oscillations increases dramatically. At higher and lower driv ing frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less effi ciently, and it
responds with lower-amplitude oscillations.
As the frequency at which the finger is moved up and d own increases, the ball will respond by oscillating with i ncreasing
amplitude. After driving the ball at its natural freq uency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as
long as it is driven. The phenomenon of driving a sys tem with a frequency equal to its natural frequency i s called resonance. As the
driving frequency gets progressively higher than the resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes
smaller until the oscillations nearly disappear and the fi nger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ba ll.
Effects of Damping
In real life, most oscillators have damping present in the system. It is interesting that the widths of th e resonance curves shown in
depend on damping: the less the damping, the narrowe r the resonance. For a driven oscillator to resonate at a very specific
frequency, there needs to be as little damping as pos sible, as is the case for piano strings and many othe r musical instruments.
Conversely, for small-amplitude oscillations, such a s in a car’s suspension system, there needs to be heav y damping. Heavy
damping reduces the amplitude, but the tradeoff is that the system responds at more frequencies.Example:
learning objectives

16.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540
Damping: The amplitude of a harmonic oscillator is a function o f the frequency of the driving force. The curves represen t the same
oscillator with the same natural frequency but with diff erent amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving fr equency
equals the natural frequency, and the greatest respon se is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest resp onse is also for the
least amount of damping.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply t o a huge variety of systems. When tuning a radio, fo r example, people are
adjusting the resonant frequency of the radio circui t so that it only oscillates to the desired station ’s broadcast (or driving)
frequency. The more selective the radio is in discri minating between stations, the smaller its damping. A ch ild on a swing is
driven by a parent at the swing’s natural frequency t o achieve maximum amplitude. In all of these cases, t he efficiency of
energy transfer from the driving force into the osc illator is best at resonance. On gravel roads that are corrugated, if people
travel at the ‘wrong’ speed, the bumps are very noti ceable. At other speeds, it is difficult to feel the bu mps at all. shows a
photograph of a famous example (the Tacoma Narrows Brid ge) of the destructive effects of a driven harmonic o scillation.
Unfortunately, heavy winds happened to drive the bridge at its natural frequency, leading to the collapse.
Collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge: In 1940, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington state col lapsed. Heavy cross
winds drove the bridge into oscillations at its resonant frequency. The damping decreased when support cables broke loose and
started to slip over the towers, allowing increasingly gr eater amplitudes until the structure failed. (credit: PR I’s Studio 360, via
Flickr)
Key Points
The waves either interfere with each other constructively o r destructively, which will either amplify or minimize the wav e,
respectively.
Spherical waves are emitted from a single point source i n a spherical shape.
A plane wave is a constant-frequency wave whose wavefronts (surf aces of constant phase) are infinite parallel planes of
constant peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velo city vector.
Although it is not possible in practice to have a true plan e wave, many waves approximate plane wave behavior.
The reflected wave is inverted from the incident wave whe n a transverse wave on a string is fixed at the end point. Th e reflected
wave is not inverted from the incident wave when a transv erse wave on a string is free at the end point.
A standing wave occurs when an incident wave meets a reflec ted wave on a string.Example:

16.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540A standing wave contains nodes (points that remain flat due to the destructive interference) and antinodes (po ints with
maximum oscillation due to the constructive interferenc e).
Every point in the string oscillates up and down and t he amplitude of the oscillations depends on the location of the point.
A standing wave has some points that remain flat due to de structive interference. These are called antinodes.
The points on a standing wave that have reached maximum oscillation do so from constructive interference, and ar e called
nodes.
A standing wave in an air column is a transverse wave.
A node occurs at the closed end of an air tube where there is no wave displacement.
An antinode occurs at the open end of the air tube where t he maximum displacement occurs.
The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one end are as follows:, n=1,3,5.
Any oscillator has a natural frequency. Driven at the natura l frequency, oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation.
The widths of the resonance curves depend on damping: less damping corresponds to a narrower resonance. With less damping,
the resonance peak becomes more pronounced.
The relationship between resonance and damping applie s to a huge variety of systems. Damping is often reduced o r enhanced to
induce the desired response of an oscillator.
Key Terms
wavefront: An imaginary surface passing through points of a mediu m oscillating in phase.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
natural frequency: The frequency at which a system vibrates on its own. For a s pring (spring constant k) with an object of
mass m attached, the natural frequency is given as.
damping: The reduction in the magnitude of oscillations by the di ssipation of energy
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Plane wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Huygens principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Huygens_principle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Plane waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_waves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wavefront. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavefront. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

16.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_waves. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/node. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
antinode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/antinode. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright

16.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14540Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/natural-frequency.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
damping. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/damping. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 16.5: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
17: Electric Charge and Field
This page titled 17: Electric Charge and Field is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
17.6: Applications of ElectrostaticsTopic hierarchy

17.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454317.1: Overview
Identify factors that determine the atom’s net charge
Overview of Atomic Electrical Charges
Atoms, the fundamental building blocks of all molecule s, consist of three types of particles: protons, neutro ns, and electrons. Of
these three subatomic particle types, two (protons and electrons) carry a net electric charge, while neutron s are neutral and have no
net charge.
Both protons and electrons have charge that is quant ized. That is, the magnitude of their respective charg es, which are equal each
other, is 1. This standard value is equal to approximate ly 1.6×10 Coulombs.
Protons
Protons are found in the center of the atom; they, wit h neutrons, make up the nucleus. Protons have a charg e of +1 and a mass of 1
atomic mass unit, which is approximately equal to 1.66 ×10 grams. The number of protons in an atom defines the identity of the
element (an atom with 1 proton is hydrogen, for exam ple, and an atom with two protons is helium). As such, pro tons are relatively
stable; their number rarely changes, only in the instance of radioactive decay.
Electrons
Electrons are found in the periphery of the atom and have a charge of -1. They are much smaller than pro tons; their mass is
1183611836 amu. Typically in modeling atoms, proton s and neutrons are regarded as stationary, while electr ons move about in the
space outside the nucleus like a cloud. The negative ly charged electronic cloud indicates the regions o f the space where electrons
are likely to be found. The electrons cloud pattern s are extremely complex and is of no importance to the discussion of electric
charge in the atom. More important is the fact that el ectrons are labile; that is, they can be transferre d from one atom to the next. It
is through electronic transfer that atoms become char ged.
Ions
In the ground state, an atom will have an equal numbe r of protons and electrons, and thus will have a net charge of 0. However,
because electrons can be transferred from one atom t o another, it is possible for atoms to become charged. Atoms in such a state are
known as ions.
If a neutral atom gains an electron, it becomes negative. This kind of ion is called an anion.
If a neutral atom loses an electron, it becomes positive. This kind of ion is called a cation.
The steady flow of electrons is called current. Curre nt is what flows through electrical wires and powers elec tronics items, from
light bulbs to televisions.
High School Phy sics - Electric ChargeHigh School Phy sics - Electric Chargelearning objectives
-19
-24

17.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Electric Charge: A brief overview of atoms, ions, and electrical charge.
Planetary Model of an Atom: Small electrons orbit the large and relatively fixed nucleus of protons and neutrons.
Properties of Electric Charges
Electric charge is a fundamental physical property of m atter that has many parallels to mass.
Describe properties of electric charge, such as its rela tivistic invariance and its conservation in closed systems
Properties of Electric Charge
Electric charge, like mass and volume, is a physical property of matter. Its SI unit is known as the Coulomb (C), which represents
6.242×10 e, where e is the charge of a proton. Charges can be positive or negative; a singular proton has a charge of 1.602×10
C, while an electron has a charge of -1.602×10 C.
Invariance
Like mass, electric charge in a closed system is cons erved. As long as a system is impermeable, the amount of charge inside it will
neither increase nor decrease; it can only be transf erred. However, electric charge differs from other prope rties—like mass—in that
it is a relativistic invariant. That is, charge is independent of speed. The mass of a particle will rise exponentially as it s speed
approaches that of light, its charge, however, will remain constant.
The independence of electric charge from speed was pr oven through an experiment in which one fast-moving h elium nucleus (two
protons and two neutrons bound together) was proven to have the same charge as two separate, slow-moving deut erium nuclei (one
proton and one neutron bound together in each nucleus).
learning objectives
18 −19
−19

17.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Attraction and Repulsion
Electric charge is a property that produces forces tha t can attract or repel matter. Mass is similar, althoug h it can only attract matter,
not repel it. Still, the formula describing the inter actions between charges is remarkably similar to tha t which characterizes the
interactions between masses. For electric fields, the forc e (F) is related to the charges (q, q) and the distance (r) bet ween them as:
where π and ϵ0ϵ0 are constants. This is known as Coulomb’s Law.
Coulomb’s Law: The forces (F and F) sum to produce the total forc e, which is calculated by Coulomb’s Law and is proport ional
to the product of the charges q and q, and inversely prop ortional to the square of the distance (r) between them.
The formula for gravitational force has exactly the same form as Coulomb’s Law, but relates the product of two masses (rather than
the charges) and uses a different constant. Both act in a vacuum and are central (depend only on distance between the forces) and
conservative (independent of path taken). However, it should be noted that when comparing similar terms, ch arge-based interaction
is substantially greater than that based on mass. For e xample, the electric repulsion between two electrons i s about 10 times
stronger than their gravitational attraction.
Charge Separation
Charge separation, often referred to as static electricit y, is the building of space between particles of opposite c harges.
Identify factors that can create charge separation
All matter is composed of atoms made up of negatively- charged electrons and positively-charged protons. In t he ground state, each
atom is of neutral charge—its protons and electrons a re equal in number, and it exists with no permanent d ipole. Because electrons
are labile (i.e., they can be transferred from atom t o atom) it is possible for the phenomenon of “charge separation” (often referred
to as static electricity) to occur.
Static Electricity: Due to friction between her hair and the plastic slide, the g irl on the left has created charge separation, resulting
in her hair being attracted to the slide.
In chemistry, this charge separation is illustrated sim ply by the transfer of an electron from one atom to another as an ionic bond is
formed. In physics, there are many other instances of charge separation that cannot be written as formal ch emical reactions.
Consider, for example, rubbing a balloon on your hai r. Once you pull the balloon away, your hair will stand on end and “reach”
towards the balloon. This is because electrons from on e have transferred to the other, causing one to be po sitive and the other to be
negative. Thus, the opposite charges attract. A similar example can be seen in playground slides (as shown in).
Charge separation can be created not only by frictio n, but by pressure, heat, and other charges. Both pre ssure and heat increase the
energy of a material and can cause electrons to bre ak free and separate from their nuclei. Charge, mean while, can attract electrons
to or repel them from a nucleus. For example, a nearb y negative charge can “push” electrons away from the nucleus around which1 2
1 2
1 2 21
learning objectives

17.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543they typically orbit. Charge separation occurs often in the natural world. It can have an extreme effect if it reaches a critical level,
whereat it becomes discharged. Lightning is a common exampl e.
Polarization
Dielectric polarization is the phenomenon that arises when p ositive and negative charges in a material are separated.
Identify two ways polarization can occur on the molecul ar level
The concept of polarity is very broad and can be ap plied to molecules, light, and electric fields. For the purposes of this atom, we
focus on its meaning in the context of what is known as dielec tric polarization—the separation of charges in materia ls.
Dielectrics
A dielectric is an insulator that can be polarized by an electric field, meaning that it is a material in which charge does not flow
freely, but in the presence of an electric field it can shift its charge distribution. Positive charge in a dielectric will migrate towards
the applied field, while negative charges will shift awa y. This creates a weak local field within the material that opposes the applied
field.
Different materials will react differently to an induc ed field, depending on their dielectric constant. Th is constant is the degree of
their polarizability (the extent to which they become polarized).
Atomic Model
The most basic view of dielectrics involves considerin g their charged components: protons and electrons. If an electric field is
applied to an atom, the electrons in the atom will mi grate away from the applied field. The protons, howeve r, remain relatively
exposed to the field. This separation creates a dipole momen t, as shown in.
Reaction of an Atom to an Applied Electric Field: When an electric field (E) is applied, electrons drift away from the field. Their
average location is displaced from the average location o f the protons (which hasn’t moved) by a distance of d. The a tom’s dipole
moment is represented by M.
Dipole Polarization
On the molecular level, polarization can occur with b oth dipoles and ions. In polar bonds, electrons are more attracted to one
nucleus than to the other. One example of a dipole m olecule is water, (H O), which has a bent shape (the H-O-H angle is 104.45°)
and in which the oxygen pulls electron density away f rom the H atoms, leaving the H relatively positive an d the O relatively
negative, as shown in.learning objectives

17.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543
Water Molecule: Water is an example of a dipole molecule, which has a ben t shape (the H-O-H angle is 104.45°) and in which the
oxygen pulls electron density away from the H atoms, leavin g the H relatively positive and the O relatively negative.
When a dipolar molecule is exposed to an electric f ield, the molecule will align itself with the field, wit h the positive end towards
the electric field and the negative end away from it.
Ionic Polarization
Ionic compounds are those that are formed from perman ently charge-separated ions. For example, table salt (NaC l) is formed from
Na and Cl ions that are not formally bound to one ano ther through a chemical bond, but interact very stro ngly due to their
opposite charges.
Ions are still free from one another and will natura lly move at random. If they happen to move in a way that is asymmetrical, and
results in a greater concentration of positive ions in one area and a greater concentration of negative ions in another, the sample of
ionic compound will be polarized—a phenomenon is known as i onic polarization.
Static Electricity, Charge, and the Conservation of Charge
Electric charge is a physical property that is perpe tually conserved in amount; it can build up in matte r, which creates static
electricity.
Formulate rules that apply to the creation and the destructi on of electric charge
Electric charge is a physical property of matter. It is created by an imbalance in a substance’s number of protons and electrons. The
matter is positively charged if it contains more pr otons than electrons, and it is negatively charged if it contains more electrons than
protons. In both instances, charged particles will experie nce a force when in the presence of other charged matter.
Charges of like sign (positive and positive, or negati ve and negative) will repel each other, whereas charge s of opposite sign
(positive and negative) will attract each another, as shown in.
Charge Repulsion and Attraction: Charges of like sign (positive and positive, or neg ative and negative) will repel each other,
whereas charges of opposite sign (positive and negative) wil l attract each other.
The SI unit for charge is the Coulomb (C), which is ap proximately equal to 6.24×10186.24×1018 elementary ch arges. (An
elementary charge is the magnitude of charge of a proton or electron.)+ –
learning objectives

17.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Conservation of Charge
Charge, like matter, is essentially constant througho ut the universe and over time. In physics, charge conser vation is the principle
that electric charge can neither be created nor des troyed. The net quantity of electric charge, the amou nt of positive charge minus
the amount of negative charge in the universe, is always conserved.
For any finite volume, the law of conservation of charge (Q) can be written as a continuity equation:
where Q(t) is the charge in the system at a given time, Q(t) is the charge in the same system at a later time, Q is the charge that
has entered the system between the two times, and Q is the amount of charge that has left the system between t he two times.
This does not mean that individual positive and negati ve charges cannot be created or destroyed. Electric charge is carried by
subatomic particles such as electrons and protons, wh ich can be created and destroyed. For example, when p articles are destroyed,
equal numbers of positive and negative charges are destr oyed, keeping the net amount of charge unchanged.
Static Electricity
Static electricity is when an excess of electric charg e collects on an object’s surface. It can be create d through contact between
materials, a buildup of pressure or heat, or the pres ence of a charge. Static electricity can also be crea ted through friction between a
balloon (or another object) and human hair (see). It can be observed in storm clouds as a result of pres sure buildup; lightning (see)
is the discharge that occurs after the charge exceeds a cr itical concentration.
Static Electricity: Due to friction between her hair and the plastic slide, the g irl on the left has created charge separation, resulting
in her hair being attracted to the slide.
Lightning: Lightning is a dramatic natural example of static disch arge.
Conductors and Insulators
Based on the ability to conduct current, materials are div ided into conductors and insulators.1 2 in
out

17.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Identify conductors and insulators among common materials
Overview
All materials can be categorized as either insulators or c onductors based on a physical property known as resistivit y.
An insulator is a material in which, when exposed to an electric field, the electric charges do not flow fre ely—it has a high
resistivity. Conversely, a conductor is a material tha t permits the flow of electric charges in one or mor e directions—its resistivity is
low.
Conductors
All conductors contain electric charges that, when exp osed to a potential difference, move towards one pol e or the other. The
positive charges in a conductor will migrate towards the negative end of the potential difference; the n egative charges in the
material will move towards the positive end of the potenti al difference. This flow of charge is electric current.
Ionic substances and solutions can conduct electrici ty, but the most common and effective conductors are metals. Copper is
commonly used in wires due to its high conductivity and relatively inexpensive price. However, gold-plated wi res are sometimes
used in instances in which especially high conductivity is necessary.
Every conductor has a limit to its ampacity, or amou nt of current it can carry. This usually is the cur rent at which the heat released
due to resistance melts the material.
Insulators
Insulators are materials in which the internal charge cannot flow freely, and thus cannot conduct electric current to an appreciable
degree when exposed to an electric field.
While there is no perfect insulator with infinite res istivity, materials like glass, paper and Teflon have very high resistivity and can
effectively serve as insulators in most instances.
Just as conductors are used to carry electrical current thro ugh wires, insulators are commonly used as coating for th e wires.
Insulators, like conductors, have their physical limi ts. When exposed to enough voltage, an insulator will experience what is known
as electrical breakdown, in which current suddenly spikes through the material as it becomes a conductor.
Conductor and Insulator in a Wire: This wire consists of a core of copper (a conductor) and a c oating of polyethylene (an
insulator). The copper allows current to flow through th e wire, while the polyethylene ensures that the current do es not escape.
The Millikan Oil-Drop Experiment
In 1911, using charged droplets of oil, Robert Millikan wa s able to determine the charge of an electron.
Explain the difference in value of a real electron’s ch arge and the charge measured by Robert Millikan
The Oil-Drop Experiment
The Oil-Drop Experiment, otherwise known as the Millikan Oil-Drop Experiment, is one of the most influential st udies in the
history of physical science.learning objectives
learning objectives

17.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Performed by Robert Millikan and Harvey Fletcher in 191 1, the experiment was designed to determine the charge of a single
electron, otherwise known as the elementary electric charge.
Millikan designed his experiment to measure the force on oil droplets between two electrodes.
He used an atomizer to spray a mist of tiny oil dropl ets into a chamber, which included a hole. Some droplet s would fall through
this hole and into a chamber, where he measured their term inal velocity and calculated their mass.
Millikan then exposed the droplets to X-rays, which ioni zed molecules in the air and caused electrons to atta ch to the oil droplets,
thus making them charged. The top and bottom of the chamber were attached to a battery, and the potenti al difference between the
top and bottom produced an electric field that acted o n the charged oil drops.
Adjusting the voltage perfectly, Millikan was able to balance the force of gravity (which was exerted downward) with the force of
the electric field on the charged particles (which was exerted upward), causing the oil droplets to be suspended in mid-air.
Simplified scheme of Millikan’s oil-drop experiment: This apparatus has a parallel pair of horizontal me tal plates. A uniform
electric field is created between them. The ring has three holes for illumination and one for viewing thro ugh a microscope. Special
oil for vacuum apparatus is sprayed into the chamber, where drops become electrically charged. The droplets enter the space
between the plates and can be controlled by changing the voltage across the plates.
Millikan then calculated the charge on particles susp ended in mid-air. His assumptions were that the force of gravity, which is the
product of mass (m) and gravitational acceleration (g), was equal to the force of the electric field (the product of the charge (q) and
the electric field (E)):
Since he already knew the mass of the oil droplets and the acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s^2), as we ll as the energy of the xrays he was using, he was able to calculate the charge.
Although the charge of each droplet was unknown, Millika n adjusted the strength of the X-rays ionizing the ai r and measured many
values of (q) from many different oil droplets. In each instance, the charge measured was a multiple of 1.5924(17)×10 C. Thus,
it was concluded that the elementary electric charge was 1.5924(17)×10 C.
The results were very accurate. The calculated value from the Oil-Drop Experiment differs by less than on e percent of the current
accepted value of 1.602176487(40)×10 C.
The Oil-Drop Experiment was tremendously influential a t the time, not only for determining the charge of a n electron, but for
helping prove the existence of particles smaller than atoms. At the time, it was not fully accepted that prot ons, neutrons, and
electrons existed.
Key Points
A proton is a positively charged particle located in th e nucleus of an atom. An electron has times the mass of a pro ton, but
an equal and opposite negative charge.
An elementary charge — that of a proton or electron — is a pproximately equal to 1.6×10-19Coulombs.
Unlike protons, electrons can move from atom to atom. If an atom has an equal number of protons and electrons, its net charge
is 0. If it gains an extra electron, it becomes negativ ely charged and is known as an anion. If it loses an elec tron, it becomes
positively charged and is known as a cation.−19
−19
−19

17.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Charge is measured in Coulombs (C), which represent 6.242×1 0 e, where e is the charge of a proton. Charges can be posit ive
or negative, and as such a singular proton has a charge of 1.602×10 C, while an electron has a charge of -1.602×10 C.
Electric charge, like mass, is conserved. The force gen erated by two charges is of the same form as that generated by two
masses and, like gravity, force from an electrical field i s both conservative and central.
Electric charge is a relativistic invariant. That is, ch arge (unlike mass) is independent of speed. Whereas th e mass of a particle
will exponentially rise as its speed approaches that of l ight, charge will remain constant.
Because electrons are labile (i.e., they can be transferred fr om atom to atom), it is possible for “charge separation” to occur.
This phenomenon is often commonly referred to as static ele ctricity.
Charge separation can be created by friction, pressure, heat, and other charges.
Charge separation can reach a critical level, whereat it i s discharged. Lightning is a common example.
Dielectrics are insulators that are capable of being polar ized by an electric field. That is, their charges cannot flow freely, but
can still be induced to redistribute unevenly.
Electric fields applied to atoms will push electrons away from the field. In the case of polar molecules, the ne gative ends thereof
will align themselves away from the field while the positive e nds will be towards the field.
An instantaneous polarization occurs when ions, through n atural, random vibrations, become distributed asymmetric ally such
that one area is more dense with one type of ion than anot her.
Electric charge is a physical property of matter create d by an imbalance in the number of protons and electron s in a substance.
Charge can be created or destroyed. However, any creation or elimination of charge occurs at a ratio of 1:1 between po sitive
and negative charges.
Static electricity is when an excess of electric charge col lects on an object’s surface.
Resistivity, a physical property that measures the abilit y of a material to carry current, is the main factor in det ermining whether
a substance is a conductor or an insulator.
Conductors contain electric charges that, when exposed to a potential difference, move towards one pole or the other. This flow
of charge is electric current.
Insulators are materials in which the internal charge canno t flow freely, and thus cannot conduct electric current to an
appreciable degree when exposed to an electric field.
The Oil-Drop Experiment involved ionizing droplets of oil as they fell through the air, and balancing the force of gr avity with
the force of an electric field applied by electrodes abov e and below the droplet.
Millikan could not directly count the number of electron s on each oil droplet, but found that the common denomin ator between
all measured charges was equal to 1.5924(17)×10 C, and th us concluded that this value was the charge of an electron.
The measured value of an electron’s charge, 1.5924(17)×1 0 C, differs from the accepted value of 1.602176487(40)×10 C
by less than one percent.
Key Terms
nucleus: the massive, positively charged central part of an atom, m ade up of protons and neutrons
coulomb: In the International System of Units, the derived unit of electric charge; the amount of electric charge carrie d by a
current of 1 ampere flowing for 1 second. Symbol: C
gravity: Resultant force on Earth’s surface, of the attraction by t he Earth’s masses, and the centrifugal pseudo-force caus ed by
the Earth’s rotation.
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
discharge: the act of releasing an accumulated charge
static electricity: an electric charge that has built up on an insulated body, often due to friction
dipole moment: The vector product of the charge on either pole of a di pole and the distance separating them.
dielectric: An electrically insulating or nonconducting materia l considered for its electric susceptibility (i.e., it s property of
polarization when exposed to an external electric fie ld).
insulator: A substance that does not transmit heat (thermal insu lator), sound (acoustic insulator) or electricity (el ectrical
insulator).
electric charge: A quantum number that determines the electromagnetic interactions of some subatomic particles; by
convention, the electron has an electric charge of -1 an d the proton +1, and quarks have fractional charge.18
−19 −19
−19
−19 −19

17.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543conductor: A material which contains movable electric charges.
resistivity: In general, the resistance to electric current of a mater ial; in particular, the degree to which a material resists th e
flow of electricity.
voltage: The amount of electrostatic potential between two poin ts in space.
terminal velocity: The speed at which an object in free-fall and not in a vac uum ceases to accelerate downwards because the
force of gravity is equal and opposite to the drag for ce acting against it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Electric charge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png. License: CC
BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric charge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gravity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gravity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
coulomb. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coulomb. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png. License: CC
BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static electricity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_electricity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
discharge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/discharge. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
static electricity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_electricity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

17.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Dipolar polarization. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dipolar_polarization. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
insulator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/insulator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dipole moment. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dipole_moment. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dielectric model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dielectric_model.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Water molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_molecule. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
electric charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric charge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Charge conservation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Charge_conservation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Static electricity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_electricity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
discharge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/discharge. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
static electricity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_electricity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dielectric model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dielectric_model.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Water molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_molecule. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Charges_repulsion_attra ction.svg/364pxCharges_repulsion_attraction.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

17.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Lightning_strike_jan_ 2007.jpg/800pxLightning_strike_jan_2007.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Insulator (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Insulator_(electricity). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_conductor. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
resistivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
insulator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/insulator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dielectric model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dielectric_model.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Water molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_molecule. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Charges_repulsion_attra ction.svg/364pxCharges_repulsion_attraction.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Lightning_strike_jan_ 2007.jpg/800pxLightning_strike_jan_2007.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Stripped wire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stripped_wire.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Oil drop experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Oil_drop_experiment. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
voltage. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
terminal velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/terminal_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric Charge. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yimS3LfqFrY. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Coulombslaw. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coulombslaw.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

17.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543Dielectric model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dielectric_model.svg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Water molecule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_molecule. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Static on the playground (48616367). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Static_on_the_playground_(48616367).jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Charges_repulsion_ attraction.svg/364pxCharges_repulsion_attraction.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Lightning_stri ke_jan_2007.jpg/800pxLightning_strike_jan_2007.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Stripped wire. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stripped_wire.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simplified scheme of Millikan's oil-drop experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simplified_scheme_of_Millikan%E2%80%99 s_oil-drop_experiment.png. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 17.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

17.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454417.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
Describe structure of a Faraday cage
Electrostatic shielding is the phenomenon that is obser ved when a Faraday cage operates to block the effects of an electric field.
Such a cage can block the effects of an external fie ld on its internal contents, or the effects of an i nternal field on the outside
environment.
A Faraday cage is a closed chamber consisting of a con ducting material or a mesh of such a material. This t ype of cage was first
invented by Michael Faraday in 1836, and can block extern al static and non-static electric fields.
When an external electric field operates on a Faraday cage, the charges within the cage (which are mobile, as the cage is a
conductor) rearrange themselves to directly counteract the field and thus “shield” the interior of the cage fro m the external field
Faraday Cage in Presence of an External Electrical Field: As the field is applied, the negative charge from the cage migrates
toward the positive end of the field, canceling the effec ts of the field at both ends of the cage.
The action of a Faraday cage may depend on whether or not it is grounded. Consider a charge placed within a cage. If the cage is
not grounded, electrons in the cage will redistribute such that the interior wall of the cage takes on a c harge opposite the internal
charge. This would leave an exterior wall of opposite c harge to that of the interior. If it is grounded, ho wever, excess charges on the
exterior of the cage will go to the ground, leaving the ext erior wall of neutral charge.
Limitations
Faraday cages are limited in their effectiveness, and c annot block static and slowly varying magnetic fields, such as that of the
planet Earth. They can, however, shield the interior from external magnetic radiation provided that the mesh is smaller than the
wavelength of the radiation and that the shield is suffic iently thick.
Applications
Microwave ovens contain energy within themselves, shielding the outside from harmful radiation.
Electrical linemen often wear suits made of Faraday cages s o as to avoid electrocution.
Elevators can act as unintended Faraday cages, shielding cell phones and radios from signal from the outside.
Induced Charge
Electrostatic induction is the redistribution of charge s within an object that occurs as a reaction to the pres ence of a nearby charge.
Compare electrostatic induction processes in conductors an d dielectrics
Electrostatic induction is the redistribution of charge within an object, which occurs as a reaction to a nearby cha rge.learning objectives
learning objectives

17.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14544Normally, a unit of matter will have equal parts positi ve and negative charge, distributed evenly throughou t the object. As such, it
has no net charge.
If a charged piece of matter is brought into close p roximity with respect to an uncharged piece of matte r, it can induce charge
redistribution in the neutral material.
In such an event, the electrons in the neutral objec t move (the protons are relatively inert) according to the charge of the nearby
charged object (inductor). If the inductor is posit ive, electrons migrate toward it, making the uncharged object more negative in that
area and positive in the region opposite it. If the inductor is negative, the electrons in the neutral o bject are repelled, leaving a
positive charge near the inductor and a negative charge opposite it.
Electric Induction Experiment: Circa 1870, the positive end of an electrostatic gener ator is placed near an uncharged brass
cylinder, causing the cylinder to polarize as its left end becomes positive and its right end becomes negative.
If a charged object comes in touch with an uncharged object, or the two come sufficiently close to one ano ther to cause a discharge
that bridges the gap between them, the previously unc harged object will become charged. Depending on the si gn of the charge of
the inductor, electrons will go to or leave the prev iously uncharged object. Total charge is conserved, an d that of the inductor
decreases as it transfers charge to its subject.
Subjects that can react to inductors include conduct ors and dielectrics. In the case of the former, the f ree flow of charges makes it
possible for strong polarization to occur. In the case of t he latter, the force is comparatively weak.
Key Points
Electrostatic shielding is the phenomenon that is observed wh en a Faraday cage operates to block the effects of an el ectric field.
Such a cage can block the effects of an external field on its internal contents, or the effects of an internal fiel d on the outside
environment.
A Faraday cage is a closed chamber consisting of a cond ucting material or a mesh of such a material. This type of cage can
block external static and non-static electric field s.
Faraday cages cannot block static and slowly varying mag netic fields, such as that of the planet Earth. They ca n, however,
shield the interior from external magnetic radiatio n provided that the mesh is smaller than the wavelength of the radiation and
that the shield is sufficiently thick.
If a charged piece of matter is brought into close proxi mity with respect to an uncharged piece of matter, it can i nduce charge
redistribution in the neutral material. This is one fo rm of induction.
If a charged object comes in touch with an uncharged obje ct, or the two come sufficiently close to one another to cau se a
discharge that bridges the gap between them, the previou sly uncharged object will become charged. This is another f orm of
induction.
Subjects that can react to inductors include conductors and dielectrics. In the case of the former, the free flow of char ges makes
it possible for strong polarization to occur. In the ca se of the latter, the force is comparatively weak.

17.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14544Key Terms
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as, and correspond s to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
discharge: the act of releasing an accumulated charge
inductor: A passive device that introduces inductance into an elec trical circuit.
dielectric: An electrically insulating or nonconducting materia l considered for its electric susceptibility (i.e., it s property of
polarization when exposed to an external electric fie ld).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Faraday cage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday_cage. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Faraday cage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Faraday_cage.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrostatic_induction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
discharge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/discharge. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Faraday cage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Faraday_cage.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic induction experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_induction_experiment.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Boundless.

17.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454517.3: Coulomb’s Law
Apply the superposition principle to determine the net resp onse caused by two or more stimuli
The superposition principle (also known as superposition property) states that: for all linear systems, the net response at a given
place and time caused by two or more stimuli is the sum of the responses which would have been caused by ea ch stimulus
individually. For Coulomb’s law, the stimuli are forces. Therefor e, the principle suggests that total force is a vector sum of
individual forces.
Coulomb Force
The scalar form of Coulomb’s Law relates the magnitude and sign of the electrostatic force F, acting simulta neously on two point
charges q and q:
Lorentz Force on a Moving Particle: Lorentz force f on a charged particle (of charge q) in motion (instantaneous velocity v). The
E field and B field vary in space and time.
where r is the separation distance and ε is electric pe rmittivity. If the product q q is positive, the force b etween them is repulsive;
if q q is negative, the force between them is attractive. The principle of linear superposition allows the e xtension of Coulomb’s
law to include any number of point charges—in order to derive the force on any one point charge by a ve ctor addition of these
individual forces acting alone on that point charge. The resulting force vector happens to be parallel to the electric field vector at
that point, with that point charge removed.
To calculate the force on a small test charge q at positi on rr, due to a system of N discrete charges:
where q and r are the magnitude and position vector of the i-th charge, respectively, and is a unit vec tor in the direction of
(a vector pointing from charges q to q.)
Of course, our discussion of superposition of forces appli es to any types (or combinations) of forces. For exampl e, when a charge is
moving in the presence of a magnetic field as well as a n electric field, the charge will feel both electros tatic and magnetic forces.
Total force, affecting the motion of the charge, will be the vector sum of the two forces. (In this parti cular example of the moving
charge, the force due to the presence of electromagnet ic field is collectively called Lorentz force (see).learning objectives
1 2
0 1 2
1 2
i i
i

17.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14545Spherical Distribution of Charge
The charge distribution around a molecule is spherical in nature, and creates a sort of electrostatic “cloud” arou nd the molecule.
Describe shape of a Coulomb force from a spherical distribu tion of charge
Through the work of scientists in the late 18th cent ury, the main features of the electrostatic force —t he existence of two types of
charge, the observation that like charges repel, unlik e charges attract, and the decrease of force with dist ance—were eventually
refined, and expressed as a mathematical formula. The mathematical formula for the electrostatic force i s called Coulomb ‘s law
after the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736–1806), who performed experiments and first proposed a formula t o calculate it.
Charge distribution in a water molecule: Schematic representation of the outer electron clou d of a neutral water molecule. The
electrons spend more time near the oxygen than the h ydrogens, giving a permanent charge separation as sho wn. Water is thus a
polar molecule. It is more easily affected by electrosta tic forces than molecules with uniform charge distributio ns.
Modern experiments have verified Coulomb’s law to grea t precision. For example, it has been shown that the fo rce is inversely
proportional to distance between two objects squared (F∝1/r) to an accuracy of 1 part in 1016. No exceptions have ever been
found, even at the small distances within the atom.
Coulomb’s law holds even within the atoms, correctly d escribing the force between the positively charged n ucleus and each of the
negatively charged electrons. This simple law also co rrectly accounts for the forces that bind atoms toge ther to form molecules and
for the forces that bind atoms and molecules together t o form solids and liquids.
Generally, as the distance between ions increases, the ene rgy of attraction approaches zero and ionic bonding is less favorable. As
the magnitude of opposing charges increases, energy inc reases and ionic bonding is more favorable.
An electric field is a vector field which associates to each point of the space the Coulomb force that wi ll experience a test unity
charge. Given the electric field, the strength and dir ection of a force F on a quantity charge q in an ele ctric field E is determined by
the electric field. For a positive charge, the directi on of the electric field points along lines directed radially away from the location
of the point charge, while the direction is towards for a n egative charge.
This distribution around a charged molecule is spheric al in nature, and creates a sort of electrostatic “c loud” around the molecule.
The attraction or repulsion forces within the spheric al distribution of charge is stronger closer to the m olecule, and becomes weaker
as the distance from the molecule increases.
This image shows the outer electron cloud of a neutral water molecule. The charge distribution of the oxygen molecule is negative,
and attracts the two positive hydrogen molecules. The attraction between the two opposing charges forms a neu tral water molecule.
It is a polar molecule because there is still a perm anent charge separation because the electrons spend more time near the oxygen
than the hydrogens.
Solving Problems with Vectors and Coulomb’s Law
Coulomb’s Law, which calculates the electric force betwee n charged particles, can be written in vector notation as.learning objectives

17.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14545Explain when the vector notation of Coulomb’s Law can be used
Solving Problems with Vectors and Coulomb’s Law
Electric Force Between Two Point Charges
To address the electrostatic forces among electrical ly charged particles, first consider two particles with electric charges q and Q,
separated in empty space by a distance r. Suppose that we want to find the electric force vector o n charge q. (The electric force
vector has both a magnitude and a direction.) We can express the location of charge q as r, and the location of charge Q as r. In
this way we can know both how strong the electric force is on a charge, but also what direction that force is d irected in. Coulomb’s
Law using vectors can be written as:
In this equation, k is equal to,where is the permit tivity of free space and εε is the relative permitt ivity of the material in
which the charges are immersed. The variables and a re in bold because they are vectors. Thus, we need to find
by performing standard vector subtraction. This mean s that we need to subtract the corresponding compone nts of vector
from vector.
This vector notation can be used in the simple example of t wo point charges where only one of which is a source of charge.
Application of Coulomb’s Law: In a simple example, the vector notation of Coulom b’s Law can be used when there are two point
charges and only one of which is a source charge.
Electric Force on a Field Charge Due to Fixed Source Charges
Suppose there is more than one point source charges pr oviding forces on a field charge. diagrams a fairly si mple example with
three source charges (shown in green and indexed by su bscripts) and one field charge (in red, designated q). We assume that the
source charges are fixed in space, and the field charge q is subject to forces from the source charges.
Multiple point charges: Coulomb’s Law applied to more than one point source charges pr oviding forces on a field charge.
Note the coordinate system that has been chosen. All of the charges lie on the corners of a square, and the o rigin is chosen to
collocate with the lower right source charge, and alig ned with the square. Since we can have only one origin of coordinates, no
more than one of the source points can lie at the o rigin, and the displacements from different source po ints to the field point differ.
The total force on the field charge q is due to applications of the force described in t he vector notation of Coulomb’s Law from
each of the source charges. The total force is therefor e the sum of these individual forces.learning objectives
q Q
Extra close brace or missing open brace

17.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14545
Displacements of field charge: The displacements of the field charge from each source charge are shown as light blue arrows.
Applying Coulomb’s Law three times and summing the results gives u s:
This equation can further be simplified and applied to a fixed number of charge points.
Electrostatics 1: Coulomb' s LawElectrostatics 1: Coulomb' s Law

17.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14545Coulomb’s Law: In this video I continue with my series of tutorial videos on Electrostatics. It’s pitched at undergraduate level a nd
while it is mainly aimed at physics majors, it should be usefu l to anybody taking a first course in electricity and mag netism such as
engineers etc.
Key Points
The superposition principle suggests that the net response at a given place and time caused by two or more stimuli is the sum of
the responses which would have been caused by each stimulu s individually.
Total Coulomb force on a test charge due to a group of ch arges is equal to the vector sum of all the Coulomb force s between the
test charge and other individual charges.
The superposition of forces is not limited to Coulomb for ces. It applies to any types (or combinations) of forces.
The force between two objects is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between two objects.
The attraction or repulsion forces within the spherical d istribution of charge is stronger closer to the molecule and becomes
weaker as the distance from the molecule increases.
This law also accounts for the forces that bind atoms togeth er to form molecules and for the forces that bind atoms and
molecules together to form solids and liquids.
The vector notation of Coulomb ‘s Law can be used in the simple example of two point charges where only one of which is a
source of charge.
The total force on the field charge for multiple point source charges is the sum of these individual forces.
Coulomb’s Law can be further simplified and applied to a fixe d number of charge points.
Key Items
Lorentz force: The force exerted on a charged particle in an electro magnetic field.
unit vector: A vector with length 1.
electrostatic force: The electrostatic interaction between electrically ch arged particles; the amount and direction of attraction or
repulsion between two charged bodies.
coulomb’s law: the mathematical equation calculating the electrosta tic force vector between two charged particles
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electrostatic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electrostatic%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

17.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14545Lorentz force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
unit vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/unit_vector. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Lorentz force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorentz_force. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Coulombu2019s Law. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42308/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electrostatic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electrostatic%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorentz_force. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Coulombu2019s Law. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42308/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
George Brown, Coulomb Law Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12742/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
George Brown, CLF Multiple Point Sources. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12747/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electrostatic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electrostatic%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorentz_force. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Coulombu2019s Law. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42308/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
George Brown, CLF Multiple Point Sources. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12747/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
George Brown, Coulomb Law Forces. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12742/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
George Brown, CLF Multiple Point Sources. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12747/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coulomb's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fbyew6sBiOA. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 17.3: Coulomb’s Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

17.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454617.4: The Electric Field Revisited
Identify law that can be used to calculate an electric fie ld created by a point charge
The electric field of a point charge is, like any e lectric field, a vector field that represents the eff ect that the point charge has on
other charges around it. The effect is felt as a forc e, and when charged particles are not in motion, this force is known as the
electrostatic force. The electrostatic force is, much l ike gravity, a force that acts at a distance. Therefo re, we rationalize this action
at a distance by saying that charges create fields aro und them that have effects on other charges.
Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size that contains a certain charge, electric field lines emanate radially in all
directions. If the charge is positive, field lines poi nt radially away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point radially
towards it.
Electric field of positive point charge: The electric field of a positively charged particle points radially away from the charge.
Electric field of negative point charge: The electric field of a negatively charged particle p oints radially toward the particle.
The reason for these directions can be seen in the d erivation of the electric field of a point charge. Let’s first take a look at the
definition of the electric field of a point particle:
The above equation is defined in radial coordinates, which can be seen in. The constant k is a result of simply combining the
constants together, and q is the charge of the particle creating the electric field. This charge is either positive or negative. I f thelearning objectives

17.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546charge is positive, as shown above, the electric field will be pointing in a positive radial direction from the charge q (away from the
charge).
As a demonstration of this phenomenon, if we now place a nother positive charge, Q (called the test charge), at some radial
distance, R, away from the original particle, the test charge will feel a force given by
Radial Coordinate System: The electric field of a point charge is defined in rad ial coordinates. The positive r direction points
away from the origin, and the negative r direction points to ward the origin. The electric field of a point charge is sy mmetric with
respect to the θ direction.
The thing to keep in mind is that the force above i s acting on the test charge Q, in the positive radial direction as defined by th e
original charge q. This means that because the charges are both positi ve and will repel one another, the force on the test charge
points away from the original charge.
If the test charge were negative, the force felt on that c harge would be:
Notice that this points in the negative ^rr^ directi on, which is toward the original charge. This makes sense because opposite
charges attract, and the force on the test charge wi ll tend to push it toward the original positive char ge creating the field. The above
mathematical description of the electric field of a point charge is known as Coulomb ‘s law.
Superposition of Fields
The resultant of multiple electric fields acting on th e same point is the sum of the strength of each field’s app lied force at that point.
Formulate the superposition principle for a linear system
As vector fields, electric fields obey the superpositi on principle. This principle states that for all line ar systems, the net response to
multiple stimuli at a given place and time is equal to the sum of the responses that would have resulted f rom each stimulus
individually.
Possible stimuli include but are not limited to: numb ers, functions, vectors, vector fields, and time-varying signals. It should be
noted that the superposition principle is applicable to any linear system, including algebraic equation s, linear differential equations,
and systems of equations of the aforementioned forms.
For example, if forces A and B are constant and simult aneously act upon an object, illustrated as O in, th e resultant force will be the
sum of forces A and B. Vector addition is commutative, so whether adding A to B or B to A makes no differ ence on the resultant
vector; this is also the case for subtraction of vectors.learning objectives

17.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546
Vector addition: Forces a and b act upon an object at point O. Their sum is co mmutative, and results in a resultant vector c.
Electric fields are continuous fields of vectors, so at a given point, one can find the forces that sever al fields will apply to a test
charge and add them to find the resultant. To do thi s, first find the component vectors of force applied by each field in each of the
orthogonal axes. This can be done using trigonometric functions. Then once the component vectors are fou nd, add the components
in each axis that are applied by the combined electric f ields.
This is one only form of solution. An overall resultan t vector can be found by using the Pythagorean theor em to find the resultant
(the hypotenuse of the triangle created with applied forces as legs) and the angle with respect to a given axis by equating the
inverse tangent of the angle to the ratio of the forces o f the adjacent and opposite legs.
Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
Electric fields created by multiple charges interact as do any other type of vector field; their forces can be sum med.
Calculate the resultant force of the multiple electric c harges on a test charge
Thus far, we have looked at electric field lines pert aining to isolated point charges. But what if another c harge is introduced? Each
will have its own electric field, and the two fields will interact.
When modeling the electric fields of multiple charg es, it’s important to take into consideration the sig n and magnitude of each
charge. Such models are not meant to be absolute, but m ust be self-consistent. For example, the number fiel d of lines should be
proportional to the value of the charge that gives rise to them. This means that if charges q (with a +1 value) q (+2 charge) and q
(+3 charge) are in the same field, one can connect 4, 8, and 12 field lines, respectively, to the charges. One could also choose to
connect 3, 6, and 9 field lines, respectively, to q, q, and q; what matters is that the number of lines are related to the charge
values by the same proportionality constant. Field lin es should always point away from positive charges and towards negative
charge.learning objectives
1 2 3
1 2 3

17.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546
Field lines between like and unlike charges: Example a shows how the electric field is weak between like cha rges (the
concentration of field lines is low between them). Example b, by contrast, has a strong field between the charges, as exhibited by
the high concentration of field lines connecting them.
If there are opposite charges in consideration, conn ect one to the other with field lines. If charges are t he same, do not connect them
in any way.
The strength of the electric field depends proporti onally upon the separation of the field lines. More fi eld lines per unit area
perpendicular to the lines means a stronger field. I t should also be noted that at any point, the direct ion of the electric field will be
tangent to the field line.
Determining net force on a test charge
As vector fields, electric fields exhibit properties typ ical of vectors and thus can be added to one anothe r at any point of interest.
Thus, given charges q, q,… q, one can find their resu ltant force on a test charge at a certain point using vector addition: adding
the component vectors in each direction and using th e inverse tangent function to solve for the angle o f the resultant relative to a
given axis.
Parallel-Plate Capacitor
A parallel-plate capacitor is an electrical component used to store energy in an electric field between two charg ed, flat surfaces.1 2 n

17.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546Describe general structure of a capacitor
Overview
A capacitor is an electrical component used to store energy in an electric field. Capacitors can take m any forms, but all involve two
conductors separated by a dielectric material. For the pu rpose of this atom, we will focus on parallel-plate capacito rs.
Diagram of a Parallel-Plate Capacitor: Charges in the dielectric material line up to oppose the c harges of each plate of the
capacitor. An electric field is created between the plat es of the capacitor as charge builds on each plate.
Capacitance
All capacitors collect charge on the two, separate cond uctive surfaces; one side is positive and the other n egative. An electric field
is created as charge builds on the opposite surface s, storing energy. The dielectric between the conduc tors is meant to act as an
insulator, preventing charge from bridging the gap b etween the two plates. Such dielectrics are commonly com posed of glass, air,
paper, or empty space (a vacuum). In practice, dielec trics do not act as perfect insulators, and permit a small amount of leakage
current to pass through them.
Capacitors are limited in their ability to prevent c harge flow from one conductive surface to the other; their ability to hold charge is
measured in Farads (F), which are defined as 1 ampere-se cond per volt, one joule per square volt and one Cou lomb per volt, among
other ways.
For a parallel-plate capacitor, capacitance (C) is rel ated to dielectric permittivity (ε), surface area (A), and separation between the
plates (d):
V oltage (V) of a capacitor is related to distance betwe en the plates, dielectric permittivity, conductor s urface area, and charge (Q)
on the plates:
Depending on the dielectric strength (E) and distance (d) between plates, a capacitor will “break” at a ce rtain voltage (V). This
is calculated by:learning objectives
ds bd

17.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546
High School Phy sics - Parallel Plates and Equipoten t High School Phy sics - Parallel Plates and Equipoten t
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines: A brief overview of parallel plates and equipotentia l lines from the viewpoint of
electrostatics.
Electric Fields and Conductors
Electric fields in the presence of conductors have severa l unique and not necessarily intuitive properties.
Describe unique properties expressed by electric field s in the presence of conductors
An electric field, like other fields (e.g., gravitation al or magnetic), is a vector field that surrounds an object. Electric fields are
found around electric charges and help determine th e direction and magnitude of force the charge exert s on a nearby charged
particle. It measures units of force exerted per unit of c harge, and its SI units are N/C.
learning objectives

17.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546
Field Lines Created by a Point Charge: Lines around the positive charge represent the electr ic field it creates.
Electrical conductors are materials in which interna l charges can move freely. Therefore, they can facili tate the flow of charge, or
current. When a conductor is placed in the presence of an electric field, it exhibits some interesting propert ies:
1. There is no electric field inside a charged conductor. A charged conductor at electrostatic equilibrium will contain charges only
on its outer surface and will have no net electric field with in itself. This is because all the charges in such a cond uctor will
symmetrically oppose other charges within the conductor, causing the net result to sum to 0.
2. Charged surfaces align themselves perpendicularly rel ative to electric fields. Provided a conductor is at elect rostatic
equilibrium, the electric field upon the surface will be aligned perpendicularly with respect to that surface. If th ere were a
nonzero parallel component of the electric field, with respect to any charge on the surface of a conductor, that cha rge would
exert a force and would move. If the conductor is at equil ibrium, such a force cannot exist, and therefore the direc tion of the
electric field must be completely perpendicular to the surface.
3. Curvature on the surface of a conductor allows for inc reased charge concentration. Charge will not necessaril y distribute itself
evenly over the surface of a conductor. If the surface of t he conductor is flat, charge will be very evenly distributed. But as the
surface becomes more sharply curved, charge can be foun d more densely packed in areas, even if the conductor is at
electrostatic equilibrium. Charges on a curved surface repel one another less strongly than they would on a smoo th surface. This
is because, based on how the charges are positioned, much of the repulsion the charges exert is in the direction away from the
surface of the conductor, not along its surface. And it is h arder for charges to be pushed off a surface than along i t. Therefore,
the repulsion between charges on a curved surface is weaker.
Electrical Charge at a Sharp Point of a Conductor: Repulsive forces towards the more sharply curved surface o n the right aim
more outward than along the surface of the conductor.
Conductors and Fields in Static Equilibrium
In the presence of charge or an electric field, the charge s in a conductor will redistribute until they reach stati c equilibrium.
Describe behavior of charges in a conductor in the presen ce of charge or an electric field and under static equi librium
Conductors are materials in which charges can move fre ely. If conductors are exposed to charge or an electr ic field, their internal
charges will rearrange rapidly. For example, if a neutr al conductor comes into contact with a rod containing a negative charge,
some of that negative charge will transfer to the co nductor at the point of contact. But the charge will not stay local to the contactlearning objectives

17.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546point — it will distribute itself evenly over the sur face of the conductor. Once the charges are redistri buted, the conductor is in a
state of electrostatic equilibrium. It should be noted that the distribution of charges depends on the shap e of the conductor and that
static equilibrium may not necessarily involve an ev en distribution of charges, which tend to aggregate i n higher concentrations
around sharp points. This is explained in.
Electrical Charge at a Sharp Point of a Conductor: Forces between like charges at either end of the conductor a re identical, but
the components of the forces parallel to the surfaces are different. The component parallel to the surface is greatest on the flattest
surface and therefore moves charges away from one another more freely. This explains the difference in concentra tion of charge on
flat vs. pointed areas of a conductor.
Similarly, if a conductor is placed in an electric f ield, the charges within the conductor will move until the field is perpendicular to
the surface of the conductor. Negative charges in the conductor will align themselves towards the positive end of the electric field,
leaving positive charges at the negative end of the field. The conductor thus becomes polarized, with t he electric field becoming
stronger near the conductor but disintegrating insid e it. This occurrence is similar to that observed in a Faraday cage, which is an
enclosure made of a conducting material that shield s the inside from an external electric charge or fie ld or shields the outside from
an internal electric charge or field.
Key Points
The electric field is a vector field around a charged particle. It represents the force that other charged par ticles would feel if
placed near the particle creating the electric field.
Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size, t hat contains a certain charge, electric field lines emana te from equally
in all radial directions.
If the point charge is positive, field lines point away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point toward it.
The superposition principle states that for all linear sy stems, the net response to multiple stimuli at a given pla ce and time is
equal to the sum of the responses that would have been caus ed by each stimulus individually.
Possible stimuli include but are not limited to numbers, f unctions, vectors, vector fields, and time-varying sign als.
The superposition principle is applicable to any line ar system, including algebraic equations, linear differen tial equations, and
systems of equations of the aforementioned forms.
Electric fields are continuous fields of vectors, so at a given point, one can find the forces that several fi elds will apply to a test
charge and add them to find the resultant.
When multiple electric charges interact, their resultant f orce on a test charge can be calculated using vector a ddition.
If there are opposite charges in consideration, connect one to the other with field lines. If charges are the sa me, do not connect
them in any way.
When modeling the electric fields of multiple charges, take into consideration the sign and magnitude of each c harge. The
number of field lines should be proportional to the value of the charge that gives rise to them.
Capacitors can take many forms, but all involve two conduct ors separated by a dielectric material.
All capacitors collect charge on the two, separate conduc tive surfaces; one side is positive and the other negati ve. An electric
field is created as charge builds on the opposite surfac es, storing energy. The dielectric acts as an insulator, isol ating the charged
surfaces.
The ability of capacitors to hold charge is measured i n Farads (F). Capacitors will typically allow a small leakage o f current
through the dielectric, but after a certain voltage, th e entire capacitor breaks down as the dielectric becomes a conductor.
There is no electric field inside a charged conductor. This is because charges, which are located on the surface of the conductor,
symmetrically oppose one another and sum to 0 in all loc ations.

17.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546Charged surfaces align themselves perpendicularly relat ive to electric fields to achieve electrostatic equil ibrium. If charges are
not distributed as such, they will exert net force upon one another, which will move them. In such an instance, the cha rges will
not be at static equilibrium.
Curvature on the surface of a field allows for increased charge concentration. Much of the repulsion charges exe rt is in the
direction moving away from the surface of the conduct or, rather than along its surface. Charges thus push one another more
weakly along the surface of a curved conductor.
The presence of charge or an electric field will force ch arges in a conductor to redistribute along the conducto r’s surface until
static equilibrium is achieved.
At static equilibrium, charge will be more concentrated in sharp, pointy areas of conductors than elsewhere.
At static equilibrium, the inside of a conductor will be en tirely shielded from an external electric field.
Key Terms
coulomb’s law: the mathematical equation calculating the electrosta tic force vector between two charged particles
vector field: a construction in which each point in a Euclidean space i s associated with a vector; a function whose range is a
vector space
orthogonal: Of two objects, at right angles; perpendicular to each ot her.
superposition principle: The principle that a linear combination of two or more s olutions of an equation is itself a solution; it is
a feature of many physical laws.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
capacitor: An electronic component capable of storing an electric charge, especially one consisting of two conductors separ ated
by a dielectric.
dielectric: An electrically insulating or nonconducting materia l considered for its electric susceptibility (i.e., it s property of
polarization when exposed to an external electric fie ld).
conductor: A material which contains movable electric charges.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
vector field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Superposition principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition_principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
orthogonal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/orthogonal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

17.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
superposition principle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superposition_principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Vector Addition. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13601/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Vector Addition. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13601/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Vector Addition. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13601/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJ910SiVha0. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

17.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546vector field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electrical conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_conductor. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Vector Addition. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13601/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJ910SiVha0. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Field_lines.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Vector Addition. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13601/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJ910SiVha0. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectr ic.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Field_lines.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution

17.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14546OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 17.4: The Electric Field Revisited is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

17.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454717.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
Express the electric flux for uniform and non-uniform el ectric fields
Electric flux is the rate of flow of the electric fi eld through a given area (see). Electric flux is prop ortional to the number of electric
field lines going through a virtual surface.
Electric Flux: Electric flux visualized. The ring shows the surface boun daries. The red arrows for the electric field lines.
If the electric field is uniform, the electric flux p assing through a surface of vector area S is where E i s the
magnitude of the electric field (having units of V/m), S is the area of the surface, and θ is the angle bet ween the electric field lines
and the normal (perpendicular) to S.
For a non-uniform electric field, the electric flux through a small surface area dS is given by (the elect ric field, E,
multiplied by the component of area perpendicular to the field).
Gauss’ Law describes the electric flux over a surface S a s the surface integral: where E is the electric field and dS is
a differential area on the closed surface S with an outward f acing surface normal defining its direction.
It is important to note that while the electric flux is not affected by charges that are not within the closed surface, the net electric
field, E, in the Gauss’ Law equation, can be affected by charges that lie outside the closed surface. While Gau ss’ Law holds for all
situations, it is only useful for “by hand” calculatio ns when high degrees of symmetry exist in the electr ic field. Examples include
spherical and cylindrical symmetry.
Electric flux has SI units of volt metres (V m), or, equivalently, newton metres squared per coulomb (N m C). Thus, the SI base
units of electric flux are kg·m ·s ·A.
Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law is a law relating the distribution of electric char ge to the resulting electric field.learning objectives
2 −1
3 −3 −1

17.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14547Describe relationship between the Gauss’s law and the Coulomb ’s law
Gauss’s law, also known as Gauss’s flux theorem, is a law relating the distribution of electric charge to the resulting electr ic field.
The law was formulated by Carl Friedrich Gauss (see) in 1835, but was not published until 1867. It is one of t he four Maxwell’s
equations which form the basis of classical electrodyn amics, the other three being Gauss’s law for magnetism, Fa raday’s law of
induction, and Ampère’s law with Maxwell’s correction.
Carl Friedrich Gauss: Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), painted by Christian Al brecht Jensen
Gauss’s law can be used to derive Coulomb’s law, and vi ce versa. Note that since Coulomb’s law only applies t o stationary charges,
there is no reason to expect Gauss’s law to hold for mo ving charges based on this derivation alone. In fact, Gauss’s law does hold
for moving charges, and in this respect Gauss’s law is more g eneral than Coulomb’s law.
In words, Gauss’s law states that: The net outward normal electric flux through any closed surface is proporti onal to the total
electric charge enclosed within that closed surface.
The law can be expressed mathematically using vector calculus in integral form and differential form, bot h are equivalent since
they are related by the divergence theorem, also cal led Gauss’s theorem. Each of these forms in turn can a lso be expressed two
ways: In terms of a relation between the electric fie ld E and the total electric charge, or in terms of the electric displacement field D
and the free electric charge.
Gauss’s law has a close mathematical similarity with a nu mber of laws in other areas of physics, such as Gauss’s law for
magnetism and Gauss’s law for gravity. In fact, any “in verse-square law” can be formulated in a way similar to Gauss’s law: For
example, Gauss’s law itself is essentially equivalent to the inverse-square Coulomb’s law, and Gauss’s law f or gravity is essentially
equivalent to the inverse-square Newton’s law of gravity.
Key Points
If the electric field is uniform, the electric flux passing through a surface of vector area S is.
For a non-uniform electric field, the electric flux i s.
Electrical flux has SI units of volt metres (V m).
Gauss’s law is one of the four Maxwell’s equations which form the basis of classical electrodynamics.
Gauss’s law can be used to derive Coulomb ‘s law, and vice vers a.
Gauss’s law states that: The net outward normal electric flux through any closed surface is proportional to the total ele ctric
charge enclosed within that closed surface.learning objectives

17.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14547Key Terms
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
electric displacement field: A vector field that appears in Maxwell’s equations.
electric charge: A quantum number that determines the electromagnetic interactions of some subatomic particles; by
convention, the electron has an electric charge of -1 an d the proton +1, and quarks have fractional charge.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_flux. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/7/72/Flux_diagram.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Gauss's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gauss's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electric displacement field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electric%20displacement%20field.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electric charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/7/72/Flux_diagram.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/9/9b/Carl_Friedrich_Gauss.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

17.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454817.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Describe effect of the DNA replication process on the hydro gen bonds
All living organisms contain either DNA or RNA. These mo lecules contain genetic information that defines (or at least influences)
all of the organism’s characteristics. In both DNA an d RNA, electrostatics plays a major role. For the purpo se of this atom we focus
specifically on DNA.
DNA is a large macromolecule that (in three-dimensiona l space) forms the shape of a double helix, as shown in. The “backbone” of
each helix is formed from alternating deoxyribose a nd phosphate subunits as illustrated in. Each deoxyri bose is connected to a base
that extends between the two backbones. Four bases can be found in DNA: adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine. The ir ordering
in sequence determines the genetic characteristics of the parent organism.
Phosphate in DNA: The complex molecules that make up our DNA are held tog ether by a phosphate-deoxyribose backbone, as
shown.
The bases of each strand of DNA are positioned close t o one another but not as a result of formal chemical bonds. Electrostatic
interactions, in this case otherwise known as hydrogen bonds, are what hold these bonds together.
In, (in the instance of guanine and cytosine) there a re three instances in which hydrogen atoms are attrac ted to nearby nitrogen and
oxygen atoms (denoted by dashed lines). For adenine and thymine, there are two such hydrogen bonds. These in teractions can be
modeled as electrostatic interactions—electrons from the oxygen and nitrogen atoms are negative, and are attracted to the exposed
nuclei (which are positive) of the nearby hydrogen a toms. These hydrogen bonds are relatively weak, but their sum is strong
enough to hold the two DNA strands together.learning objectives

17.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14548
Hydrogen bonding between Guanine and Cytosine: In the instance of guanine and cytosine, there are thr ee instances in which
hydrogen atoms are attracted to nearby nitrogen and ox ygen atoms (denoted by dashed lines).
When DNA replicates, as it does in cellular reproduction, it is first “unzipped” by any of a number of enzy mes known as DNA
Helicases. These enzymes break the electrostatic hydrog en bonds between the two strands.
Photocopy Machines and Printers
Photocopiers use xerography, a process that uses principl es of electrostatics, to copy images.
Describe functions of a photocopier and distinguish the th ree steps of xerography
A photocopier is a machine that prints copies of do cuments and images on paper. Currently, most photocopie rs use a process called
xerography, which is dry and uses heat in printing.
Different models of photocopiers vary somewhat in thei r methods, but the first instance of xerography involve d use of a
photosensor with a copy camera and a separate process ing unit. To this day, xerography is conducted in a five-step process, in
which electrostatics play an important role. This proces s is diagrammed in with explanations of each step outlined in t he text below.learning objectives

17.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14548
How a photocopier works: This image describes how a photocopier works.
Charging
In the first step of xerography, a high-voltage devic e (either a corona wire or charge roller) charges a cylindrical drum. This occurs
by corona discharge, with output limited by a control grid or screen: a negative charge on the wire ionizes the space between the
wire and conductor, so electrons are repelled and pu shed onto the conductor. The conductor is put on top of a conducting surface
and is kept at ground potential.
Polarity of charge can be altered depending on desir ed effects. A positive process is used to produce blac k on white copies, while a
negative process is used to produce black on white from ne gative originals.
Exposure
A lamp illuminates the original document. The white areas of the original reflect light onto the surface of the drum, which exhibits
photoconductivity (it becomes a conductor in the pr esence of light). The areas of the drum exposed to li ght then discharge to the
ground; the other parts of the drum (which are not c onductive, having not been exposed to light) remain negatively charged. Thus,
the result is an electric image on the surface of the drum.
Developing
The toner, a powder used to form images on the paper, is positively charged. When it is placed on the dru m, it is attracted to the
negative (black) areas. This develops the image.

17.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14548Transfer
The image with toner on the drum is transferred to a piece of paper with more negative charge than the drum.
Fusing
The toner is melted and bonded to the paper by heat and pr essure rollers.
It should be noted that the explanation above is typ ical for modern copiers, but some older copiers use a positive drum and paper,
and a negatively charged toner.
Van de Graff Generators
A Van de Graaff generator is a device that can be us ed to separate charges and create potential differen ces in the range of
megavolts.
Identify and describe functions of the major parts of a Va n de Graaff generator
A Van de Graaff generator is a device used to separate electric charges. Using a moving belt, it can create extremely high potential
differences. In some cases these can reach a value in excess of five megavolts.
Fundamentally, a Van de Graaff generator consists of a flexible dielectric belt (silk is commonly used) run ning over two metal
pulleys. One of these pulleys is surrounded by a hollo w metal sphere. Two electrodes are positioned near the b ottom of the lower
pulley and inside the sphere, over the upper pulley. On e comb is connected to the sphere, and another is con nected to the ground. In
this figure, a high, positive DC potential is applied to the upper roller.
Schematic of a Van de Graaff Generator: Numbers in the diagram indicate: 1) hollow metal sphere; 2) upper electrode; 3) upper
roller (for example an acrylic glass); 4) side of the be lt with positive charges; 5) opposite side of the belt with ne gative charges; 6)
lower roller (metal); 7) lower electrode (ground); 8) sp herical device with negative charges, used to discharge the main sphere; 9)
spark produced by the difference of potentials
The separation of charge in a Van de Graaff generato r is a complex, multistep process. Due to the electric f ield around the lower
pulley, the belt receives negative charge as it passe s the lower comb. When the belt comes into contact wit h the upper roller, it
leaves the roller with a negative charge as electron s are transferred. Electrons seep from the belt to the upper comb and then the
terminal, leaving the belt positively charged and th e terminal negatively charged. The sphere acts as a Fa raday shield, shielding the
upper roller and comb from the electric field produ ced by charges on the outside of the sphere. Eventual ly, discharge occurs, and
the belt changes polarity. As the belt continues, a charg ing current travels via the belt, and the sphere tak es on more and morelearning objectives

17.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14548negative charge until the rates at which it gains an d loses charge (which occurs by leakage and corona d ischarge) are equal. Final
potential is proportional to the size of the sphere and i ts distance from the ground.
Key Points
In DNA, hydrogen bonds between base pairs hold two opposite stra nds together.
The hydrogen bonds that hold DNA together are electrost atic interactions between the nucleus of a hydrogen atom and the
electrons of an oxygen or a nitrogen atom.
When DNA replicates, a helicase enzyme “unzips” the double h elix, breaking the hydrogen bonds that hold it together in the
center.
In the first step of xerography, a high-voltage device (ei ther a corona wire or charge roller) charges a cylindrica l drum.
In the second step, a lamp illuminates the original docume nt. The white areas of the original reflect light ont o the surface of the
drum, which is photoconductive. The areas of the drum exp osed to light then discharge to the ground.
Next, the toner, a positively-charged powder used to form i mages on the paper, is placed on the drum. It is attracte d to the
negative (black) areas. This develops the image.
The image with toner on the drum is then transferred to a piece of paper with more negative charge than the drum.
Finally, the toner is melted and bonded to the paper by hea t and pressure rollers.
Fundamentally, a Van de Graaff generator consists of a flex ible dielectric belt (silk is commonly used) running o ver two metal
pulleys.
The belt is used to transport charge, isolating positive charge from negative charge.
The maximum potential difference a Van de Graaff gener ator can create is achieved when the rates at which the sph ere (which
holds charge) gains and loses charge are equal. Charge ca n be lost by leakage and corona discharge.
Key Terms
base: A nucleotide’s nucleobase in the context of a DNA or RNA biopolymer.
photoconductivity: An increase in the electrical conductivity of a materia l as a result of incident electromagnetic radiation
xerography: a photocopying process in which a negative image formed on an electrically charged plate is transferred as a
positive to paper and thermally fixed
Faraday shield: A Faraday cage or Faraday shield is an enclosure formed b y conducting material or by a mesh of such
material. Such an enclosure blocks external static and no n-static electric fields.
polarity: the separation, alignment or orientation of something into two opposed poles
corona discharge: an electrical discharge brought on by the ionization of a fluid surrounding a conductor that is electrically
energized
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Andrew Hughes, Primary DNA Molecular Structure. September 18, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11411/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen bond. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_bond. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//chemistry/definition/base. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GC DNA base pair. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:GC_DNA_base_pair.svg. License: CC
BY: Attribution
File:DNA chemical structure.svg - Wikipedia, the free ency clopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:DNA_chemical_structure.svg&pag e=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

17.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14548Xerography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Xerography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
photoconductivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/photoconductivity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
xerography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/xerography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
GC DNA base pair. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:GC_DNA_base_pair.svg. License: CC
BY: Attribution
File:DNA chemical structure.svg - Wikipedia, the free ency clopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:DNA_chemical_structure.svg&pag e=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Xerographic photocopy process en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Xerographic_photocopy_process_en.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Van de Graaff generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_de_Graaff_generator. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
polarity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polarity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
corona discharge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/corona%20discharge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Faraday shield. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday%20shield. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
GC DNA base pair. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:GC_DNA_base_pair.svg. License: CC
BY: Attribution
File:DNA chemical structure.svg - Wikipedia, the free ency clopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:DNA_chemical_structure.svg&pag e=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Xerographic photocopy process en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Xerographic_photocopy_process_en.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Van de graaf generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Van_de_graaf_generator.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 17.6: Applications of Electrostatics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
18: Electric Potential and Electric Field
This page titled 18: Electric Potential and Electric Field is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.18.1: Overview
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
18.5: ApplicationsTopic hierarchy

18.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455018.1: Overview
Explain the relationship between the electric potentia l and the electric field
The relationship between electric potential and fiel d is similar to that between gravitational potential and field in that the potential
is a property of the field describing the action of the field upon an object (see).
Electric field and potential in one dimension: The presence of an electric field around the static po int charge (large red dot)
creates a potential difference, causing the test charge (s mall red dot) to experience a force and move.
The electric field is like any other vector field—i t exerts a force based on a stimulus, and has units o f force times inverse stimulus.
In the case of an electric field the stimulus is cha rge, and thus the units are NC. In other words, the el ectric field is a measure of
force per unit charge.
The electric potential at a point is the quotient of the potential energy of any charged particle at th at location divided by the charge
of that particle. Its units are JC. Thus, the electric po tential is a measure of energy per unit charge.
In terms of units, electric potential and charge are closely related. They share a common factor of inve rse Coulombs (C), while
force and energy only differ by a factor of distance (e nergy is the product of force times distance).
Thus, for a uniform field, the relationship between el ectric field (E), potential difference between points A and B (Δ), and distance
between points A and B (d) is:
The -1 coefficient arises from repulsion of positiv e charges: a positive charge will be pushed away from the positively charged
plate, and towards a location of higher-voltage.
The above equation is an algebraic relationship for a uniform field. In a more pure sense, without assumi ng field uniformity,
electric field is the gradient of the electric potentia l in the direction of x:
This can be derived from basic principles. Given that ∆ P=W (change in the energy of a charge equals work done on that charge), an
application of the law of conservation of energy, we can replace ∆P and W with other terms. ∆P can be sub stituted for its definition
as the product of charge (q) and the differential o f potential (dV). We can then replace W with its defini tion as the product of q,
electric field (E), and the differential of distance in t he x direction (dx):
Dividing both sides of the equation by q yields the pre vious equation.learning objectives
-1
-1
-1

18.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550Electric Potential Energy and Potential Difference
Electric potential energy results from forces betwee n charges; potential difference is the energy needed to move a charge from point
A to B.
Calculate the potential energy between the charges
Electric potential energy is a type of potential ene rgy that results from Coulomb forces. It is measured in joules and depends on the
positioning of charged particles relative to one another, as well as the magnitude of their respective charges.
The potential energy (U) between charges q and Q can be cal culated as a function of distance between the charges (r):
If there are three or more charges, the above formula can be modified so that the potential energies betwe en all charges are
summed. Consider, for example, the case involving charges Q, Q and Q:
In this example, r represents the distance between Q an d Q, r represents the distance between Q and Q, and r represents the
distance between Q and Q. The above formula can be modi fied for any number of charges.
Potential Difference
Potential difference, or voltage, is the difference in electric potential energy between two points. It is denoted by ∆V and has units
of volts, or joules per Coulomb.
High School Phy sics - Electric Potential DifferenceHigh School Phy sics - Electric Potential Differencelearning objectives
E
1 2 3
12 1 2 23 2 3 13
1 3

18.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550Electric Potential Difference: A brief overview of electric potential difference and e lectric potential energy for beginning physics
students.
V oltage denotes the work per unit charge that must be done against a static electric field to move a char ge from one point to
another. It may represent a source of energy, or lost, st ored or used energy. V oltage also is defined such th at negative charges are
pulled towards higher voltages, while positive charges move towards lower voltages. Thus, current in wires flo ws from higher to
lower voltages.
Potential difference is independent of path taken fr om one point to another, and may be measured by any of a number of
instruments. These include the voltmeter, the potenti ometer, and the oscilloscope. It is most typically meas ured in circuits, and in
such situations can be calculated using Ohm ‘s Law, which wil l be covered in a later atom.
Potential difference in a static field: When a charge q moves from point A to point B, the poten tial difference is independent of
path taken.
Electric Field and Changing Electric Potential
Electric field is the gradient of potential, which depen ds inversely upon distance of a given point of interest f rom a charge.
Calculate the electric potential created by a charge di stribution of constant value
Any charge will create a vector field around itself (k nown as an electric field). Electric field is the gra dient of potential, which
depends inversely upon distance of a given point of interest from a charge. Placing a second charge in the system (a “test charge”)
learning objectives

18.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550results in the two charges experiencing a force (the field’s units are Newtons, a measure of force per Coulom b), causing the charges
to move relative to one another. It is easiest to mode l interactions between two charges such that one is con sidered stationary while
the test charge moves.
As the test charge moves, the potential between it and an other charge changes, as does the electric field. The relationship between
potential and field (E) is a differential: electric fie ld is the gradient of potential (V) in the x direction. Thi s can be represented as:
Equipotential Lines: An isolated point charge Q with its electric field lines (blue) and equipotential lines (green)
Thus, as the test charge is moved in the x direction, the r ate of the its change in potential is the value of the elec tric field.
The instant before the test charge moves, its potent ial energy is at a maximum, and its kinetic energy i s 0. For any charge of
constant value (Q), the potential at a certain distance fro m it (r) can be calculated from the following equation:
where ε is the electric constant, otherwise known as per mittivity of free space. Moving towards and away from the charge results
in change of potential; the relationship between distance and potential is inverse.
For one point charge, potential will be constant for a ll points a certain radial distance away. Multiple poin ts of the same potential
are known as equipotential. In the case of fields cr eated by a single point charge, all points on any cir cle centered around the point
charge will be equipotential, as illustrated in.
shows that when multiple charges create a field, the e quipotential lines become irregularly shaped. This i s due to the fact that the
fields created by each charge overlap, thus potenti al is increased at any point relative to that which wou ld have arisen from one or
the other charge.
Potentials and Charged Conductors
Electric potential within a charged conductor is equ al to zero, but can be calculated as a nonzero valu e outside of a charged
conductor.
Determine the electric potential within and outside a charged conductor
When a conductor becomes charged, that charge distri butes across its surface until electrostatic equilib rium is reached. Its surface
is equipotential.
All points within a charged conductor experience an e lectric field of 0. This is because field lines from ch arges on the surface of the
conductor oppose one another equally. However, having the electric field equal to zero at all points within a conductor, the electric
potential within a conductor is not necessarily equal to zero for all points within that same conductor. This can be proven by
relating electric field and potential.0
learning objectives

18.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550
Electrical Charge at a Sharp Point of a Conductor: Repulsive forces towards the more sharply curved surface o n the right aim
more outward than along the surface of the conductor.
Given that work is the difference in final and initial potential energies (∆U), we can relate this differenc e to the dot product of force
at every infinitesimal distance l along the path between the points within the conductor:
\Delta \mathrm { U } = - \int _ { \mathrm { i } } ^ { f } \vec { \m athrm { F } } \cdot \mathrm { d } \vec { }
This is the equation for work, with ∆U substituted in pl ace of W. Rewriting U as the product of charge (q) and potential difference
(V), and force as the product of charge and electric field (E), we can assert:
Dividing both sides by the common term of q, we simplify the equation to:
Finally we derive the equation:
Thus we can conclude that, given that the electric f ield is constantly 0 for any location within the char ged conductor, the potential
difference in that same volume needs to be constant and equal to 0.
On the other hand, for points outside a conductor, pot ential is nonzero and can be defined by the very sa me equation, according to
field and distance from the conductor.
Uniform Electric Field
An electric field that is uniform is one that reaches the unattainable consistency of being constant throughout.
Describe properties and approximations of the uniform elect ric field
A uniform field is that in which the electric field i s constant throughout. Just like the so-called “frictio nless surface” in mechanics,
the uniform field is an ideal but unreal situation th at makes for simpler calculations. Equations involvin g non-uniform electric
fields require use of differential calculus.
Uniformity in an electric field can be approximated by placing two conducting plates parallel to one anot her and creating a
potential difference between them. In such a case th ere will be slight variations in the field near its e dges, but it will be
approximately constant throughout every other area.
The equation for magnitude of a uniform electric fiel d is:
where E is the field, Δ is the potential difference b etween the plates, and d is the distance between the plates. The coefficient of -1
arises from the fact that positive charges repel, and thus a positive charge will be pushed away from the posi tive plate and in a
direction opposite that of the increasing voltage.learning objectives

18.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550Uniformity of an electric field allows for simple calc ulation of work performed when a test charge is moved across it. For the case
of a positive charge q to be moved from a point A wi th a certain potential (V) to a point B with another potential (V), that
equation is:
The difference (V -V) can also be represented as ∆V or V. In uniform fields it is also simple to relate ∆ V to field strength and
distance (d) between points A and B:
Relationships within a uniform electric field: In this image, Work (W), field strength (E), and poten tial difference (∆V) are
defined for points A and B within the constructs of a unif orm potential field between the positive and negative pl ates.
Energy Conservation
Energy is conserved in the movement of a charged particle through an electric field, as it is in every other physical situation.
Formulate energy conservation principle for a charged p article in an electric field
Energy is conserved in the movement of a charged pa rticle through an electric field, as it is in every other physical situation. This
phenomenon can be expressed as the equality of summed ki netic (E) and electric potential (E) energies:
Given a stationary test charge in a certain location, an applied electric field will cause the charge to m ove to one end or the other,
depending on the charge (positive test charges will m ove in the direction of the field; negative charges will move in the opposite
direction). In all cases, a charge will naturally move fro m an area of higher potential energy to an area of lower p otential energy.1 2
2 1 AB
learning objectives
kin el

18.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550At the instant at which the field is applied, the motio nless test charge has 0 kinetic energy, and its ele ctric potential energy is at a
maximum. After that moment, the charge accelerates, an d its kinetic energy (from motion) increases as its p otential energy
decreases. Throughout this time, the sum of potential an d kinetic energies remains constant.
Another way to express the previous equation is:
where m and v are the mass and velocity of the electron, respective ly, and U is the electric potential energy. U can be calculated as
follows:
where V is the potential difference, k is a constant, q is a test charge, q is another charge, and r is the distance between the charges.
The terms involved in the formula for conservation of energy can be rewritten in many ways, but all expr essions are based on the
simple premise of equating the initial and final sums of kin etic and potential energy.
Similarities Between Activity of Gravitational and Electric F ields on an Object: The charge, +q, is moved down the electric
field in the same way that the object, m, is moved down the hil l. In both instances, the particle in motion goes from a h igher to a
lower potential energy state.
The Electron-Volt
The electron volt is a unit of energy useful in the physi cs of elementary charges and electricity.
Convert between electron volts and SI units of energy
Overview
The electron volt, symbolized as eV and sometimes writ ten as electronvolt, is a unit of energy useful in the physics of elementary
charges and electricity.
The electron volt is defined as the amount of energ y gained or lost by the charge of an electron moved across a one-volt electric
potential difference. As such, it is equal to the produ ct of one volt (1 J/C) and one elementary charge, giv ing it a value in joules
approximately equal to 1.602×10 J.
Not an SI unit in itself, the electron volt became use ful through experimentation. Scientists working with e lectrostatic particle
accelerators commonly used the relationship between energy (E), charge (q), and potential difference (V) in their work:0
learning objectives
-19

18.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550All calculations of energy from the above equation we re quantized as multiples of the elementary charge, q, for a given voltage,
and thus arose the common usage of the electron volt as a unit of measurement.
Momentum
Both electron volts and momentum are measures of energ y, and the two are related in high-energy physics. App lying a potential
difference to an electron gives it energy, which man ifests itself in motion of the electron through it. Giv en that the electron has both
mass and velocity, it has momentum. Dividing electron volts b y a constant with units of velocity results in a momentum.
Mass
Given that mass is equivalent to energy, the electron volt can measure mass. In particle physics, the equati on E=mc can be
rearranged to solve for mass:
Wavelength
The energy E, frequency v, and wavelength λ of a photon are related by
where h is the Planck constant and c is the speed of light. Thus, a photon with a wavelength of 532 nm (gr een light) would have an
energy of approximately 2.33 eV. Similarly, 1 eV would corr espond to an infrared photon of wavelength 1240 nm, and so on.
Energy of Photons in the Visible Spectrum: Relationship between wavelength and energy expressed in el ectron volts.
Temperature
In plasma physics, the electron volt can be used as a unit of temperature. To convert to Kelvins, simply div ide the value of 1 eV (in
Joules) by the Boltzmann constant (1.3806505(24)×10 J /K).
Dipole Moments
The electric dipole moment is a measure of polarity in a sy stem.
Relate the electric dipole moment to the polarity in a sy stem
The electric dipole moment is a measure of polarity, wh ich is the separation of positive and negative charg es in a system. It is
measured in units of Coulomb-meters (C m). There are many different types of dipole moments, including electric dipole moments,
magnetic dipole moments, and topological dipole moments.
Among the subset of electric dipole moments are transit ion dipole moments, molecular dipole moments, bond dip ole moments, and
electron electric dipole moments. For the purposes o f this atom we will focus on a broad overview of elect ric dipole moment in
static situations.2
-23
learning objectives

18.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550
Molecular Dipole Moment in Water: This water (H O) molecule has a high density of electrons (denoted by the red shading) near
the red O atom. Closer to the white H atoms, there is a low den sity of electrons. Therefore, the molecule is is a dipol e, with
negativity near the O and positivity closer to the H atom s.
Definition
Fundamentally, for the case of point charges with valu es +q and -q, an electric dipole moment (p) can be de fined as the vector
product of the charges and the displacement vector d:
The displacement vector is the vector with a magnitud e equal to the distance between the charges and a dir ection pointing from the
negative charge to the positive charge. It is essentia lly interchangeable with the “radius” variable in ma ny other equations (such as
those determining gravitational and electrostatic forc es), except that it includes the factor of direction.
Torque
All dipoles will experience a torsional force, or torq ue, when they are placed in external electric fields. This torque rotates the
dipole to align it with the field. It is brought on by the need to minimize potential energy. Torque (τ) can be calculated as the cross
product of the electric dipole moment and the electric field (E), assuming that E is spatially uniform:
Key Points
The electric field is a measure of force per unit cha rge; the electric potential is a measure of energy per un it charge.
For a uniform field, the relationship between electric field (E), potential difference between points A and B (Δ), and distance
between points A and B (d) is: If the field is not unifor m, calculus is required to solve.
Potential is a property of the field that describes the acti on of the field upon an object.
Electric potential energy is a type of potential energy that results from Coulomb forces. The potential energy (UE) between
charges q and Q can be calculated as a function of distance b etween the charges (r):.
The formula for potential energy can be modified for p otential between many charges, so long as the interactions of each charge
with every other charge in the system are considered. For exa mple, potential between three charges can be solved using t he
following formula:.
Potential difference, or voltage, is the difference in ele ctric potential energy between two points. It is denoted b y ∆V and has
units of volts, or joules per Coulomb.
For any charge of constant value (Q), the potential (VE) a t a certain distance from it (r) can be calculated from the equation:
Where is the electric constant, otherwise known as perm ittivity of free space.
For one point charge, potential will be constant for all p oints a certain radial distance away. Multiple points of th e same
potential are known as equipotential.
When multiple charges create a field, the equipotenti al lines become irregularly shaped. This is because the fie lds created by
each charge overlap, thus the potential is increased at a ny point relative to that which would have arisen from one o r the other
charge.
Electric potential (∆V) and field (E) are related accordi ng to the integral: where l is the distance between two
points between which the potential difference is being fou nd.2

18.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550Given that the electric field is constantly 0 for any loca tion within the charged conductor, it is impossible for po tential
difference in that same volume to have any value other than 0.
For points outside a conductor, potential is nonzero an d can be calculated according to field and distance from the conductor.
The uniform electric field is an approximation that m akes for simple calculations that don’t require differe ntial calculus. Every
field will have at least some irregularity, although some c an be very nearly uniform.
The equation for magnitude of a uniform electric fiel d is: where E is the field, Δ is the potential difference between the
plates, and d is the distance between the plates.
For the case of a positive charge q to be moved from a po int A with a certain potential (V) to a point B with anoth er potential
(V), that equation is: The difference (V -V) can also be r epresented as ∆V or V.
In uniform fields it is also simple to calculate potential difference: In this case, field strength is E, and distanc e
between points A and B is d.
Given a stationary test charge in a certain location, an ap plied electric field will cause the charge to move to one end or the
other, depending on the charge.
Positive test charges will move in the direction of the fie ld; negative charges will move in the opposite direction.
At the instant at which the field is applied, the motionle ss test charge has 0 kinetic energy, and its electric poten tial energy is at a
maximum. Then, the charge accelerates, and its kinetic ene rgy (from motion) increases as its potential energy decr eases.The
sum of energies is always constant.
The formula illustrating conservation of energy can be written in many ways, but all expressions are based on the sim ple
premise of equating the initial and final sums of kineti c and potential energy.
The electron volt is defined as the amount of energy ga ined or lost by the charge of an electron moved across a one-volt electric
potential difference. Its value is approximately equal to 1.602×10 J.
The electron volt became useful through experimentation. Scientists working with electrostatic particle accelerat ors commonly
used the relationship between energy (E), charge (q), and pot ential difference (V) in their work. This relationship is:.
As an energy, the electron volt can be used in many calculat ions, including momentum, mass, wavelength, and temperature.
Electric dipole moments are used to measure the separat ion of positive and negative charges (polarity) in a s ystem. They are
measured in units of Coulomb-meters (C m).
For point charges with values +q and -q, electric dipole mom ent (p) can be defined as: where q represents the charges
and d represents the displacement vector. The displacem ent vector has a magnitude of the distance between the ch arges and a
direction from the negative to the positive charge.
All dipoles will experience a torque that rotates the dipo le to align it with an electric field. This torque can b e calculated as the
cross product of the electric dipole moment and the ele ctric field.
Key Terms
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
electric potential: The potential energy per unit charge at a point in a stat ic electric field; voltage.
coulomb: In the International System of Units, the derived unit of electric charge; the amount of electric charge carrie d by a
current of 1 ampere flowing for 1 second. Symbol: C
potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
equipotential: A region whose every point has the same potential.
radial: Moving along a radius.
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
potential difference: The difference in potential energy between two points in an electric field; the difference in charge
between two points in an electrical circuit; voltage.
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.1
2 2 1 AB
-19

18.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550particle accelerator: A device that accelerates electrically charged partic les to extremely high speeds, for the purpose of
inducing high-energy reactions or producing high-energ y radiation.
electron volt: A unit for measuring the energy of subatomic particl es; the energy equal to that attained by an electron mov ing
through a potential difference of one volt. Equivalent t o 1.6022 x 10-19 joules.
dipole moment: The vector product of the charge on either pole of a di pole and the distance separating them.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electric potential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
V oltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential_energy. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
coulomb. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coulomb. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
radial. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radial. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equipotential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equipotential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

18.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550electric potential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
potential difference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/potential_difference. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential_energy. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential difference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/potential_difference. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

18.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential Energy: Potential Diff erence. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
potential difference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/potential_difference. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electronvolt. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronvolt. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electron volt. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electron_volt. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
particle accelerator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/particle_accelerator. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential Energy: Potential Diff erence. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Colors_in_eV. svg/605px-Colors_in_eV.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric dipole moment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_dipole_moment. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dipole moment. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dipole_moment. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electric_field.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrostatic definition of voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electrostatic_definition_of_voltag e.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric Potential Difference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjwwb2yfytk. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

18.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14550OpenStax College, College Physics. December 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential Energy: Potential Diff erence. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Colors_in_eV. svg/605px-Colors_in_eV.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Water-elpot-transparent-3D-balls. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Water-elpottransparent-3D-balls.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 18.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

18.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455118.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
Compare conductivity and resistivity of an ideal condu ctor, commenting on the presence of ideal conductors in nat ure
An ideal conductor is one that exists only in the world of theory. It is one that has certain “ideal” proper ties that make calculations
of electric potential and field, and other properti es simple to perform; it essentially eliminates the n eed for “corrections” to account
for slight deviations from the so-called “ideal. ” These id eal properties are:
Conductivity (σ) is the inverse of resistance, measure d in units of current per potential difference. In a n ideal conductor, the
material’s conductivity is infinite, and its resista nce approaches 0. This means that, ideally, it needs a minute amount of voltage
(potential difference) to carry an extremely high a mperage (current). The principle of near-zero resis tance is akin to that of
frictionless surfaces: t. Theoretically, with the sligh test force (voltage), an object (current) on a frict ionless surface (zero-resistance
conductor) can proceed without restriction.
The electric field (E) and electric flux density (D) tangential to the surface of a conductor must be e qual to 0. This is because
any such field or flux that is tangential to the sur face of the conductor must also exist inside the cond uctor, which by definition
touches the tangential field or density at one point.
If an electric field exists inside the metal, there m ust be a drop in voltage between any two points along t he surface of the metal. In
a perfect conductor this drop should not exist because it implies a less-than-infinite conductivity.
Electric flux density normal to the conductor’s surfa ce is equal to surface charge density. Essentially t his means that the
conductor’s charge exists on its surface, not in its inte rior.
This means that the electric field inside a perfect c onductor is 0. The charges along the surface all act equally and opposite to one
another, and their sum at any point is equal to 0.
Charge distribution may vary depending on shape, but the potential over the surface of an ideal conducto r is, at electrostatic
equilibrium, constant throughout.learning objectives
tan tan

18.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551
Charge Distribution on a Conductor with an Irregular Surface: Curvature causes electric field lines to extend such that they
further distance themselves from one another with incre asing distance from the conductor surface. As such, charge s (and field
lines) aggregate around areas of curvature.
Electric Potential in Human
Electric potentials are commonly found in the body, acro ss cell membranes and in the firing of neurons.
Give examples of the electric potentials in human body
Electric potentials are not limited in function to i norganic processes. In fact, they can be commonly see n in living organisms. In
humans, they are seen in cell membranes and nerve impulses in particular.
Cell Membranes
Cell membranes are only semipermeable; water can freel y travel in and out, but ions can be selectively admi tted passage across
them. As a result, a cell can contain a concentration of a given ion that differs from that which exists ou tside. Thus, a potential,
called the resting potential, is created on either side o f the membrane.
Typical ions used to generate resting potential include potassium, chloride, and bicarbonate.
Resting membrane potential is approximately -95 mV i n skeletal muscle cells, -60 mV in smooth muscle cell s, -80 to -90 mV in
astroglia, and -60 to -70 mV in neurons.
Potentials can change as ions move across the cell me mbrane. This can occur passively, as ions diffuse through ion channels in the
membrane. No energy is required for this to occur, a nd therefore ions can only move from areas of higher concentration to those of
lower concentration.learning objectives

18.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551Active transport of ions across a cell membrane is als o a possibility. This involves ion pumps using energ y to push an ion from an
area of lower concentration to one of higher concentratio n.
Nerve Impulses
When the brain decides on an action, it sends an impuls e that cascades to the extremity where a muscle contracts.
Neurons receive an impulse at the dendrites. This impul se is passed through the axon, a long extension of th e cell, in the form of an
electrical potential created by differing concentratio ns of sodium and potassium ions on either side of a membrane in the axon.
The Neuron: Neurons receive an impulse at the dendrites. This impul se is passed through the axon, a long extension of the cell, i n
the form of an electrical potential created by differi ng concentrations of sodium and potassium ions on either side of a membrane in
the axon.
When the signal reaches the end of the axon, neurot ransmitters are released, which then are received by th e dendrites of the next
neuron. The next neuron repeats the process outlined above.
Equipotential Lines
Equipotential lines depict one-dimensional regions in which the electric potential created by one or mo re nearby charges is
constant.
Describe the shape of the equipotential lines for seve ral charge configurations
Equipotential lines depict one-dimensional regions in which the electric potential created by one or more nearby charges has a
constant value. This means that if a charge is at an y point on a given equipotential line, no work will be required to move it from
one point to another on that same line.learning objectives

18.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551
High School Phy sics - Parallel Plates and Equipoten t High School Phy sics - Parallel Plates and Equipoten t
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines: A brief overview of parallel plates and equipotentia l lines from the viewpoint of
electrostatics.
Equipotential lines may be straight, curved, or irre gularly shaped, depending on the orientation of char ges that give rise to them.
Since they are located radially around a charged bod y, they are perpendicular to electric field lines, wh ich extend radially from the
center of a charged body.
A Single Point Charge
For a single, isolated point charge, the formula for po tential (V) is functionally dependent upon charge (Q) and inversely dependent
upon radial distance from the charge (r):
The radial dependence means that at any point a cer tain distance from the point charge, potential will b e the same. Therefore,
equipotential lines for a single point charge are circ ular, with the point charge at the center.

18.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551
Equipotential Lines: An isolated point charge Q with its electric field lines (blue) and equipotential lines (green)
Multiple Point Charges
When multiple, discrete charges interact, their fiel ds overlap. The combining of fields also results in a combining of potential,
which results in the skewing of equipotential lines in area s that are close enough to both charges to “feel” the e ffects of both fields.
Equipotential lines with multiple charges: Equipotential lines become irregularly shaped when t here are multiple charges vicinal
to one another. At a point between the charges, a test char ge may “feel” the effects of both charges.
Continuous Charge
If charges are distributed across two conductor plate s in static equilibrium, in which charges are continuo us and distributed in a
straight line, the equipotential lines will be approx imately straight. This is because the continuity of charges results in a continuity
of action upon any point a certain distance from either pl ate.

18.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551
Equipotential Lines Between Two Plates: When charges are lined up and continuous on conducti ng plates, equipotential lines are
straight between them. The only exception is a curving of the lines near the edges of the conductor plates.
This continuity is broken towards the ends of the pla tes, however, which causes curvature in these areas. T his curvature is known as
“edge effects. ”
Key Points
In an ideal conductor, conductivity is assumed to be i nfinite (as resistivity approaches 0).
The electric field (Etan) and electric flux density (Dtan) tangential to the surface of a conductor must be e qual to 0.
Electric flux density normal to the conductor’s surface is equal to surface charge density. Essentially this means that the
conductor’s charge exists on its surface, not in its inte rior.
Electric field inside a perfect conductor is 0. The char ges along the surface all act equally and opposite to one a nother, and their
sum at any point is equal to 0.
Charge distribution may vary depending on shape, but t he potential over the surface of an ideal conductor is, at electrostatic
equilibrium, constant throughout.
The resting potential is a potential created by an imbal ance of ions on either side of a cell membrane.
Resting potential can be altered by passive diffusion (wh ich requires no energy) or active transport of ions acro ss a cell
membrane.
When the brain decides on an action, it sends an impuls e that cascades to the extremity where a muscle contracts. Alon g the
axon of a neuron, this impulse manifests itself in a pote ntial created by an imbalance of sodium and potassium ion s across a
membrane.
For a single, isolated point charge, potential is inversel y dependent upon radial distance from the charge. Therefor e,
equipotential lines for a single point charge are circ ular, with the point charge at the center.
When multiple, discrete charges interact, their fields overlap, meaning their potentials combine. This resul ts in the skewing of
equipotential lines in areas that are close enough to both charges to “feel” the effects of both fields.

18.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551If charges are distributed across two conductor plates in s tatic equilibrium, in which charges are continuous and dist ributed in a
straight line, the equipotential lines will be approxima tely straight.
Key Terms
conductor: A material which contains movable electric charges.
flux density: A measure of rate of flow of a fluid, particles or ene rgy per unit area.
neuron: A cell of the nervous system, which conducts nerve impul ses; consisting of an axon and several dendrites. Neurons are
connected by synapses.
axon: A nerve fiber which is a long, slender projection of a n erve cell, and which conducts nerve impulses away from the body
of the cell to a synapse.
cell membrane: The semipermeable membrane that surrounds the cyto plasm of a cell.
equipotential: A region whose every point has the same potential.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Electrical conductivity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_conductivity. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
flux density. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/flux_density. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equ ilibrium. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Neuron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuron. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Resting potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resting_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
neuron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/neuron. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
axon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/axon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
cell membrane. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cell_membrane. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equ ilibrium. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Complete neuron cell diagram en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Complete_neuron_cell_diagram_en.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
equipotential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equipotential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equ ilibrium. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42317/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Complete neuron cell diagram en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Complete_neuron_cell_diagram_en.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

18.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14551OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 4, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Equipotential Lines. January 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Plates and Equipotential Lines. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJ910SiVha0. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

18.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455218.3: Point Charge
Express the electric potential generated by a single poin t charge in a form of equation
Electric Potential Due to a Point Charge
Overview
Recall that the electric potential is defined as the ele ctric potential energy per unit charge
The electric potential tells you how much potential energy a single point charge at a given location will have. The electric potential
at a point is equal to the electric potential energy (measured in joules) of any charged particle at tha t location divided by the charge
(measured in coulombs) of the particle. Since the ch arge of the test particle has been divided out, the electric potential is a
“property” related only to the electric field itsel f and not the test particle. Another way of saying thi s is that because PE is
dependent on q, the q in the above equation will cancel o ut, so V is not dependent on q.
The potential difference between two points ΔV is often ca lled the voltage and is given by
Point Charges
Point charges, such as electrons, are among the fundamen tal building blocks of matter. Furthermore, spherical charge distributions
(like on a metal sphere, see figure below) create ext ernal electric fields exactly like a point charge. The electric potential due to a
point charge is, thus, a case we need to consider. Using calculus to find the work needed to move a test cha rge q from a large
distance away to a distance of r from a point charge Q, and noting the connection between work and potentia l (W=–qΔV), it can be
shown that the electric potential V of a point charge is
(point charge)
where k is a constant equal to 9.0×10 N ⋅m /C.learning objectives
9 2 2

18.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14552
Van de Graaff Generator: The voltage of this demonstration Van de Graaff gene rator is measured between the charged sphere and
ground. Earth’s potential is taken to be zero as a refere nce. The potential of the charged conducting sphere is the same as that of an
equal point charge at its center.
The potential at infinity is chosen to be zero. Thus V for a point charge decreases with distance, whereas E for a point charge
decreases with distance squared:
The electric potential is a scalar while the electric field is a vector. Note the symmetry between electric p otential and gravitational
potential – both drop off as a function of distance to the first power, while both the electric and gravita tional fields drop off as a
function of distance to the second power.
Superposition of Electric Potential
To find the total electric potential due to a system of poi nt charges, one adds the individual voltages as numbers.
Explain how the total electric potential due to a syste m of point charges is found
Superposition of Electric Potential
We’ve seen that the electric potential is defined as the amount of potential energy per unit charge a te st particle has at a given
location in an electric field, i.e.
We’ve also seen that the electric potential due to a p oint charge islearning objectives

18.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14552where k is a constant equal to 9.0×10 N ⋅m /C. The equation for the electric potential of a p oint charge looks similar to the
equation for the electric field generated for a point par ticle
with the difference that the electric field drops off with the square of the distance while the potential drops off linearly with
distance. This is analogous to the relationship between t he gravitational field and the gravitational potential.
Superposition of Electric Potential: The electric potential at point L is the sum of voltage s from each point charge (scalars).
Recall that the electric potential V is a scalar and has no direction, whereas the electr ic field E is a vector. To find the voltage due to
a combination of point charges, you add the individ ual voltages as numbers. So for example, in the figur e above the electric
potential at point L is the sum of the potential contributi ons from charges Q, Q, Q, Q, and Q so that
To find the total electric field, you must add the i ndividual fields as vectors, taking magnitude and direction into account. This is
consistent with the fact that V is closely associated with energy, a scalar, whereas E is closely associated with force, a vector.
The summing of all voltage contributions to find the total potential field is called the superposition of electric potential. Summing
voltages rather than summing the electric simplifies calculations significantly, since addition of potenti al scalar fields is much
easier than addition of the electric vector fields. Note that there are cases where you might need to sum potential contributions from
sources other than point charges; however, that is beyond the scope of this section.
Key Points
Recall that the electric potential is defined as the pot ential energy per unit charge, i.e..
The potential difference between two points ΔV is often c alled the voltage and is given b. The potential
at an infinite distance is often taken to be zero.
The case of the electric potential generated by a poin t charge is important because it is a case that is often e ncountered. A
spherical sphere of charge creates an external field just l ike a point charge, for example.
The equation for the electric potential due to a point charge is, where k is a constant equal to 9.0×10 N ⋅m /C.
The electric potential V is a scalar and has no direction, whereas the electric field E is a vector.
To find the voltage due to a combination of point charges, y ou add the individual voltages as numbers. So for example, i n the
electric potential at point L is the sum of the potential contributions from charges Q, Q, Q, Q, and Q so that
To find the total electric field, you must add the individ ual fields as vectors, taking magnitude and direction in to account. This is
consistent with the fact that V is closely associated wi th energy, a scalar, whereas E is closely associated with force, a vector.
The summing of all voltage contributions to find the total potential field is called the superposition of e lectric potential. It is
much easier to sum scalars than vectors, so often the prefer red method for solving problems with electric fields involves the
summing of voltages.9 2 2
1 2 3 4 5
9 2 2
1 2 3 4 5

18.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14552Key Terms
electric potential: The potential energy per unit charge at a point in a stat ic electric field; voltage.
voltage: The amount of electrostatic potential between two poin ts in space.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
scalar: A quantity that has magnitude but not direction; compa re vector.
superposition: The summing of two or more field contributions occupy ing the same space.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
electric potential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42328/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
voltage. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42328/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42326/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
scalar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scalar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 13, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42328/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potencial eletrico resultante. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Potencial_eletrico_resultant e.PNG. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 18.3: Point Charge is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

18.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455318.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
Express the relationship between the capacitance, charge of an object, and potential difference in the form of equat ion
Capacitance is the measure of an object’s ability t o store electric charge. Any body capable of being cha rged in any way has a value
of capacitance.
The unit of capacitance is known as the Farad (F), whic h can be adjusted into subunits (the millifarad (mF), f or example) for ease
of working in practical orders of magnitude. The Fara d can be equated to many quotients of units, includin g JV, WsV, CV,
and C J.
The most common capacitor is known as a parallel-plat e capacitor which involves two separate conductor pla tes separated from
one another by a dielectric. Capacitance (C) can be calculated as a function of charge an object can st ore (q) and potential
difference (V) between the two plates:
Parallel-Plate Capacitor: The dielectric prevents charge flow from one plate t o the other.
Ultimately, in such a capacitor, q depends on the surf ace area (A) of the conductor plates, while V depends on the distance (d)
between the plates and the permittivity (ε) of the d ielectric between them. For a parallel-plate capacitor, this equation can be used
to calculate capacitance:
Where ε is the electric constant. The product of length and hei ght of the plates can be substituted in place of A.
In storing charge, capacitors also store potential e nergy, which is equal to the work (W) required to cha rge them. For a capacitor
with plates holding charges of +q and -q, this can be calc ulated:
Thus, either through calculus or algebraically (if C and V are known), stored energy (W) can be calculat ed. In a parallel-plate
capacitor, this can be simplified to:
Capacitors with Dielectrics
A dielectric partially opposes a capacitor’s electric field but can increase capacitance and prevent the capacitor’s plates from
touching.learning objectives
-2 -2 -1
2 -1
r
stored

18.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553Describe the behavior of the dielectric material in a ca pacitor’s electric field
In order for a capacitor to hold charge, there must be an interruption of a circuit between its two sides. This interruption can come
in the form of a vacuum (the absence of any matter) or a di electric (an insulator).
When a dielectric is used, the material between the p arallel plates of the capacitor will polarize. The pa rt near the positive end of
the capacitor will have an excess of negative charge, and the part near the negative end of the capacito r will have an excess of
positive charge. This redistribution of charge in t he dielectric will thus create an electric field oppo sing the field created by the
capacitor.
Diagram of a Parallel-Plate Capacitor: Charges in the dielectric material line up to oppose the c harges of each plate of the
capacitor. An electric field is created between the plat es of the capacitor as charge builds on each plate.
Therefore, the net field created by the capacitor will be partially decreased, as will the potential differ ence across it, by the
dielectric. On the other hand, the dielectric preven ts the plates of the capacitor from coming into direc t contact (which would render
the capacitor useless). If it has a high permittivity, it also increases the capacitance for any given vol tage. The capacitance for a
parallel-plate capacitor is given by:
c=ϵAdc=ϵAd
where ε is the permittivity, A is the area of the capacitor plates (assuming both are the same size and shape), and d is the thickness
of the dielectric.
Any insulator can be used as a dielectric, but the ma terials most commonly used are selected for their abi lity to resist ionization.
The more resistant a material is to ionization, the mo re tolerance it has for operating at higher voltages. Eventually every material
has a “dielectric breakdown point,” at which the poten tial difference becomes too high for it to insulate, and it ionizes and permits
the passage of current.
Parallel-Plate Capacitor
The parallel-plate capacitor is one that includes t wo conductor plates, each connected to wires, separated f rom one another by a thin
space.
Calculate the maximum storable energy in a parallel-pl ate capacitor
One of the most commonly used capacitors in industry a nd in the academic setting is the parallel-plate ca pacitor. This is a capacitor
that includes two conductor plates, each connected to wires, separated from one another by a thin space. Betwee n them can be a
vacuum or a dielectric material, but not a conductor.learning objectives
learning objectives

18.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553
Parallel-Plate Capacitor: In a capacitor, the opposite plates take on opposite cha rges. The dielectric ensures that the charges are
separated and do not transfer from one plate to the othe r.
The purpose of a capacitor is to store charge, and in a parallel-plate capacitor one plate will take on an excess of positive charge
while the other becomes more negative.
Assuming the plates extend uniformly over an area of A and hold ± Q charge, their charge density is ±, where ρ=Q/A. Assuming
that the dimensions of length and width for the plates are significantly greater than the distance (d) be tween them, the electric field
(E) near the center of the plates can be calculated by:
Potential (V) between the plates can be calculated from t he line integral of the electric field (E):
where z is the axis perpendicular to both plates. Through simplification and substitution, this integral can be chang ed to:
Given that capacitance is the quotient of charge and poten tial:
Accordingly, capacitance is greatest in devices with high permittivity, large plate area, and minimal separation between the plates.
The maximum energy (U) a capacitor can store can be calculated as a function of U, the dielectric streng th per distance, as well as
capacitor’s voltage (V) at its breakdown limit (the m aximum voltage before the dielectric ionizes and no longer operates as an
insulator):
Combinations of Capacitors: Series and Parallel
Like any other form of electrical circuitry device, capac itors can be used in series and/or in parallel within circuits.
Calculate the total capacitance for the capacitors conn ected in series and in parallel
Like any other form of electrical circuitry device, capacitors can be used in combination in circuits. T hese combinations can be in
series (in which multiple capacitors can be found alon g the same path of wire) and in parallel (in which mu ltiple capacitors can be
found along different paths of wire).
Capacitors in Series
Like in the case of resistors in parallel, the reci procal of the circuit’s total capacitance is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the
capacitance of each individual capacitor:d
learning objectives

18.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553
Capacitors in Series: This image depicts capacitors C1, C2 and so on until Cn in a series.
This can also be expressed as:
Parallel Capacitors
Total capacitance for a circuit involving several ca pacitors in parallel (and none in series) can be foun d by simply summing the
individual capacitances of each individual capacitor.
Parallel Capacitors: This image depicts capacitors C1, C2, and so on until C n in parallel.
Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
It is possible for a circuit to contain capacitors th at are both in series and in parallel. To find total capacitance of the circuit, simply
break it into segments and solve piecewise.
Capacitors in Series and in Parallel: The initial problem can be simplified by finding th e capacitance of the series, then using it
as part of the parallel calculation.
The circuit shown in (a) contains C and C in series. However, these are both in parallel with C. If we find the capacitance for the
series including C and C, we can treat that total as that from a single capacitor (b). This value can be c alculated as approximately
equal to 0.83 μF.
With effectively two capacitors left in parallel, we c an add their respective capacitances (c) to find th e total capacitance for the
circuit. This sum is approximately 8.83 μF.
Dieletrics and their Breakdown
Dielectric breakdown is the phenomenon in which a dielectric loses its ability to insulate, and instead becomes a conduc tor.1 2 3
1 2

18.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553Identify conditions that can lead to a dielectric brea kdown and its effect on materials
Dielectric breakdown (illustrated in) is the phenomen on in which a dielectric loses its ability to insula te, and instead becomes a
conductor. Dielectrics are commonly used either to iso late conductors from a variable external environmen t (e.g., as coating for
electrical wires) or to isolate conductors from one another (e.g., between plates of a parallel-plate capa citor). In all applications,
they are selected for their ability to act as insula tors. By definition, an insulator is unable to condu ct electricity. Under certain
conditions, however, a material that is an insulator can b ecome a conductor.
Eventually, exposing any insulator to increasing volt age will result in the insulator becoming conductive. This point (the minimum
voltage for the insulator to become a conductor) is known as the breakdown voltage. Breakdown is more of a ro ugh concept than
an exact science. A material’s breakdown voltage cannot be precisely defined. As a failure, there is a probabi listic element and thus
a dielectric may experience a breakdown at any of a range of voltages. Additionally, the nature of the vo ltage used to induce
breakdown must be considered. Short pulses can be used in stress testing to resemble lightning strikes, a s could a continuous
applied voltage.
However, for the case of a gas being used as a dielectri c, the following equation has been proven to be rathe r reliable in predicting
breakdown voltage (V):
where A and B are constants that depend on the surround ing gas, p is the pressure of the surrounding gas, d i s distance between the
electrodes (in cm) and γ is the secondary electron emission coefficient. Gaseous dielectrics commonly ex perience breakdown in
nature (the phenomenon of lightning is the most common ex ample).
Dielectric breakdown of plexiglas: The treelike pattern in the plexiglas stems from the r oot of the breakdown. Current is dispersed
in many different directions, creating different stems.
Key Points
The unit of capacitance is known as the farad (F), which can b e equated to many quotients of units, including JV, WsV, CV
, and C J.learning objectives
b
se
-2 -2 1 2 -1

18.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553Capacitance (C) can be calculated as a function of charge an object can store (q) and potential difference (V) be tween the two
plates:. Q depends on the surface area of the conductor pl ates, while V depends on the distance between the plates an d
the permittivity of the dielectric between them.
In storing charge, capacitors also store potential energ y, which is equal to the work (W) required to charge them. For a c apacitor
with plates holding charges of +q and -q, this can be calc ulated:. The above can be equated with the work
required to charge the capacitor.
When a dielectric is used, the material between the plate s will polarize to oppose the dielectric’s field. The net fi eld created by
the capacitor will be partially decreased, as will the pot ential difference across it, by the dielectric.
Capacitance for a parallel -plate capacitor is given b y: where ε is the permittivity, A is the area of the capacitor plates
(assuming both are the same size and shape), and d is the thickness of the dielectric.
Any insulator can be used as a dielectric, but the materials m ost commonly used are selected for their ability to resist ionization.
The more resistant a material is to ionization, the more tolerance it has for operating at higher voltages.
Assuming the plates extend uniformly over an area of A a nd hold ± Q charge, their charge density is ±, where ρ=Q/A.
Assuming that the dimensions of length and width for the pla tes are significantly greater than the distance (d) be tween them,
can be used to calculate the electric field (E) near the center of the plates. In this equation, ε represents permi ttivity.
can be used to calculate the potential between the plates.
can be found from the previous equation, adjusting the te rms to solve for capacitance (C).
solves for the maximum storable energy in a parallel-pla te capacitor (U) as a function of U, the
dielectric strength per distance as well as capacitor’s vol tage (V) at its breakdown limit.
Capacitors in series follow the law of reciprocals; t he reciprocal of the circuit ‘s total capacitance is
equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the capacitances of each individual capacitor.
For capacitors in parallel, summing the capacitances of i ndividual capacitors affords the total
capacitance in the circuit.
When capacitors are found both in series and in parallel in the same circuit, it is best to simplify the circuit by solving parts of it
in sequence.
All insulators can, when exposed to enough voltage, experi ence dielectric breakdown and become conductors.
Because dielectric breakdown is a failure that depends o n a probability, an exact breakdown voltage is in most ca ses impossible
to calculate with a high degree of certainty.
Lightning is a common instance of dielectric breakdown, a s air loses its ability to separate the potential dif ference between
clouds and the point of a lightning bolt’s impact.
Key Terms
dielectric: An electrically insulating or nonconducting materia l considered for its electric susceptibility (i.e., it s property of
polarization when exposed to an external electric fie ld).
capacitance: The property of an electric circuit or its element tha t permits it to store charge, defined as the ratio of store d
charge to potential over that element or circuit (Q/V); SI un it: farad (F).
capacitor: An electronic component capable of storing an electric charge, especially one consisting of two conductors separ ated
by a dielectric.
permittivity: A property of a dielectric medium that determines the f orces that electric charges placed in the medium exe rt on
each other.
circuit: A pathway of electric current composed of individual electronic components, such as resistors, transistors, capa citors,
inductors and diodes, connected by conductive wires or t races through which electric current can flow. T
conductor: A material which contains movable electric charges.
breakdown: A failure, particularly mechanical; something that has failed.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTIONd

18.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553Capacitance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacitance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
permittivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/permittivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Series and parallel circuits. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Series_and_parallel_circuits.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/circuit. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitors in parallel. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitors_in_parallel.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitors in series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitors_in_series.svg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

18.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553OpenStax College, Capacitors in Series and Parallel. January 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42336/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Breakdown voltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Breakdown_voltage. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical breakdown. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_breakdown. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
breakdown. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/breakdown. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitor schematic with dielectric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitor_schematic_with_dielectric.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Parallel plate capacitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parallel_plate_capacitor.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitors in parallel. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitors_in_parallel.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Capacitors in series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Capacitors_in_series.svg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Capacitors in Series and Parallel. January 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42336/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Square1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Square1.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
This page titled 18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

18.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455418.5: Applications
Identify the primary components of a cathode ray tube a nd describe the use of cathode ray tubes
Cathode Ray Tube, TV and Computer Monitors, and the Oscilloscope
Introduction
The cathode ray tube (CRT) is a vacuum tube containing one or more elect ron guns (a source of directed electrons) and a
fluorescent screen used to view images. It has a means to accelerate and deflect the electron beam onto th e fluorescent screen to
create the images. The images are generated when elec trons strike fluorescent phosphors on the screen, whi ch then emit light (the
color varies depending on the phosphor used,).
Color Cathode Ray Tube: Cutaway rendering of a color CRT: 1) Three Electron g uns (for red, green, and blue phosphor dots) 2)
Electron beams 3) Focusing coils 4) Deflection coils 5) Anode connection 6) Mask for separating beams for red, green, an d blue
part of displayed image 7) Phosphor layer with red, green, and blue zones 8) Close-up of the phosphor-coated inner si de of the
screen
The CRT uses an evacuated glass envelope which is lar ge, deep (i.e., long from front screen face to rear end), fairly heavy, and
relatively fragile. As a matter of safety, the face is typically made of thick lead glass so as to be high ly shatter-resistant and to block
most X-ray emissions, particularly if the CRT is used in a c onsumer product.
Phosphors
The phosphors in a CRT’s screen are the materials tha t directly produce the photons generated by the CRT. These phosphors are
struck by incoming electrons from the electron gun, absorb energy, and then re-emit some or all of that energy in the form of light
(this process is called phosphorescence). By varying th e type of phosphor used, one may vary the wavelength of light emitted by
the phosphor when excited. For example, black and white T V screens use one type of phosphor, while color TVs use three (blue,
red, and green). Early computer terminal monitors used only green phosphors.learning objectives

18.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14554CRT Devices
Monochrome Computer CRT Monitor: Monochrome monitor – this CRT uses only one type of phosphor.
Televisions and Computer Monitors
In television sets and computer monitors, the entire fr ont area of the tube is scanned repetitively and sys tematically in a fixed
pattern called a raster. An image is produced by contr olling the intensity of each of the three electron b eams, one for each additive
primary color (red, green, and blue) with a video sign al as a reference. In all modern CRT monitors and te levisions, the beams are
bent by magnetic deflection, which is a varying magn etic field generated by coils and driven by electro nic circuits around the neck
of the tube.
Although a mainstay of display technology for decades, CRT-based computer monitors and televisions constitu te a dead
technology. The demand for CRT screens has dropped pre cipitously since 2000, and this falloff has been acce lerating in the latter
half of that decade. The rapid advances and falling prices of LCD flat panel technology, first for compute r monitors and then for
televisions, has been the key factor in the demise of c ompeting display technologies such as CRT, rear-proje ction, and plasma
display.
Oscilloscope
An oscilloscope is a device that measures and displa ys voltages as a time versus voltage graph. The volta ge difference between the
positive and negative probe leads is measured, buffer ed, and displayed on the screen as a continuous curve. Oscilloscopes are
generally used to see if a circuit is performing as e xpected, but oscilloscopes are also useful for compa ring different signals to each
other.
Oscilloscope Display: Example of an analog oscilloscope display. Shown is a Lissaj ous figure, showing a harmonic relationship of
one horizontal oscillation cycle to three vertical oscil lation cycles.
Many oscilloscopes also use CRT displays, though LCD disp lays are becoming more common. In oscilloscope CRTs, electrostatic
deflection is used, rather than the magnetic deflect ion commonly used with television and other large CR Ts. The beam is deflected

18.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14554horizontally by applying an electric field between a pair of plates to its left and right, and vertically by applying an electric field to
plates above and below.
Oscilloscopes use electrostatic rather than magnetic def lection because the inductive reactance of the magn etic coils would limit
the frequency response of the instrument. The color of the oscilloscope phosphor is much less important tha n in the case of color
televisions or computer monitors since the primary pu rpose is to evaluate signal voltages rather than con struct complex images;
however, the persistence of the phosphor may be more i mportant. Phosphors are available with persistences ranging from less than
one microsecond to several seconds. For visual observat ion of brief transient events, a long persistence phosph or may be desirable.
For events which are fast and repetitive, or high freq uency, a short-persistence phosphor is generally prefera ble.
Key Points
The primary components of a cathode ray tube (CRT) consist of a vacuum tube containing an electron gun and a scree n lined
with phosphors. CRTs are used to produce images.
The phosphors in a CRT’s screen are the materials that d irectly produce the photons generated by the CRT. Thes e phosphors are
struck by incoming electrons from the electron gun, ab sorb energy, and then re-emit some or all of that energy in the form of
light.
CRT technology used to be common in televisions and comp uter monitors. Color CRTs contain three electron guns
corresponding to three types of phosphors, one for each p rimary color (red, blue, and green). Examples of monochr omatic CRTs
include black and white TVs and old computer terminals.
Oscilloscopes, devices used to measure and display voltage s, also use CRT displays. In this case, the persistence of the
phosphor is more important than the color.
The CRTs in televisions and computer monitors bend the e lectron beams with magnetic deflection, while oscilloscopes r ely on
electrostatic deflection.
Key Terms
phosphor: A substance that exhibits the phenomenon of luminesce nce; often transition metal compounds or rare earth
compounds of various types. The most common uses of phos phors are in CRT displays and fluorescent lights.
raster: A scanning pattern of parallel lines that form the display of an image projected on a cathode-ray tube of a television set
or display screen.
electron gun: Any device that produces a stream of electrons, espec ially a narrow stream that is focused onto a phosphor
screen.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Raster scan. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Raster_scan. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Oscilloscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscilloscope. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Cathode ray tube. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathode_ray_tube%23Phosphor_persistence. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Phosphor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Computer monitor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_monitor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Television set. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Television_set. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
CJ Ganier, Using an Oscilloscope. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11902/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

18.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14554phosphor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/phosphor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
raster. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/raster. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electron gun. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electron_gun. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Phosphor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphor. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Oscilloscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscilloscope. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Cathode ray tube. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathode_ray_tube%23Ionizing_radiation.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 18.5: Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
19: Electric Current and Resistance
This page titled 19: Electric Current and Resistance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.19.1: Overview
19.2: Electric Current
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
19.4: Electric Power and Energy
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the WorldTopic hierarchy

19.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455719.1: Overview
Explain difference between conductor and resistor
Introduction to Electric Current and Resistance
From ceiling lights to circuit chips, from power stee ring to Internet browsing, electricity provides the ba sis for our technology and
civilization. The firing of neurons in your brain is also an example of electric current – that is, the movement of electric charge
through a conductive medium. In electric circuits, thi s charge is often carried by moving electrons in a wi re. It can also be carried
by ions in an electrolyte, or by both ions and electrons suc h as in a plasma.
Electric Current
When we speak of electric current, often we are refer ring to a specific quantity – the rate at which charge flows. A large current,
such as that used to start a truck engine, moves a la rge amount of charge in a small time, whereas a small current, such as that used
to operate a hand-held calculator, moves a small amo unt of charge over a long period of time. In equatio n form, electric current I is
defined to be
where Q is the amount of charge passing through a giv en area in time t. The SI unit for current is the amp ere (A), named for the
French physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). Since I=ΔQ/Δt, we see that an ampere is one coulomb per second:
The flow of electricity requires a medium in which cha rge can flow. We call an object or medium that allows charge to flow a
conductor, while the empirical measure of a material’s abilit y to conduct charge is called the electrical conductance. The SI unit for
conductance is the siemens (S).
Electric Current: The rate of flow of charge is current. An ampere is the f low of one coulomb through an area in one second.
Resistance
The opposite of conductance is resistance – a quant ity that describes how strongly a material opposes t he flow of electric current.
An object or medium that has high electrical resistance is called a resistor. We will see that the resistance of an object depends on
its shape and the material of which it is composed. The SI unit for resistance is the ohm (symbol:).
Electric Circuits
A useful and practical way to learn about electric c urrent and resistance is to study circuits. The figure above shows a simple circuit
and the standard schematic representation of a batte ry, conducting path, and load (a resistor). Schematics are very useful in
visualizing the main features of a circuit. A singl e schematic can represent a wide variety of situations. The schematic in (b), for
example, can represent anything from a truck batter y connected to a headlight lighting the street in fr ont of the truck to a small
battery connected to a penlight lighting a keyhole in a door. Such schematics are useful because the analy sis is the same for a wide
variety of situations. We need to understand a few schemati cs to apply the concepts and analysis to many more situations.learning objectives

19.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14557
Simple Electric Circuit: (a) A simple electric circuit. A closed path for curre nt to flow through is supplied by conducting wires
connecting a load to the terminals of a battery. (b) In this schematic, the battery is represented by the two para llel red lines,
conducting wires are shown as straight lines, and the zigzag represents the load. The schematic represents a wide var iety of similar
circuits.
Note that the direction of current flow in the figure is from positive to negative. The direction of conve ntional current is the
direction that positive charge would flow. Depending on the situation, positive charges, negative charges, or both may move. In
metal wires, for example, current is carried by electr ons—that is, negative charges move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both
positive and negative charges move.
It is important to realize that there is an electric field in conductors responsible for producing the c urrent. Unlike static electricity,
where a conductor in equilibrium cannot have an elec tric field in it, conductors carrying a current have an electric field and are not
in static equilibrium. An electric field is needed to sup ply energy to move the charges.
Armed with these basics, we’ll begin to tackle the harder detail s of this topic in the next section.
Key Points
Electric current is the movement of electric charge th rough a conductive medium.
We also use the term “current” as a quantity to describe the rate at which charge flows through a medium. The SI unit f or
current is the ampere (A), which is equal to a coulomb per second (C/s).
Conductance is a quantity describing how easily charge ca n flow through a material, while resistance is the inverse, a m easure
of how strongly a material opposes electric flow.
An object that allows charge to flow easily is called a cond uctor, while an object that resists the flow of charge is calle d a
resistor.

19.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14557Key Terms
conductive medium: A material that can transmit electricity.
electrical resistance: The opposition offered by an electrical conductor to the flow of a current through itself, resulting in a
conversion of electrical energy into heat and radiation. The SI derived unit of resistance is the ohm. Symbol: R.
electric charge: A quantum number that determines the electromagnetic interactions of some subatomic particles; by
convention, the electron has an electric charge of -1 an d the proton +1, and quarks have fractional charge.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electrical conductance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_conductance. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical resistance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_resistance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42339/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
conductive medium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/conductive+medium. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electric charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electrical resistance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electrical_resistance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 19.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

19.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455819.2: Electric Current
Describe the functions and identify the major components o f a battery
A battery is a device that converts chemical energy directly to electrical energy. It consists of a nu mber of voltaic cells connected in
series by a conductive electrolyte containing anions and cations. One half-cell includes electrolyte and th e anode, or negative
electrode; the other half-cell includes electrolyte and the cathode, or positive electrode. In the redox (reduction-oxidation) reaction
that powers the battery, cations are reduced (electro ns are added) at the cathode, while anions are oxidize d (electrons are removed)
at the anode. The electrodes do not touch each othe r but are electrically connected by the electrolyte. Some cells use two half-cells
with different electrolytes. A separator between half-cell s allows ions to flow, but prevents mixing of the electroly tes.
Each half-cell has an electromotive force (or emf), determined by its ability to drive electric current from the interior to the exterior
of the cell. The net emf of the cell is the differe nce between the emfs of its half-cells, or the differe nce between the reduction
potentials of the half-reactions.
The electrical driving force across the terminals of a cell is known as the terminal voltage (difference) and is measured in volts.
When a battery is connected to a circuit, the electr ons from the anode travel through the circuit toward the cathode in a direct
circuit. The voltage of a battery is synonymous with i ts electromotive force, or emf. This force is respons ible for the flow of charge
through the circuit, known as the electric current.
A battery stores electrical potential from the chem ical reaction. When it is connected to a circuit, th at electric potential is converted
to kinetic energy as the electrons travel through th e circuit. Electric potential is defined as the pot ential energy per unit charge (q).
The voltage, or potential difference, between two poin ts is defined to be the change in potential energy o f a charge q moved from
point 1 to point 2, divided by the charge. Rearranged, this mathematical relationship can be described as:
V oltage is not the same as energy. V oltage is the en ergy per unit charge. Thus a motorcycle battery and a car battery can both have
the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one store s much more energy than
the other. The car battery can move more charge than t he motorcycle battery, although both are 12V batteries.
AP Phy sics - Ideal and Real BatteriesAP Phy sics - Ideal and Real Batterieslearning objectives

19.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558Ideal and Real Batteries: A brief introduction to ideal and real batteries for students studying circuits.
Symbol of a Battery in a Circuit Diagram: This is the symbol for a battery in a circuit diagram. I t originated as a schematic
drawing of the earliest type of battery, a voltaic pile. Not ice the positive cathode and negative anode. This orien tation is important
when drawing circuit diagrams to depict the correct flow o f electrons.
Current and Voltage Measurements in Circuits
The electrical current is directly proportional to the voltage applied and inversely related to the resistance in a circuit.
Describe the relationship between the electrical curren t, voltage, and resistance in a circuit
To understand how to measure current and voltage in a circuit, you must also have a general understanding of how a circuit works
and how its electrical measurements are related.
learning objectives

19.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558
What is V oltage? Let' s start here. Lesson 1 of 2What is V oltage? Let' s start here. Lesson 1 of 2
What is Voltage?: This video helps with a conceptual understanding of volta ge.
An electrical circuit is a type of network that has a c losed loop, which provides a return path for the curr ent. A simple circuit
consists of a voltage source and a resistor and can be sch ematically represented as in.
A Simple Circuit: A simple electric circuit made up of a voltage source and a resistor
According to Ohm’s law, The electrical current I, or movement of charge, that flows through most substa nces is directly
proportional to the voltage V applied to it. The electric property that impedes c urrent (crudely similar to friction and air resista nce)
is called resistance R. Collisions of moving charges with atoms and molecu les in a substance transfer energy to the substance a nd
limit current. Resistance is inversely proportional to c urrent. Ohm’s law can therefore be written as follows:

19.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558where I is the current through the conductor in amperes, V is the potential difference measured across the con ductor in volts, and R
is the resistance of the conductor in ohms (Ω). More specifically, Ohm’s law states that R in this relation is constant, independent of
the current. Using this equation, we can calculate the cu rrent, voltage, or resistance in a given circuit.
For example, if we had a 1.5V battery that was connected in a closed circuit to a lightbulb with a resistance of 5Ω, what is the
current flowing through the circuit? To solve this pro blem, we would just substitute the given values into Oh m’s law: I = 1.5V/5Ω;
I = 0.3 amperes. If we know the current and the resistance, we c an rearrange the Ohm’s law equation and solve for voltage V:
A Microscopic View: Drift Speed
The drift velocity is the average velocity that a part icle achieves due to an electric field.
Relate the drift velocity with the velocity of free charge s in conductors
Drift Speed
Electrical signals are known to move very rapidly. Te lephone conversations carried by currents in wires cov er large distances
without noticeable delays. Lights come on as soon as a swi tch is flicked. Most electrical signals carried by cur rents travel at speeds
on the order of 10 m/s, a significant fraction of the s peed of light. Interestingly, the individual charge s that make up the current
move much more slowly on average, typically drifting at s peeds on the order of 10 m/s.
The high speed of electrical signals results from the f act that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance. Thus, when a free
charge is forced into a wire, the incoming charge pu shes other charges ahead of it, which in turn push on c harges farther down the
line. The resulting electrical shock wave moves throug h the system at nearly the speed of light. To be pre cise, this rapidly moving
signal or shock wave is a rapidly propagating change in th e electric field.
Electrons Moving Through a Conductor: When charged particles are forced into this volume of a conductor, an equal number are
quickly forced to leave. The repulsion between like char ges makes it difficult to increase the number of charge s in a volume. Thus,
as one charge enters, another leaves almost immediately, c arrying the signal rapidly forward.
Drift Velocity
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges in them. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. The distance that an
individual electron can move between collisions with atoms or other electrons is quite small. The electro n paths thus appear nearly
random, like the motion of atoms in a gas. However, ther e is an electric field in the conductor that causes the electrons to drift in
the direction shown (opposite to the field, since the y are negative). The drift velocity vis the average velocity of the free charges
after applying the field. The drift velocity is quit e small, since there are so many free charges. Given an estimate of the density of
free electrons in a conductor (the number of electr ons per unit volume), it is possible to calculate the drift velocity for a given
current. The larger the density, the lower the velocity r equired for a given current.learning objectives
−4
d

19.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558
Drift Speed: Free electrons moving in a conductor make many collisions with other electrons and atoms. The path of one electron
is shown. The average velocity of the free charges is calle d the drift velocity and is in the direction opposite to t he electric field for
electrons. The collisions normally transfer energy to t he conductor, requiring a constant supply of energy to main tain a steady
current.
It is possible to obtain an expression for the relati onship between the current and drift velocity by con sidering the number of free
charges in a segment of wire. The number of free charges per unit volume is given the symbol n and depends on the material. Ax is
the volume of a segment, so that the number of free c harges in it is nAx. The charge ΔQ in this segment is thus qnAx, where q is the
amount of charge on each carrier. (Recall that for electrons, q is 1.60×10−19C.) The current is the charge moved per unit time.
Thus, if all the original charges move out of this segment i n time t, the current is:
Notably, x/Δt is the magnitude of the drift velocity v, since the charges move an average distance x in a time t. Rearranging terms
gives: I = qnAv, where I is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area A made of a material with a free charge density n. The
carriers of the current each have charges q and move with a drift velocity of magnitude v.
Current density is the electric current per unit area of c ross-section. It has units of Amperes per square meter.
Key Points
A battery stores electrical potential from the chemical reaction. When it is connected to a circuit, that electric potential is
converted to kinetic energy as the electrons travel through t he circuit.
The voltage or potential difference between two points is defined to be the change in potential energy of a c harge q moved from
point 1 to point 2, divided by the charge.
The voltage of a battery is synonymous with its electromot ive force, or emf. This force is responsible for the flow o f charge
through the circuit, known as the electric current.
A simple circuit consists of a voltage source and a resist or.
Ohm ‘s law gives the relationship between current I, voltage V, and resistance R in a simple circuit: I = V/R.
The SI unit for measuring the rate of flow of electric char ge is the ampere, which is equal to a charge flowing throug h some
surface at the rate of one coulomb per second.
There is an electric field in conductors that causes elect rons to drift in the direction opposite to the field. The dr ift velocity is the
average velocity of these free charges.
The expression for the relationship between the current an d drift velocity can be obtained by considering the numbe r of free
charges in a segment of wire.
I = qnAv relates the drift velocity to the current, where I is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area A made of a
material with a free charge density n. The carriers of the current each have a charge q and move with a drift velocity of
magnitude v.d
d
d

19.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558Key Terms
battery: A device that produces electricity by a chemical re action between two substances.
current: The time rate of flow of electric charge.
voltage: The amount of electrostatic potential between two poin ts in space.
electrical current: the movement of charge through a circuit
ohm: in the International System of Units, the derived unit of el ectrical resistance; the electrical resistance of a device across
which a potential difference of one volt causes a current of one ampere; symbol: Ω
ampere: A unit of electrical current; the standard base unit in the International System of Units. Abbreviation: amp. Symbol: A.
drift velocity: The average velocity of the free charges in a conduc tor.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42324/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Battery (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_(electricity). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Battery (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_(electricity). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
voltage. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
battery. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/battery. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/current. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ideal and Real Batteries. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2Hcip2zoZc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Battery (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_(electricity). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lml.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltage. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current%23Current_density_and_Ohm.27s_ law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
ampere. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ampere. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ohm. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ohm. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electrical current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electrical_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ideal and Real Batteries. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2Hcip2zoZc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Battery (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_(electricity). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Electrical circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_circuit. License: CC BY:
Attribution
What is V oltage?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g287MugJC9E. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

19.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14558Electric current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current%23Drift_speed. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/drift-velocity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ideal and Real Batteries. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2Hcip2zoZc. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Battery (electricity). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Battery_(electricity). License: CC
BY: Attribution
Electrical circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_circuit. License: CC BY:
Attribution
What is V oltage?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g287MugJC9E. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42341/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 19.2: Electric Current is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

19.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455919.3: Resistance and Resistors
Contrast shape of current-voltage plots for ohmic and n on-ohmic circuits
Ohm’s Law
What drives current? We can think of various device s—such as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on— which are necessary
to maintain a current. All such devices create a pote ntial difference and are loosely referred to as volt age sources. When a voltage
source is connected to a conductor, it applies a pot ential difference V that creates an electric field. The electric field, in turn, exerts
force on charges, causing current. The current that fl ows through most substances is directly proportional to the voltage V applied
to it. The German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854) wa s the first to experimentally demonstrate that the current in a metal
wire is directly proportional to the voltage applied:\.
This important relationship is known as Ohm’s law. It c an be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with voltage the cause and
current the effect. This is an empirical law like th at for friction—an experimentally observed phenomeno n. Such a linear
relationship doesn’t always occur. Recall that while v oltage drives current, resistance impedes it. Collisio ns of moving charges with
atoms and molecules in a substance transfer energy t o the substance and limit current. The current is t herefore inversely
proportional to the resistance:.
Simple Circuit: A simple electric circuit in which a closed path for curr ent to flow is supplied by conductors (usually metal wires)
connecting a load to the terminals of a battery, repre sented by the red parallel lines. The zigzag symbol repr esents the single resistor
and includes any resistance in the connections to the voltage source.
The unit for resistance is the ohm where 1Ω = 1 V/A. We c an combine the two relations above to obtain I = V/R. This relationship
is also called Ohm’s law. In this form Ohm’s law really d efines resistance for certain materials. Ohm’s law (like Hooke’s law) is not
universally valid. The many substances for which Ohm’s law holds are called ohmic. These include good conduc tors like copper
and aluminum, and some poor conductors under certain circumstances. Ohmic materials have a resistance R that is independent of
voltage V and current I. An object that has simple resistanc e is called a resistor, even if its resistance is small.
Voltage Drop: The voltage drop across a resistor in a simple circui t equals the voltage output of the battery.
Additional insight is gained by solving I=V/R for V, yi elding V=IR. This expression for V can be interpreted as the voltage drop
across a resistor produced by the flow of current I. Th e phrase IR drop is often used for this voltage. If voltage is measured at
various points in a circuit, it will be seen to increase at the voltage source and decrease at the resistor. V oltage is similar to fluid
pressure. The voltage source is like a pump, creating a pressure difference, causing current—the flow of c harge. The resistor is like
a pipe that reduces pressure and limits flow because of its resistance. Conservation of energy has importa nt consequences here. The
voltage source supplies energy (causing an electric field and a current), and the resistor converts it to another form (such as thermal

19.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559energy). In a simple circuit (one with a single simpl e resistor), the voltage supplied by the source equals t he voltage drop across the
resistor, since E=qΔV, and the same q flows through eac h. Thus, the energy supplied by the voltage source and the energy
converted by the resistor are equal.
In a true ohmic device, the same value of resistance will be calculated from R = V/I regardless of the val ue of the applied voltage V.
That is, the ratio of V/I is constant, and when current is plotted as a function of voltage the curve is lin ear (a straight line). If
voltage is forced to some value V, then that voltage V divided by measured current I will equal R. Or if the current is forced to
some value I, then the measured voltage V divided b y that current I is also R. We visualize the plot of I versus V as a straight line.
There are, however, components of electrical circuits which do not obey Ohm’s law; that is, their relations hip between current and
voltage (their I–V curve) is nonlinear (or non-ohmic). An example is the p-n junction diode.
Current-Voltage Curves: The I–V curves of four devices: two resistors, a diode, and a battery. The two resistors follow Ohm’s
law: The plot is a straight line through the origin. The other two devices do not follow Ohm’s law.
High School Phy sics - Ohm ' s LawHigh School Phy sics - Ohm ' s Law

19.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Ohm’s Law: A brief overview of Ohm’s Law.
Temperature and Superconductivity
Superconductivity is a phenomenon of zero electrical resistance and expulsion of magnetic fields in cert ain materials below a
critical temp.
Describe behaviors of a superconductor below a critical temperature and in a weak external magnetic field
Superconductivity is a phenomenon of exactly zero el ectrical resistance and expulsion of magnetic fields o ccurring in certain
materials when cooled below a characteristic critical temperature. It was discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (shown in) on
April 8, 1911 in Leiden.
Heike Kamerlingh Onnes: Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1853-1926).
Most of the physical properties of superconductors var y from material to material, such as the heat capaci ty and the critical
temperature, critical field, and critical current den sity at which superconductivity is destroyed. On the ot her hand, there is a class of
properties independent of the underlying material. Fo r instance, all superconductors have exactly zero re sistivity to low applied
currents when there is no magnetic field present or i f the applied field does not exceed a critical valu e. The existence of these
“universal” properties implies that superconductivity is a thermodynamic phase, and thus possesses certain dis tinguishing
properties that are largely independent of microscopi c details.
In superconducting materials, the characteristics of s uperconductivity appear when the temperature T is lo wered below a critical
temperature T. The onset of superconductivity is ac companied by abrupt changes in various physical prop erties—the hallmark of a
phase transition. For example, the electronic heat capa city is proportional to the temperature in the norm al (non-superconducting)
regime. At the superconducting transition, it suffers a disco ntinuous jump and thereafter ceases to be linear, as illustrate d in.
learning objectives
c

19.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559When a superconductor is placed in a weak external ma gnetic field H, and cooled below its transition temper ature, the magnetic
field is ejected. The Meissner effect does not cause the field to be completely ejected. Rather, the fie ld penetrates the
superconductor to a very small distance (characteri zed by a parameter λ), called the London penetratio n depth. It decays
exponentially to zero within the bulk of the materia l. The Meissner effect is a defining characteristic of superconductivity. For most
superconductors, the London penetration depth is on the o rder of 100 nm.
Superconducting phase transition: Behavior of heat capacity (cv, blue) and resistivity (ρ, green) at the superconducting phase
transition.
Superconductors are also able to maintain a current with no applied voltage whatsoever—a property exploit ed in superconducting
electromagnets such as those found in MRI machines. E xperiments have demonstrated that currents in superc onducting coils can
persist for years without any measurable degradation. Experimental evidence points to a current lifetime of at least 100,000 years.
Theoretical estimates for the lifetime of a persisten t current can exceed the estimated lifetime of the u niverse, depending on the
wire geometry and the temperature.
The value of this critical temperature varies from material to material. Usually, conventional supercond uctors have critical
temperatures ranging from around 20 K to less than 1 K. Solid mercury, for example, has a critical temperat ure of 4.2 K. As of
2009, the highest critical temperature found for a c onventional superconductor is 39 K for magnesium dib oride (MgB), although
this material’s exotic properties cause some doubt abo ut accurately classifying it as a “conventional” sup erconductor. Hightemperature superconductors can have much higher cr itical temperatures. For example, YBa Cu O, one of the fi rst cuprate
superconductors to be discovered, has a critical tem perature of 92 K; mercury-based cuprates have been f ound with critical
temperatures in excess of 130 K. It is of note that th e chemical composition and crystal structure of sup erconducting materials can
be quite complex, as seen in.2
2 3 7

19.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559
Unit Cell of YBaCuO superconductor: Unit Cell of YBaCuO superconductor. Atoms are indicated wit h different colors.
Resistance and Resistivity
Resistance and resistivity describe the extent to which an object or material impedes the flow of electric curre nt.
Identify properties of the material that are described b y the resistance and resistivity
Resistance and Resistivity
Resistance is the electric property that impedes a cu rrent. A current flowing through a wire (or resistor) is like water flowing
through a pipe, and the voltage drop across the wire is like the pressure drop which pushes water through the pipe. Resistance is
proportional to how much pressure is required to achi eve a given flow, while conductance is proportional to how much flow occurs
for a given pressure. Conductance and resistance are reciprocals. The resistance of an object depends on its shape and the material
of which it is composed. The cylindrical resistor is easy to analyze, and by so doing we can gain insight i nto the resistance of more
complicated shapes. As you might expect, the cylinder’ s electric resistance R is directly proportional to i ts length L, similar to the
resistance of a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the more collisions charges will make with its atoms. The greater the
diameter of the cylinder, the more current it can c arry (again, similar to the flow of fluid through a pi pe). In fact, R is inversely
proportional to the cylinder’s cross-sectional area A.
learning objectives

19.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Cylindrical Resistor: A uniform cylinder of length L and cross-sectional are a A. Its resistance to the flow of current is similar to
the resistance posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longe r the cylinder, the greater its resistance. The larger its c ross-sectional area A,
the smaller its resistance.
As mentioned, for a given shape, the resistance depends on the material of which the object is composed. Differe nt materials offer
different resistance to the flow of charge. We defin e the resistivity ρ of a substance so that theresistanceR of an object is directly
proportional to ρ. Resistivity ρ is an intrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size. In contrast, the resistance R is
an extrinsic property that does depend on the size an shape of the resistor. (A similar intrinsic/extri nsic relation exists between heat
capacity C and the specific heat c). Recall that an o bject whose resistance is proportional to the voltage and current is known as a
resistor.
Typical Resistor: A typical axial-lead resistor.
What determines resistivity? The resistivity of diffe rent materials varies by an enormous amount. For exampl e, the conductivity of
teflon is about 1030 times lower than the conductivi ty of copper. Why is there such a difference? Loosel y speaking, a metal has
large numbers of “delocalized” electrons that are no t stuck in any one place, but free to move across l arge distances, whereas in an
insulator (like teflon), each electron is tightly bo und to a single atom, and a great force is required to pull it away. Likewise,
resistors range over many orders of magnitude. Some ceramic insulators, such as those used to support po wer lines, have
resistances of 10 Ω or more. A dry person may have a hand-to-foot resistance of 10 Ω, whereas the resistance o f the human heart
is about 10 Ω. A meter-long piece of large-diameter c opper wire may have a resistance of 10 Ω, and supercondu ctors have no
resistance at all (they are non-ohmic). The potenti al difference (voltage) seen across the network is t he sum of those voltages, thus
the total resistance (the series equivalent resistan ce) can be found as the sum of those resistances:
As a special case, the resistance of N resistors connected in series, each of the same resistance R, is given by NR.Resistors in a
parallel configuration are each subject to the same potential difference (voltage), however the currents through them add. Thus the
equivalent resistance (Req) of the network can be comput ed:
The parallel equivalent resistance can be represent ed in equations by two vertical lines “||” (as in geo metry) as a simplified
notation. Occasionally two slashes “//” are used instead of “||”, in case the keyboard or font lacks the ver tical line symbol. For the
case of two resistors in parallel, this can be calculated using:
As a special case, the resistance of N resistors connecte d in parallel, each of the same resistance R, is given by R/N. A resistor
network that is a combination of parallel and series connections can be broken up into smaller parts that are either one or the other,
such as is shown in.12 5
3 −5

19.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559
Resistor Network: In this combination circuit, the circuit can be broken up into a series component and a parallel component.
However, some complex networks of resistors cannot be r esolved in this manner. These require a more sophisti cated circuit
analysis. One practical application of these relatio nships is that a non-standard value of resistance can ge nerally be synthesized by
connecting a number of standard values in series or parallel. This can also be used to obtain a resistance with a higher power rating
than that of the individual resistors used. In the speci al case of N identical resistors all connected in seri es or all connected in
parallel, the power rating of the individual resistors is t hereby multiplied by N.
High School Phy sics - Resistance, Resistors, and ReHigh School Phy sics - Resistance, Resistors, and Re

19.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Resistance, Resistors, and Resistivity: A brief overview of resistance, resistors, and resistivit y.
Dependence of Resistance on Temperature
Resistivity and resistance depend on temperature with the dependence being linear for small temperature c hanges and nonlinear for
large.
Compare temperature dependence of resistivity and resis tance for large and small temperature changes
The resistivity of all materials depends on temperature. Some materials can become superconductors (zero re sistivity) at very low
temperatures (see). Conversely, the resistivity of conductors increases with increasing temperature. Sin ce the atoms vibrate more
rapidly and over larger distances at higher tempera tures, the electrons moving through a metal, for exa mple, create more collisions,
effectively making the resistivity higher. Over relat ively small temperature changes (about 100ºC or less), resistivity ρ varies with
temperature change ΔT as expressed in the following equati on:
Resistance of a sample of mercury: The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero at very lo w temperatures—it is a
superconductor up to about 4.2 K. Above that critical temp erature, its resistance makes a sudden jump and then incr eases nearly
linearly with temperature.
learning objectives

19.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559where ρ is the original resistivity and α is the tempe rature coefficient of resistivity. For larger tempera ture changes, α may vary, or
a nonlinear equation may be needed to find ρ. For th is reason it is usual to specify a suffix for the temp erature at which the
substance was measured (such as α) and the relationshi p only holds in a range of temperatures around the r eference. Note that α is
positive for metals, meaning their resistivity increa ses with temperature. The temperature coefficient is t ypically +3×10 K to
+6×10 K for metals near room temperature. Some alloy s have been developed specifically to have a small t emperature
dependence. Manganin (made of copper, manganese and ni ckel), for example, has α close to zero, so its resistiv ity varies only
slightly with temperature. This is useful for making a t emperature-independent resistance standard, for example.
Note also that α is negative for semiconductors, meanin g that their resistivity decreases with increasing tempe rature. They become
better conductors at higher temperature because inc reased thermal agitation increases the number of free charges available to carry
current. This property of decreasing ρ with temperatur e is also related to the type and amount of impurit ies present in the
semiconductors.
The resistance of an object also depends on temperat ure, since R is directly proportional to ρ. For a cyl inder we know R=ρL/A, so
if L and A do not change greatly with temperature, R will have the same temperature dependence as ρ. (Ex amination of the
coefficients of linear expansion shows them to be abou t two orders of magnitude less than typical temperatu re coefficients of
resistivity, and so the effect of temperature on L and A is about two orders of magnitude less than on ρ.) Thus,
is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where R is the original resistance and R is the resistance after a
temperature change T. Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on resistance (see). On e of the most
common is the thermistor, a semiconductor crystal wit h a strong temperature dependence, the resistance o f which is measured to
obtain its temperature. The device is small so it qui ckly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part of a p erson it touches.
Thermometers: These familiar thermometers are based on the automate d measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-dependent
resistance.
Key Points
V oltage drives current while resistance impedes it.
Ohm ‘s Law refers to the proportion relation between voltage a nd current. It also applies to the specific equation V=IR, which is
valid when considering circuits that contain simple resi stors (whose resistance is independent of voltage and curr ent).
Circuits or components that obey the relation V=IR are known as ohmic and have current-voltage plots that are linea r and pass
through the origin.
There are components and circuits that are non-ohmic; th eir I-V plots are not linear and/or don’t pass through the o rigin.
Superconductivity is a Superconductivity is a thermodynam ic phase and possesses certain distinguishing properties whi ch are
largely independent of microscopic details.
In superconducting materials, the characteristics of su perconductivity appear when the temperature is lowered bel ow a critical
temperature. The onset of superconductivity is accompani ed by abrupt changes in various physical properties.
When a superconductor is placed in a weak external magnet ic field H, and cooled below its transition temperature, the ma gnetic
field is ejected.
Superconductors are able to maintain a current with no a pplied voltage.
The resistance of an object (i.e., a resistor) depends on its shape and the material of which it is composed.0
−3 −1
−3 −1

19.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Resistivity ρ is an intrinsic property of a material and directly proportional to the total resistance R, an ex trinsic quantity that
depends on the length and cross-sectional area of a resisto r.
The resistivity of different materials varies by an enorm ous amount. Likewise, resistors range over many orders of mag nitude.
Resistors are arranged in series or parallel configura tions. The equivalent resistance of a network of resistors in series is the sum
of all the resistance. The inverse of the equivalent resist ance of a network of resistors in parallel is the sum of the inv erse of the
resistance of each resistor.
Over temperature changes of 100ºC or less, resistivity (ρ) va ries with temperature change ΔT as: p=p0(1+αΔT)p=p0(1+αΔ T)
where ρ is the original resistivity and α is the tempera ture coefficient of resistivity.
For large temperature changes, nonlinear variation of res istivity with temperature is observed.
The resistance of an object demonstrates similar temper ature dependence as resistivity since resistance is direc tly proportional
to resistivity.
Key Terms
simple circuit: A circuit with a single voltage source and a single res istor.
ohmic: That which obeys Ohm’s law.
high-temperature superconductors: Materials that behave as superconductors at unusually high temperatures (above about 30
K).
critical temperature: In superconducting materials, the characteristics of supe rconductivity appears at (and continues below)
this temperature.
superconductivity: The property of a material whereby it has no resistance to the flow of an electric current.
series equivalent resistance: The resistance of a network of resistors arranged su ch that the voltage across the network is the
sum of the voltage across each resistor. In this case, the e quivalent resistance is the sum of the resistance of all th e resistors in
the network.
parallel equivalent resistance: the resistance of a network such that each resistor is subject to the same potential difference
(voltage), so that the currents through them add. In this case the inverse of the equivalent resistance is equal t o the sum of the
inverse resistance of all the resistors in the network.
resistivity: In general, the resistance to electric current of a mater ial; in particular, the degree to which a material resists th e
flow of electricity.
temperature coefficient of resistivity: An empirical quantity, denoted by α, which describes the change in resistance or
resistivity of a material with temperature.
semiconductor: A substance with electrical properties intermediate between a good conductor and a good insulator.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
ohmic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ohmic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/simple-circuit. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLU4LtG0_hc. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright0

19.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Superconductors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconductors. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
superconductivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superconductivity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//chemistry/definition/critical-temperature.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
high-temperature superconductors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/hightemperature%20superconductors. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLU4LtG0_hc. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/94/Kamerlingh_por tret.jpg/450px-Kamerlingh_portret.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Ybco.jpg/424pxYbco.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Superconductors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconductors. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electrical resistance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_resistance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/parallel-equivalentresistance. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resistivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/series-equivalentresistance. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLU4LtG0_hc. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

19.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/94/Kamerlingh_por tret.jpg/450px-Kamerlingh_portret.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Ybco.jpg/424pxYbco.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Superconductors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconductors. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistance, Resistors, and Resistivity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXYpR5RmTBk. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electrical resistance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_resistance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical resistivity and conductivity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_resistivity_and_conductivity%23T emperature_dependence. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
semiconductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/semiconductor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
resistivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/temperature-coefficientof-resistivity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLU4LtG0_hc. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42344/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/94/Kamerlingh_por tret.jpg/450px-Kamerlingh_portret.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Ybco.jpg/424pxYbco.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Superconductors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconductors. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistance, Resistors, and Resistivity. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXYpR5RmTBk. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

19.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14559Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 22, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42346/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 19.3: Resistance and Resistors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

19.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456019.4: Electric Power and Energy
Formulate the relationship between the energy usage and the electric power
In many cases it is necessary to calculate the energy usage by an electric device or a collection of devi ces, such as in a home. For
example, we (or the electric power utility) may want t o calculate the amount of money owed for electricity consumed. In another
case, we might need to determine the energy necessary to power a component or apparatus for a given period of time. The last
distinction is crucial – the energy used by a circuit or co mponent is the time integral of the electric power.
Power
Recall that power is the rate at which work is done – or the rate at which energy is consumed or produced – and is measured in
watts (W). The electric power in watts produced by an el ectric current I consisting of a charge of Q coulomb s every t seconds
passing through an electric potential (voltage) dif ference of V is, where Q is electric charge in coulo mbs, t is time in
seconds, I is electric current in amperes, and V is elec tric potential or voltage in volts.
In resistive circuits where Ohm ‘s Law applies, the po wer can be expressed as, where R is the electrical r esistance.
Power isn’t necessarily constant; it may vary over time. The general expression for electric power is then
where the current I and voltage V may be time variable.
Energy
In any given time interval, the energy consumed (or provided, depending on your perspective) is given by, where E is the
electric energy, V is the voltage, and q is the amoun t of charge moved in the time interval under consid eration. We can relate the
total energy consumed to the power by integrating ov er time:. Positive energy corresponds to consumed energ y and negative
energy corresponds to energy production. Note that a circuit element having a power profile that is both positive and negative over
some time interval could consume or produce energy a ccording to the sign of the integral of power. If the power is constant over
the time interval then the energy can be expressed simply as:
Units of Energy Usage
We are of course very familiar with the SI unit of en ergy, the joule. However, typically, residential energy b ills state household
energy consumption in kilowatt-hours (kWh). Additional ly, this unit is often seen elsewhere when the energy usage of power
consuming devices, structures, or jurisdictions is under consideration. We can parse out the conversion from k ilowatt-hours to
joules in this way: 1 W = 1 J/s and a kilowatt is 100 0 W while one hour is 3,600 seconds, so 1 kWh is (1000 J/s)(3600 s)=3,600,000
joules. This is the scale of American home energy usage, wh ich is on the order of hundreds of kilowatt-hours per mo nth.
Reducing Energy Usage
The electrical energy (E) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the powe r consumption of that
appliance or fixture. This will not only reduce the c ost, but it will also result in a reduced impact on th e environment.
Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a home or b usiness. About 20% of a
home’s use of energy goes to lighting, while the number for commercial establishments is closer to 40%. Fluo rescent lights are
about four times more efficient than incandescent li ghts—this is true for both the long tubes and the comp act fluorescent lights
(CFL). Thus, a 60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same brightness and color. C FLs have a
bent tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube, all connected to a standard screw-in base that fits stand ard incandescent light
sockets. (Original problems with color, flicker, shape, an d high initial investment for CFLs have been address ed in recent years.)
The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they last up to 10 times longer.learning objectives

19.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14560
Compact Fluorescent Light (CFL): CFLs are much more efficient than incandescent bulbs and so consume much less energy for
the intensity light produces.
Key Points
Recall that power is the rate work is done, or the rate at wh ich energy is consumed or produced. In terms of current an d voltage
it is P=IV.
The energy used is the amount of charge q moved through v oltage V in a time interval t. It is equal to the integra l of power over
time.
A common unit used to describe energy usage is the kilowat t-hour, the energy of 1000 W acting over one hour.
Key Terms
kilowatt-hour: a unit of electrical energy equal to that done by one k ilowatt acting for one hour; equal to 3.6 mega-joules.
Symbol: kWh.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Electric power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_power. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42714/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Don Johnson, V oltage, Current, and Generic Circuit Elemen ts. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m0011/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kilowatt-hour. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kilowatt-hour. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Compact fluorescent lamp. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_fluorescent_lamp.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 19.4: Electric Power and Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

19.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456119.5: Alternating Currents
Discuss applications of a phase vector
Phasors
Complex numbers play an important role in physics. Usu ally, complex numbers are written in terms of their r eal part plus the
imaginary part. For example, where a and b are real n umbers, and ii signals the imaginary part. However, i t is often practical
to write complex numbers in the form of an exponential calle d a phasor.
In physics, a phase vector, or phasor, is a representat ion of a sinusoidal function whose amplitude (A), frequency (ω), and phase (θ)
are time-invariant, as diagramed in. Phasors separate t he dependencies on,, and into three independent f actors. This can be
particularly useful because the frequency factor (whi ch includes the time-dependence of the sinusoid) is of ten common to all the
components of a linear combination of sinusoids. In those situations, phasors allow this common feature t o be factored out, leaving
just the A and θ features. The result is that trigonometry reduces to algebra, and linear differential equations become al gebraic ones.
The term phasor therefore often refers to just those t wo factors.
Phasor Diagram: An example of series RLC circuit and respective phasor diag ram for a specific ω. Electrical engineers,
electronics engineers, electronic engineering technicia ns and aircraft engineers all use phasor diagrams to visualiz e complex
constants and variables (phasors). Like vectors, arrows drawn on graph paper or computer displays represent phasors.
Phasors are often used in electrical systems when consid ering voltages and currents that vary sinusoidally i n time, such as in RLC
circuits.
Definition
Sinusoids can be represented mathematically as the sum of two complex-valued functions:
or as the real part of one of the functions:
As indicated above, phasor can refer to either Aeiθ ⋅eiωtAeiθ ⋅eiωt or just the complex constant, AeiθAeiθ. In the latter case, it is
understood to be a shorthand notation, encoding the amp litude and phase of an underlying sinusoid.
Phasor Representation of Signals
There are two key ideas behind the phasor representation of a signal:
1. a real, time-varying signal may be represented by a com plex, time-varying signal; and
2. a complex, time-varying signal may be represented as the product of a complex number that is independent of time and a
complex signal that is dependent on time.
The signal:learning objectives

19.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561illustrated in the figure below is a cosinusoidal sign al with amplitude A, frequency, and phase θ. The amplitude A characterizes the
peak-to-peak swing of 2A, the angular frequency ω characterizes the period T=2π/ω between negative- to-positive zero crossings
(or positive peaks or negative peaks), and the phas e θ characterizes the time τ=−θ/ω when the signal reaches its first peak. With so
defined, the signal x(t) may also be written as
Cosinusoidal Signal: A Cosinusoidal Signal.
When τ is positive, then τ is a “time delay” that describes the time (greater than zero) when the first peak is achieved. When τ is
negative, then τ is a “time advance” that describes the time (less t han zero) when the last peak was achieved. With the su bstitution
=2π/T we obtain a third way of writing x(t):
In this form the signal is easy to plot. Simply draw a cosinusoidal wave with amplitude A and period T; then strike the origin (t=0)
so that the signal reaches its peak at τ. In summary, the parameters that determine a cosinusoida l signal have the following units:
A, arbitrary (e.g., volts or meters/sec, depending upon the application)
ω, in radians /sec (rad/sec)
T, in seconds (sec)
θ, in radians (rad)
τ, in seconds (sec)
Sinusoidal Steady State and the Series RLC CircuitPhasors may be used to analyze the behavior of electrical a nd mechanical
systems that have reached a kind of equilibrium called sinusoidal steady state.
In the sinusoidal steady state, every voltage and cu rrent (or force and velocity) in a system is sinusoi dal with angular frequency ω.
However, the amplitudes and phases of these sinusoidal voltage s and currents are all different.
For example, the voltage across a resistor might lead the voltage across a capacitor by 90 and lag the vol tage across an inductor by
90. In order to make our application of phasors to e lectrical systems concrete, we consider the series RLC circuit illustrated in.
The arrow labeled i(t) denotes a current that flows in response to the voltage ap plied.∘

19.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561
Series RLC Circuit: Series RLC Circuit.
We will assume that the voltage source is an audio oscil lator that produces the voltage:
We represent this voltage as the complex signal:
and give it the phasor representation,
We then describe the voltage source by the phasor V and remember that we can always compute the actual vo ltage by multiplying
by eand taking the real part.
Root Mean Square Values
The root mean square (RMS) voltage or current is the time- averaged voltage or current in an AC system.
Relate the root mean square voltage and current in an al ternating circut with the peak voltage and current and the average
power
Root Mean Square Values and Alternating Current
Recall that in the case of alternating current (AC) t he flow of electric charge periodically reverses direc tion. Unlike direct current
(DC), where the currents and voltages are constant, AC c urrents and voltages vary over time. Recall that mos t residential and
commercial power sources use AC. It is often the case t hat we wish to know the time averaged current, or voltage. Given the current
or voltage as a function of time, we can take the root mean sq uare over time to report the average quantities.
Definition
The root mean square (abbreviated RMS or rms), also known as the quadratic mean, is a statistical measure of t he magnitude of a
varying quantity. It is especially useful when the fu nction alternates between positive and negative valu es, e.g., sinusoids.The RMS
value of a set of values (or a continuous-time func tion such as a sinusoid) is the square root of the a rithmetic mean of the squares of
the original values (or the square of the function). In the case of a set of n values {x,x,….,x }, the RMS value is given by this
formula:
The corresponding formula for a continuous function f(t)defined over the interval T ≤ t ≤ T is as follows:iωt
learning objectives
1 2 n
1 2

19.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561The RMS for a function over all time is below.
The RMS over all time of a periodic function is equal to the RMS of one period of the function. The RMS value of a continuous
function or signal can be approximated by taking the R MS of a series of equally spaced samples.
Application to Voltage and Current
Consider the case of sinusoidally varying voltage:
Sinusoidal Voltage and Current: (a) DC voltage and current are constant in time, once the cu rrent is established. (b) A graph of
voltage and current versus time for 60-Hz AC power. The volta ge and current are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistance
circuit. The frequencies and peak voltages of AC sources di ffer greatly.
V is the voltage at time t, V is the peak voltage, and f is the frequency in her tz. For this simple resistance circuit, I=V/R, and so the
AC current is as follows:
Here, I is the current at time t, and I =V /R is the pea k current. Now using the definition above, let’s calcu late the rms voltage and
rms current. First, we have
Here, we have replaced 2πf with ω. Since V is a constant, we c an factor it out of the square root, and use a trig i dentity to replace
the squared sine function.0
0 0

19.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561Integrating the above, we have:
Since the interval is a whole number of complete cycles (p er definition of RMS), the terms will cancel out, leaving:
Similarly, you can find that the RMS current can be express ed fairly simply:
Updated Circuit Equations for AC
Many of the equations we derived for DC current apply equally to AC. If we are concerned with the time avera ged result and the
relevant variables are expressed as their rms values. For e xample, Ohm ‘s Law for AC is written as follows:
The various expressions for AC power are below:
We can see from the above equations that we can expr ess the average power as a function of the peak volt age and current (in the
case of sinusoidally varying current and voltage):
Average Power: AC power as a function of time. Since the voltage and curren t are in phase here, their product is non-negative and
fluctuates between zero and I0V0. Average power is (1/2)I 0V0.
The RMS values are also useful if the voltage varies by some waveform other than sinusoids, such as with a sq uare, triangular or
sawtooth waves.

19.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561
Waveforms: Sine, square, triangle, and sawtooth waveforms
Safety Precautions in the Household
Electrical safety systems and devices are designed and wid ely used to reduce the risks of thermal and shock hazards.
Identify major risks associated with the electrical cir cuits and strategies to mitigate those risks
Electrical Safety and Household Appliances
Electricity has two hazards. A thermal hazard occurs i n cases of electrical overheating. A shock hazard oc curs when an electric
current passes through a person. There are many systems and devices that prevent electrical hazards.
AC Circuit Lacking Safety Features: A schematic of a simple AC circuit with a voltage source and a single appliance represented
by the resistance R. It lacks safety features.
In practice, a simple AC circuit with no safety featu res is not how power is distributed. Modern household a nd industrial wiring
requires the three-wire system, which has several safety features. The first safety feature is the familiar cir cuit breaker (or fuse) thatlearning objectives

19.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561prevents thermal overload. Secondly, there is a prote ctive case around the appliance, as with a toaster or r efrigerator. The case
prevents people from touching exposed wires and coming i nto electrical contact with the circuit, helping preven t shocks.
Three-Wire System: The three-wire system connects the neutral wire to the e arth at the voltage source and the user location. It
exists at zero volts and supplies an alternative return p ath for the current through the earth. The case of the ap pliance is also
grounded to zero volts. A circuit breaker or fuse prevents thermal overload and exists in series on the active (live /hot) wire. Wire
insulation colors vary by region. It is essential to check locally to determine which color codes are in use, even i f they were
followed in one particular installation.
There are three connections to the earth or ground (earth/ground,). An earth/ground connection is a low-r esistance path directly to
the earth. The two earth/ground connections on the n eutral wire force it to exist at zero volts relative t o the earth, giving the wire its
name. This wire is therefore safe to touch even if its insulation is missing. The neutral wire is the return p ath for the current to
follow in order to complete the circuit.
The two earth/ground connections supply an alternativ e path through the earth to complete the circuit, si nce the earth is a good
conductor. The earth/ground connection closest to th e power source could be at the generating plant, whil e the other is situated at
the user’s location. The third earth/ground connect ion involves the case of the appliance, through the g reen earth/ground wire,
forcing the case to be at zero volts. The live or hot wire (live/hot) supplies the voltage and current to o perate the appliance. The
three-wire system is connected to an appliance through a th ree-prong plug.

19.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561
Three-Prong Plug: The standard three-prong plug can only be inserted one way to ensure the proper function of the three-wire
system.
The Three-Prong Plug
The three-wire system replaced the older two-wire syste m, which lacks an earth/ground wire. Under ordinary circu mstances,
insulation on the live/hot and neutral wires prevent s the case from being situated directly within the c ircuit, so that the earth/ground
wire may seem like double protection. Grounding the ca se solves more than one problem, however. The simplest problem is worn
insulation on the live/hot wire that allows it to con tact the case. When lacking an earth/ground connecti on (some people cut the
third prong off the plug because they only have out dated two-hole receptacles), a severe shock is possible. This is particularly
dangerous in the kitchen, where a good earth/ground connec tion is available through water on the floor or a water fa ucet.
With the earth/ground connection intact, the circui t breaker will trip, thus requiring appliance repair. Some appliances are still sold
with two-prong plugs. These appliances, including power tools with impact resistant plastic cases, have noncon ducting cases and
are called ‘doubly insulated. ‘ Modern two-prong plugs can be inserted into the asymmetric standard outlet in only one way,
ensuring the proper connection of live/hot and neutral wir es.
Color-Coding
Insulating plastic is color-coded to identify live/ hot, neutral, and ground wires, but these codes vary thr oughout the world. Live/hot
wires may be brown, red, black, blue, or grey. Neutral wi res may be blue, black, or white. Since the same color m ay be used for
live/hot or neutral wires in different parts of the world, it is essential to confirm the color code for a ny given local region. The only
exception is the earth/ground wire, which is often gree n but may be yellow or ‘bare wire. ‘ Striped coatings a re sometimes used for
the benefit of those who are colorblind.
Induction and Leakage Current
Electromagnetic induction causes a subtler problem solved by grounding the case. The alternating current in appliances can induce
an EMF on the case. If grounded, the case voltage is ke pt near zero, but if the case is not grounded, a shoc k can occur. Current that
is driven by the induced case EMF is called a leakage current, although current does not necessarily pass fro m the resistor to the
case.
Key Points
A phasor is a representation of a sinusoidal function who se amplitude (A), frequency (ω), and phase (θ) are time-invar iant. If ω
is shared by all components of the system, it can be factor ed out, leaving just A and ω. The term phasor usually refer s to the last
two factors.
Phasors greatly reduce the complexity of expressing sinusoid ally varying signals.
Phasors may be used to analyze the behavior of electrical systems, such as RLC circuits, that have reached a kind of equilibrium
called sinusoidal steady state. In the sinusoidal steady sta te, every voltage and current in a system is sinusoidal wit h angular
frequency ω.

19.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561Phasors allow us to apply techniques used to solve DC circuit s to solve RC circuits.
Recall that unlike DC current and voltage, which are const ant, AC current and voltage vary over time. This is called al ternating
current because the direction alternates.
The root mean square (abbreviated RMS or rms) is a statistica l measure of the magnitude of a varying quantity. We use th e root
mean square to express the average current or voltage in an AC system.
The RMS current and voltage (for sinusoidal systems) are th e peak current and voltage over the square root of two.
The average power in an AC circuit is the product of the RMS current and RMS voltage.
Electrical circuits carry the risks of overheating and pot ential electrical shocks.
Fuses and circuit breakers are used to stop currents that exc eed a set safety limit, thus preventing overheating.
The three-wire system protects against thermal and shoc k hazards by using live, neutral, and ground wires, and grou nding the
neutral wire and the conducting cases of appliances.
Before altering any circuitry, it is important to estab lish the correct color-coding scheme for your region (the color of live/hot,
neutral, and ground wires).
Alternating current has the potential to induce an EMF on the case of an appliance, which poses a shock hazard, so it is
important to ground the case.
Key Terms
sinusoidal steady state: Indicates every voltage and current in a system is sinuso idal with the same angular frequency ω.
complex numbers: Numbers that have an imaginary part. Usually represented a s i.
phasor: A representation of a complex number in terms of a compl ex exponential.
root mean square: The square root of the arithmetic mean of the squares.
rms current: the root mean square of the current,, where I0 is the pea k current, in an AC system
rms voltage: the root mean square of the voltage,, where V0 is the pea k voltage, in an AC system
thermal hazard: an electrical hazard caused by overheating (e.g., in a res istive element)
shock hazard: an electrical hazard that poses the risk of passing cur rent through the body
three-wire system: a modern wiring system with safety precautions; contains live, neutral, and ground wires
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Bill Wilson, Review of Phasors. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11381/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Phasor Representation of Signals. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m21474/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Sinusoidal Steady State and the Series RLC Circuit. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m21475/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
phasor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phasor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
sinusoidal steady state. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/sinusoidal%20steady%20state.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
complex numbers. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/complex_numbers. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Phasor Representation of Signals. Octobe r 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m21474/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Sinusoidal Steady State and the Series RLC Circuit. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m21475/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

19.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14561OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Root mean square. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_mean_square. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rms-voltage. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rms-current. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
root mean square. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/root_mean_square. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Phasor Representation of Signals. Octobe r 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m21474/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Sinusoidal Steady State and the Series RLC Circuit. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m21475/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Root mean square. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_mean_square. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thermal-hazard.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42416/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/three-wire-system.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/shock-hazard. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Phasor Representation of Signals. Octobe r 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m21474/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Louis Scharf, Phasors: Sinusoidal Steady State and the Series RLC Circuit. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m21475/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Root mean square. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_mean_square. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42416/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42416/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42416/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 19.5: Alternating Currents is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

19.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456219.6: Electricity in the World
Identify factors that determine the lethality of an elec tric shock
There are two known categories of electrical hazards: thermal hazards and shock hazards. A thermal hazard is when excessive
electric power causes undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire in the wall of a house. A shock haz ard occurs when electric
current passes through a person. Shocks range in severity from painful but otherwise harmless to heart-stoppingly letha l.
Thermal Hazards
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whene ver electric energy is converted to thermal energy at a rate faster than it can
be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is the short circuit, shown in. A short circuit is a low- resi stance path between
terminals of a voltage source. Insulation on the app liance’s wires has worn through, allowing the two wires t o come into contact.
Such an undesired contact with a high voltage is call ed a short. Since the resistance of the short, r, is very small, the power
dissipated in the short, P = V/r, is very large. For example, if V is 120 V and r is 0.100 Ω, then the power is 144 kW, much greater
than that used by a typical household appliance. The rmal energy delivered at this rate will very quickly raise the temperature of
surrounding materials, melting or perhaps igniting the m.
Short Circuit: A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance path across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wir es of a
toaster allows them to come into contact with a low res istance r. Since P = V2/r, thermal power is created so r apidly that the cord
melts or burns. (b) A schematic of the short circuit.
A thermal hazard can be created even when a short ci rcuit is not present if the wires in a circuit are ove rloaded with too much
current. The power dissipated in the supply wires is P = I R, where R is the resistance of the wires and I the current flowing
through them. If either I or R is too large, the wires overheat. Thermal hazards can cause moderate to severe burns to those who
come in contact with the affected appliance or circuit.
Shock Hazards
Electric shock occurs upon contact of a body part with any source of electricity that causes a sufficient current through the skin,
muscles, or hair. Typically, the expression is used to describe an injurious exposure to electricity.The m inimum current a human can
feel depends on the current type (AC or DC) and fre quency. A person can feel at least 1 mA (rms) of AC cu rrent at 60 Hz and at
least 5 mA of DC current. The current may, if it is high enough, cause tissue damage or fibrillation, which leads to cardiac ar rest. 60
mA of AC (rms, 60 Hz) or 300-500 mA of DC can cause fibr illation.The potential severity of the shock depends on paths through
the body that the currents take. If an electrical c ircuit is established by electrodes introduced in t he body, bypassing the skin, then
the potential for lethality is much higher if a cir cuit through the heart is established. This is known as a microshock. Currents of
only 10 µA can be sufficient to cause fibrillation in th is case.
A very dangerous possibility is the “can’t let go” e ffect illustrated in. The muscles that close the finger s are stronger than those that
open them, so the hand involuntarily closes around t he wire shocking it. This can prolong the shock inde finitely. It can also be alearning objectives
2w w
w

19.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562danger to a person trying to rescue the victim, bec ause the rescuer’s hand may close about the victim’s wrist. Usually the best way
to help the victim is to give the fist a hard blow with an insulator or to throw an insulator at the fist.
Electric Shock and Muscular Contractions: An electric current can cause muscular contractions with va rying effects. (a) The
victim is “thrown” backward by involuntary muscle contract ions that extend the legs and torso. (b) The victim can’t l et go of the
wire that is stimulating all the muscles in the hand. Those that close the fingers are stronger than those that open them.
Factors in the Lethality of Electric Shock
The lethality of an electric shock is dependent on sev eral variables:
Current: The higher the current, the more likely it is le thal. Since current is proportional to voltage when resis tance is fixed (
Ohm ‘s law), high voltage is an indirect risk for producing hig her currents.
Duration: The longer the duration, the more likely it is lethal — safety switches may limit the time of current fl ow.
Pathway: If current flows through the heart muscle, it is mo re likely to be lethal.
Very high voltage (over about 600 volts): This poses an a dditional risk beyond the simple ability of high voltag e to cause high
current at a fixed resistance. Very high voltage, enough to c ause burns, will cause dielectric breakdown at the skin, act ually
lowering total body resistance and, ultimately, causing e ven higher current than when the voltage was first applied. C ontact with
voltages over 600 volts can cause enough skin burning to d ecrease the total resistance of a path though the body to 500 ohms or
less.
Frequency: Very high-frequency electric current causes tissue burning but does not penetrate the body far eno ugh to cause
cardiac arrest.
High Voltage Warning: International safety symbol “Caution, risk of electric s hock” (ISO 3864), also known as the high-voltage
symbol

19.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562Nerve Conduction and Electrocardiograms
V oltage pulses along a cell membrane, called action po tentials, allow us to sense the world, control parts of our body, and think.
Explain purpose of the electrocardiogram and identify f unctions performed by electric currents in the nerve system
Nerve Conduction and Electrocardiograms
Nerve Conduction
Electric currents in the complex system of nerves in our body allow us to sense the world, control parts of o ur body, and think.
There are three major functions of nerves. First, nerve s carry messages from our sensory organs to the centr al nervous system,
consisting of the brain and spinal cord. Second, nerv es carry messages from the central nervous system to m uscles and other
organs. Third, nerves transmit and process signals within th e central nervous system.
Nerve conduction is a general term for electrical sign als carried by nerve cells. A voltage is created acro ss the cell membrane of a
neuron in its resting state. This membrane separates electrically neutral fluids having differing concen trations of ions, the most
important varieties being Na, K, and Cl (these are sod ium, potassium, and chlorine ions). Free ions will diffus e from a region of
high concentration to one of low concentration. The c ell membrane is semipermeable, meaning that some ions may cross it while
others cannot. In its resting state, the cell membran e is permeable to K and Cl, and impermeable to Na. Di ffusion of K and Cl
thus creates the layers of positive and negative char ge on the outside and inside of the membrane, and the Coulomb force prevents
the ions from diffusing across in their entirety.
Creating a Voltage Across a Cell Membrane: The semipermeable membrane of a cell has differen t concentrations of ions inside
and out. Diffusion moves the K+ and Cl− ions in the dir ection shown, until the Coulomb force halts further t ransfer. This results in
a layer of positive charge on the outside, a layer o f negative charge on the inside, and thus a voltage a cross the cell membrane. The
membrane is normally impermeable to Na+.
Once the charge layer has built up, the repulsion of like charges prevents more from moving across, and t he attraction of unlike
charges prevents more from leaving either side. The result is two layers of charge right on the membrane, with diffusion being
balanced by the Coulomb force. A tiny fraction of th e charges move across and the fluids remain neutral, while a separation of
charge and a voltage have been created across the m embrane. Electric currents along the cell membrane a re created by any stimulus
that changes the membrane’s permeability. The membran e thus temporarily becomes permeable to Na, which then rushes in,
driven both by diffusion and the Coulomb force. Thi s inrush of Na+ first neutralizes the inside membrane (called depolarization),
and then makes it slightly positive. The depolarizat ion causes the membrane to again become impermeable to Na, and the
movement of K quickly returns the cell to its resti ng potential, referred to as repolarization. This sequ ence of events results in a
voltage pulse, called the action potential and is shown in.learning objectives

19.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562
Voltage channels are critical in the generation of an action potent ial: Top: view of an idealized action potential shows its
various phases as the action potential passes a point on a ce ll membrane. Bottom: Recordings of action potentials are often
distorted compared to the schematic view because of vari ations in electrophysiological techniques used to make th e recording.
Only small fractions of the ions move, so that the cell can fire many hundreds of times without depleting t he excess concentrations
of Na+ and K+. This is an example of active transport, wherein cell energy is used to move ions across membran es against
diffusion gradients and the Coulomb force. The action po tential is a voltage pulse at one location on a cell mem brane.
How does it get transmitted along the cell membrane a s a nerve impulse? The changing voltage and electri c fields affect the
permeability of the adjacent cell membrane, so that the same process takes place there. The adjacent mem brane depolarizes,
affecting the membrane farther down, and so on. Thus t he action potential stimulated at one location trig gers a nerve impulse that
moves slowly (about 1 m/s) along the cell membrane.
Electrocardiograms
Just as nerve impulses are transmitted by depolarizat ion and repolarization of an adjacent membrane, the depolarization that causes
muscle contraction can also stimulate adjacent muscle cells to depolarize (fire) and contract. Thus, a depo larization wave can be
sent across the heart, coordinating its rhythmic cont ractions and enabling it to perform its vital functi on of propelling blood through
the circulatory system. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a record of the voltages created by the wave of depolar ization (and
subsequent repolarization) in the heart. Historically, E CGs were performed by placing electrodes on the left an d right arms and the
left leg. The voltage between the right arm and the left leg is called the lead II potential and is an indicator of heart-muscle
function.
shows an ECG of the lead II potential and a graph of other major events during the cardiac cycle. The majo r features are labeled P,
Q, R, S, and T. The P wave is generated by the depolarization and contraction of the atria as they pump blood into the ventricles.
The QRS complex has a characteristic shape and time span, and is cre ated by the depolarization of the ventricles as they pump
blood to the body. The lead II QRS signal also masks the repolarization of the atria. Finally, the T wave is generated by the
repolarization of the ventricles and is followed by t he P wave in the next heartbeat. Arterial blood pressur e varies with each part of
the heartbeat, with systolic (maximum) pressure occur ring closely after the QRS complex, signaling the cont raction of the
ventricles.

19.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562
ECG Curve: A normal ECG curve synchronized with other major events during the cardiac cycle.
Electric Activity in the Heart
Electric energy stimulating the heart occurs in the sinoatrial node, the heart’s pacemaker, and is transm itted partially by Perkinje
fibers.
Identify part of the heart that acts as a pacemaker
Electric Activity in the Heart
The human heart provides continuous blood circulati on through the cardiac cycle and is unsurprisingly on e of the most vital organs
in the human body. The heart is divided into four ma in chambers: the two upper chambers are called the lef t and right atria
(singular atrium) and two lower chambers are called th e right and left ventricles. As can be seen in, ther e is a thick wall of muscle
separating the right side and the left side of the heart called the septum. Normally with each beat the r ight ventricle pumps the same
amount of blood into the lungs that the left ventri cle pumps out into the body. Physicians commonly refer t o the right atrium and
right ventricle together as the right heart and to the left atrium and left ventricle as the left heart.learning objectives

19.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562
Structure of the heart: Structure diagram of a coronal section of the human hear t from an anterior view. The two larger chambers
are the ventricles.
The electric energy that stimulates the heart occurs in the sinoatrial node, which produces a definite p otential and then discharges,
sending an impulse across the atria. In the atria th e electrical signal moves from cell to cell (see sec tion on nerve conduction and
the electrocardiogram) while in the ventricles the signal is carried by specialized tissue called the Purkinje fibers which then
transmit the electric charge to the myocardium. shows the isolated heart conduction system.
Conduction System of the Heart: Isolated heart conduction system, showing the sinoatrial a nd Purkinje fibers.
The Sinotrial Node’s Role as a Pacemaker
The sinoatrial node (also commonly spelled sinuatria l node) is the impulse-generating (pacemaker) tissue located in the right
atrium of the heart: i.e., generator of normal sinus rhythm. It is a group of cells positioned on the wall of the right atrium. These
cells are specialized cardiomycetes (cardiac muscle cells).
The sinoatrial node (also commonly spelled sinuatria l node, abbreviated SA node) is the impulse-generating (pacemaker) tissue
located in the right atrium of the heart, and thus the generator of normal sinus rhythm. It is a group of cells positioned on the wall
of the right atrium. Although all of the heart’s cell s have the ability to generate the electrical impul ses (or action potentials) that
trigger cardiac contraction, the sinoatrial node nor mally initiates it, simply because it generates impu lses slightly faster than the
other areas with pacemaker potential.

19.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562
Sinoatrial Node Tissue: High magnification micrograph of sinoatrial node tissu e and an adjacent nerve fiber.
Cells in the SA node, located in the upper right cor ner of the heart, will typically discharge (create ac tion potentials) at about 60100 beats/minute. Because the sinoatrial node is resp onsible for the rest of the heart’s electrical activi ty, it is sometimes called the
primary pacemaker. If the SA node does not function, o r the impulse generated in the SA node is blocked be fore it travels down the
electrical conduction system, a group of cells furth er down the heart will become the heart’s pacemaker. Th ese cells form the
atrioventricular node (A V node), which is an area bet ween the atria and ventricles, within the atrial septu m. If the A V node also
fails, Purkinje fibers are capable of acting as the pacemaker. The reason Purkinje cells do not normally c ontrol the heart rate is that
they generate action potentials at a lower frequency tha n the A V or SA nodes.
Purkinje Fibers
The Purkinje fibers are located in the inner ventricu lar walls of the heart. These fibers consist of special ized cardiomyocytes that
are able to conduct cardiac action potentials more quickly and efficiently than any other cells in the heart. Purkinje fibers allow the
heart’s conduction system to create synchronized con tractions of its ventricles, and are therefore essenti al for maintaining a
consistent heart rhythm.
During the ventricular contraction portion of the ca rdiac cycle, the Purkinje fibers carry the contractio n impulse from both the left
and right bundle branch to the myocardium of the ve ntricles. This causes the muscle tissue of the ventricl es to contract, thus
enabling a force to eject blood out of the heart. At rial and ventricular discharge through the Purkinje trees is assigned on a standard
Electrocardiogram as the P Wave and QRS complex, respecti vely.
Purkinje fibers also have the ability of automaticall y firing at a rate of 15-40 beats per minute if left to their own devices. In
contrast, the SA node outside of parasympathetic contro l can fire a rate of almost 100 beats per minute. In short, they generate
action potentials, but at a slower rate than sinoatr ial node and other atrial ectopic pacemakers. Thus t hey serve as the last resort
when other pacemakers fail.
Key Points
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenever electric energy is converted to thermal energy at a rat e faster than it
can be safely dissipated, such as in the case of a shor t circuit. This is referred to as a thermal hazard.
A shock hazard occurs when electric current passes throu gh a person. If the current is high enough it can cause tis sue damage or
fibrillation, which can lead to cardiac arrest.
The lethality of an electric shock is dependent on man y variables, including current, duration, pathway, and t he presence or
absence of very high voltage.
Nerves carry messages from our sensory organs to the central nervous system, from the central nervous system to muscles, an d
within the central nervous system itself.
The effects of diffusion and the Coulomb force act toge ther to allow ions like Na+, K+, and Cl- to create a voltage acr oss cell
membranes.

19.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562An action potential is an event which alters the permea bility of a cell membrane due to electric currents.
The depolarization that causes muscle contraction can a lso stimulate contraction in adjacent muscle cells. A depolarization wave
across the heart is responsible for rhythmic contractions. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a record of the voltages in the heart.
The human heart provides continuous blood circulation th rough the cardiac cycle and is unsurprisingly one of the most vital
organs in the human body.
The heart is divided into four main chambers: the two up per chambers are called the left and right atria (singu lar atrium) and
two lower chambers are called the right and left ventricles. See for an illustration. There is a conduction system that transports
impulses through the heart.
The electric energy that stimulates the heart occurs in the sinoatrial node, which produces a definite potentia l and then
discharges, sending an impulse across the atria. It is thus the generator of normal sinus rhythm and functions as the heart’s
pacemaker.
In the atria the electrical signal moves from cell to ce ll while in the ventricles the signal is carried by special ized tissue called
the Purkinje fibers.
Purkinje fibers allow the heart’s conduction system to crea te synchronized contractions of its ventricles, and are th erefore
essential for maintaining a consistent heart rhythm.
Key Terms
shock hazard: an electrical hazard that poses the risk of passing cur rent through the body
thermal hazard: an electrical hazard caused by overheating (e.g., in a res istive element)
fibrillation: the rapid, irregular, and unsynchronized contraction of the muscle fibers of the heart
diffusion: the intermingling of the molecules of a fluid due to ra ndom thermal agitation
electrocardiogram: The visual output that an electrocardiograph produc es
action potential: A short term change in the electrical potential that t ravels along a cell such as a nerve or muscle fiber.
sinoatrial node: a group of specialized cardiac muscle cells (tissue) loca ted in the right atrium of the heart, which generates t he
impulses that establish the normal sinus rhythm.
Purkinje fibers: specialized cardiac muscle cells that are able to condu ct cardiac muscle potentials quickly and efficiently;
essential for maintaining consistent heart rhythm.
myocardium: The middle of the three layers forming the wall of the h eart.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/shock-hazard. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric shock. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_shock. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Fibrillation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibrillation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hazard symbol. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hazard_symbol. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thermal-hazard.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
fibrillation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fibrillation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

19.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562High-voltage hazards. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/High-voltage_hazards. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electrocardiogram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrocardiogram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Action potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42352/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/diffusion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electrocardiogram. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electrocardiogram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
action potential. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/action_potential. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
High-voltage hazards. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/High-voltage_hazards. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electrocardiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrocardiography. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Action potential vert. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Action_potential_vert.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42352/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Human heart. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_heart. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Cardiomyocytes. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiomyocytes. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrocardiogram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrocardiogram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Purkinje fibers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Purkinje_fibers. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sinoatrial node. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinoatrial_node. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
myocardium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/myocardium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
sinoatrial node. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/sinoatrial%20node. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Purkinje fibers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Purkinje%20fibers. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
High-voltage hazards. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/High-voltage_hazards. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 12, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42350/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

19.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14562Electrocardiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrocardiography. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Action potential vert. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Action_potential_vert.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42352/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Heart diagram-en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_diagram-en.svg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ConductionsystemoftheheartwithouttheHeart. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ConductionsystemoftheheartwithouttheHeart.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sinoatrial node high mag. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sinoatrial_node_high_mag.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 19.6: Electricity in the World is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Kinematics
This page titled 2: Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
2.2: Speed and Velocity
2.3: Acceleration
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
2.5: Free-Falling ObjectsTopic hierarchy

2.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144382.1: Basics of Kinematics
Defining Kinematics
Kinematics is the study of the motion of points, objects, and groups of objects without considering the causes of its mo tion.
Define kinematics
Kinematics is the branch of classical mechanics that d escribes the motion of points, objects and systems of groups of objects,
without reference to the causes of motion (i.e., forces). The study of kinematics is often referred to as the “g eometry of motion.”
Objects are in motion all around us. Everything from a tennis match to a space-probe flyby of the plane t Neptune involves motion.
When you are resting, your heart moves blood throug h your veins. Even in inanimate objects there is cont inuous motion in the
vibrations of atoms and molecules. Interesting questi ons about motion can arise: how long will it take for a space probe to travel to
Mars? Where will a football land if thrown at a certai n angle? An understanding of motion, however, is also key to understanding
other concepts in physics. An understanding of acceleratio n, for example, is crucial to the study of force.
To describe motion, kinematics studies the trajectori es of points, lines and other geometric objects, as well as their differential
properties (such as velocity and acceleration). Kinem atics is used in astrophysics to describe the motion of celestial bodies and
systems; and in mechanical engineering, robotics and biomechanics to describe the motion of systems compo sed of joined parts
(such as an engine, a robotic arm, or the skeleton of the hu man body).
A formal study of physics begins with kinematics. The wor d “kinematics” comes from a Greek word “kinesis” meani ng motion,
and is related to other English words such as “cinema” (movies) and “kinesiology” (the study of human motion). Kinematic
analysis is the process of measuring the kinematic quantities used to describe motion. The study of kine matics can be abstracted
into purely mathematical expressions, which can be use d to calculate various aspects of motion such as velo city, acceleration,
displacement, time, and trajectory.
Kinematics of a particle trajectory: Kinematic equations can be used to calculate the traje ctory of particles or objects. The
physical quantities relevant to the motion of a particle include: mass m, position r, velocity v, acceleration a.
Reference Frames and Displacement
In order to describe an object’s motion, you need to specif y its position relative to a convenient reference frame.
Evaluate displacement within a frame of reference.
In order to describe the motion of an object, you m ust first describe its position — where it is at any particular time. More
precisely, you need to specify its position relative t o a convenient reference frame. Earth is often used as a reference frame, and we
often describe the position of objects related to its position to or from Earth. Mathematically, the positi on of an object is generally
represented by the variable x.
Frames of Reference
There are two choices you have to make in order to d efine a position variable x. You have to decide where to put x = 0 and which
direction will be positive. This is referred to as ch oosing a coordinate system, or choosing a frame of re ference. As long as you arelearning objectives
learning objectives

2.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14438consistent, any frame is equally valid. But you don’ t want to change coordinate systems in the middle of a calculation. Imagine
sitting in a train in a station when suddenly you no tice that the station is moving backward. Most people wo uld say that they just
failed to notice that the train was moving — it only seemed like the station was moving. But this shows that ther e is a third
arbitrary choice that goes into choosing a coordina te system: valid frames of reference can differ from each other by moving
relative to one another. It might seem strange to use a coordinate system moving relative to the earth — but, for instance, the frame
of reference moving along with a train might be far more convenient for describing things happening insi de the train. Frames of
reference are particularly important when describing an object’s displacement.
FRAMES OF REFERENCE by Professor Hume and Professor Donald Ivey of the University of Toronto
In this classic film, Professors Hume and Ivey cleverly illustrate reference frames and distinguish between fixe d and moving
frames of reference.
Frames of Reference (1960)Frames of Reference (1960)
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film: Frames of Reference is a 1960 educational film by Physical Sciences Study
Committee. The film was made to be shown in high school physics courses. In the film University of Toronto p hysics professors
Patterson Hume and Donald Ivey explain the distinction between inertial and nonintertial frames of referen ce, while demonstrating
these concepts through humorous camera tricks. For exam ple, the film opens with Dr. Hume, who appears to be upsid e down,
accusing Dr. Ivey of being upside down. Only when the pair flip a coin does it become obvious that Dr. Ivey — and the camera —
are indeed inverted. The film’s humor serves both to hold students’ interest and to demonstrate the concept s being discussed. This
PSSC film utilizes a fascinating set consisting of a r otating table and furniture occupying surprisingly u npredictable spots within
the viewing area. The fine cinematography by Abraham M orochnik, and funny narration by University of Toront o professors

2.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14438Donald Ivey and Patterson Hume is a wonderful example of the fun a creative team of filmmakers can have with a subject that
other, less imaginative types might find pedestrian. Producer: Richard Leacock Production Company: Educat ional Development
Corp. Sponsor: Eric Prestamon
Displacement
Displacement is the change in position of an object re lative to its reference frame. For example, if a car m oves from a house to a
grocery store, its displacement is the relative dista nce of the grocery store to the reference frame, or t he house. The word
“displacement” implies that an object has moved or ha s been displaced. Displacement is the change in position of an object and can
be represented mathematically as follows:
where is displacement, is the final position, and is the initial position.
shows the importance of using a frame of reference when de scribing the displacement of a passenger on an airplane.
Displacement in Terms of Frame of Reference: A passenger moves from his seat to the back of the plan e. His location relative to
the airplane is given by x. The -4.0m displacement of the passenger relative to the plane is represented by an ar row toward the rear
of the plane. Notice that the arrow representing his displ acement is twice as long as the arrow representing the disp lacement of the
professor (he moves twice as far).
Introduction to Scalars and Vectors
A vector is any quantity that has both magnitude and di rection, whereas a scalar has only magnitude.
Distinguish the difference between scalars and vectors
What is the difference between distance and displace ment? Whereas displacement is defined by both direct ion and magnitude,
distance is defined by magnitude alone. Displacement i s an example of a vector quantity. Distance is an exa mple of a scalar
quantity. A vector is any quantity with both magnitude and direction. Other examples of vectors include a ve locity of 90 km/h east
and a force of 500 newtons straight down.learning objectives

2.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14438
Scalars and V ectorsScalars and V ectors
Scalars and Vectors: Mr. Andersen explains the differences between scalar and vectors quantities. He also uses a demonstration to
show the importance of vectors and vector addition.
In mathematics, physics, and engineering, a vector is a geometric object that has a magnitude (or length) a nd direction and can be
added to other vectors according to vector algebra. T he direction of a vector in one-dimensional motion i s given simply by a plus
(+) or minus (−) sign. A vector is frequently represe nted by a line segment with a definite direction, or graphically as an arrow,
connecting an initial point A with a terminal point B, as shown in.
Vector representation: A vector is frequently represented by a line segment wi th a definite direction, or graphically as an arrow,
connecting an initial point A with a terminal point B.
Some physical quantities, like distance, either have no direction or no specified direction. In physics, a sc alar is a simple physical
quantity that is not changed by coordinate system ro tations or translations. It is any quantity that ca n be expressed by a single
number and has a magnitude, but no direction. For exam ple, a 20ºC temperature, the 250 kilocalories (250 Ca lories) of energy in a
candy bar, a 90 km/h speed limit, a person’s 1.8 m h eight, and a distance of 2.0 m are all scalars, or qu antities with no specified

2.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14438direction. Note, however, that a scalar can be negative, such as a −20ºC temperature. In this case, the minus sign indicates a point
on a scale rather than a direction. Scalars are never repre sented by arrows. (A comparison of scalars vs. vectors is shown i n.)
Scalars vs. Vectors: A brief list of quantities that are either scalars or vec tors.
Key Points
To describe motion, kinematics studies the trajectories of points, lines and other geometric objects.
The study of kinematics can be abstracted into purely ma thematical expressions.
Kinematic equations can be used to calculate various aspec ts of motion such as velocity, acceleration, displaceme nt, and time.
Choosing a frame of reference requires deciding where the ob ject’s initial position is and which direction will be consi dered
positive.
Valid frames of reference can differ from each other by moving relative to one another.
Frames of reference are particularly important when describ ing an object’s displacement.
Displacement is the change in position of an object relat ive to its reference frame.
A vector is any quantity that has magnitude and direct ion.
A scalar is any quantity that has magnitude but no dir ection.
Displacement and velocity are vectors, whereas distance and speed are scalars.
Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of mechanics concerned with objects in mot ion, but not with the forces involved.
displacement: A vector quantity that denotes distance with a direct ional component.
frame of reference: A coordinate system or set of axes within which to measure the position, orientation, and other properties
of objects in it.
scalar: A quantity that has magnitude but not direction; compa re vector.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42122/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

2.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14438Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
displacement. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/displacement. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frame of reference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frame_of_reference. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRDOqiqBUQY. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Scalar (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42124/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
scalar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scalar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRDOqiqBUQY. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Vector (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_(physics). License: CC BY: Attribution
Scalars and Vectors. Provided by: National Air and Space Association. Located at: http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/k12/airplane/vectors.html. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 2.1: Basics of Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

2.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144392.2: Speed and Velocity
Average Velocity: A Graphical Interpretation
Average velocity is defined as the change in position (o r displacement) over the time of travel.
Contrast speed and velocity in physics
In everyday usage, the terms “speed” and “velocity” are used interchangeably. In physics, however, they a re distinct quantities.
Speed is a scalar quantity and has only magnitude. Vel ocity, on the other hand, is a vector quantity and so has both magnitude and
direction. This distinction becomes more apparent when we calculate average speed and velocity.
Average speed is calculated as the distance traveled over the total time of travel. In contrast, average velocity is defined as the
change in position (or displacement) over the total time of travel.
Average Velocity: The kinematic formula for calculating average veloc ity is the change in position over the time of travel.
The SI unit for velocity is meters per second, or m/s, b ut many other units (such as km/h, mph, and cm/s) are commonly used.
Suppose, for example, an airplane passenger took five seconds to move -4 m (the negative sign indicates th at displacement is
toward the back of the plane). His average velocity would be:
The minus sign indicates that the average velocity is als o toward the rear of the plane.
The average velocity of an object does not tell us anything about what happens to it between the starting point and ending point,
however. For example, we cannot tell from average veloc ity whether the airplane passenger stops momentarily or backs up before
he gets to the back of the plane. To get more details, we must con sider smaller segments of the trip over smaller time i ntervals.
To illustrate the difference between average speed a nd average velocity, consider the following additiona l example. Imagine you
are walking in a small rectangle. You walk three meter s north, four meters east, three meters south, and an other four meters west.
The entire walk takes you 30 seconds. If you are calc ulating average speed, you would calculate the entir e distance (3 + 4 + 3 + 4 =
14 meters) over the total time, 30 seconds. From this, you would get an average speed of 14/30 = 0.47 m/s. When calculating
average velocity, however, you are looking at the disp lacement over time. Because you walked in a full rect angle and ended up
exactly where you started, your displacement is 0 mete rs. Therefore, your average velocity, or displacemen t over time, would be 0
m/s.
learning objectives

2.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14439Average Speed vs. Average Velocity: If you started walking from one corner and went all the way around the rectangle in 30
seconds, your average speed would be 0.47 m/s, but your ave rage velocity would be 0 m/s.
Instananeous Velocity: A Graphical Interpretation
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity of an object at a single point in time and space as calculated by the sl ope of the tangent line.
Differentiate instantaneous velocity from other ways of d etermining velocity
Typically, motion is not with constant velocity nor spe ed. While driving in a car, for example, we continuous ly speed up and slow
down. A graphical representation of our motion in te rms of distance vs. time, therefore, would be more va riable or “curvy” rather
than a straight line, indicating motion with a constan t velocity as shown below. (We limit our discussion to one dimensional
motion. It should be straightforward to generalize to thre e dimensional cases.)
Motion with Changing Velocity: Motion is often observed with changing velocity. This would result in a curvy line when graphed
with distance over time.
To calculate the speed of an object from a graph re presenting constant velocity, all that is needed is to find the slope of the line; this
would indicate the change in distance over the change in t ime. However, changing velocity it is not as straightforwar d.
Since our velocity is constantly changing, we can esti mate velocity in different ways. One way is to look at our instantaneous
velocity, represented by one point on our curvy lin e of motion graphed with distance vs. time. In order t o determine our velocity at
any given moment, we must determine the slope at tha t point. To do this, we find a line that represents our velocity in that moment,
shown graphically in. That line would be the line tan gent to the curve at that point. If we extend this li ne, we can easily calculate
the displacement of distance over time and determin e our velocity at that given point. The velocity of an object at any given
moment is the slope of the tangent line through the relev ant point on its x vs. t graph.
learning objectives

2.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14439Determining instantaneous velocity: The velocity at any given moment is dened as the slope of the tangent line through the
relevant point on the graph
Instantaneous V elocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Instantaneous V elocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes,
Instantaneous Velocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Graphs vs. Time: This is how kinematics begins.
In calculus, finding the slope of curve at x=x is eq uivalent to finding the first derivative:
One interpretation of this definition is that the ve locity shows how many meters the object would travel in one second if it
continues moving at the same speed for at least one secon d.
Key Points
Average velocity can be calculated by determining the t otal displacement divided by the total time of travel.
The average velocity of an object does not tell us anyth ing about what happens to it between the starting point a nd ending point.
Average velocity is different from average speed in that it considers the direction of travel and the overall ch ange in position.
When velocity is constantly changing, we can estimate our velocity by looking at instantaneous velocity.
Instantaneous velocity is calculated by determining the slope of the line tangent to the curve at the point of in terest.
Instantaneous velocity is similar to determining how man y meters the object would travel in one second at a specifi c moment.
Key Terms
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.

2.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14439instantaneous: (As in velocity)—occurring, arising, or functioning without any delay; happening within an imperceptibly brief
period of time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 20, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: None. Located at: None. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
instantaneous. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instantaneous. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 20, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: None. Located at: None. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Instantaneous Velocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Graphs vs. Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=STcgrV2L4tw. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 2.2: Speed and Velocity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

2.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144402.3: Acceleration
Graphical Interpretation
The graphical representation of acceleration over ti me can be derived through the graph of an object’s positi on over time.
Distinguish the difference between how to plot a velocity graph and how to plot an acceleration graph
In physics, acceleration is the rate at which the velo city of a body changes with time. It is a vector quan tity with both magnitude
and direction. Acceleration is accompanied by a force, as described by Newton’s Second Law; the force, as a ve ctor, is the product
of the mass of the object being accelerated and the acceleration (vector), or. The SI unit of accelerati on is the meter per
second squared:
Acceleration is a vector that points in the same dire ction as the change in velocity, though it may not al ways be in the direction of
motion. For example, when an object slows down, or deceler ating, its acceleration is in the opposite direction of i ts motion.
The motion of an object can be depicted graphically by plotting the position of an object over time. T his distance-time graph can be
used to create another graph that shows changes in v elocity over time. Because acceleration is velocity in divided by time in s,
we can further derive a graph of acceleration from a gra ph of an object’s speed or position.
is a graph of an object’s position over time. This gr aph is similar to the motion of a car. In the begin ning, the object’s position
changes slowly as it gains speed. In the middle, the spe ed is constant and the position changes at a constant rate. As it slows down
toward the end, the position changes more slowly. From this gra ph, we can derive a velocity vs time graph.
Position vs Time Graph: Notice that the object’s position changes slowly at the beg inning of the journey, then more and more
quickly as it picks up speed. Its position then changes mor e slowly as it slows down at the end of the journey. In the mid dle of the
journey, while the velocity remains constant, the positio n changes at a constant rate.
This shows the velocity of the object over time. The ob ject’s velocity increases in the beginning as it acc elerates at the beginning,
then remains constant in the middle before it slows d own toward the end. Notice that this graph is a represe ntation of the slope of
the previous position vs time graph. From this graph, we can further derive an acceleration vs time graph.learning objectives

2.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14440
Velocity vs Time: The object’s velocity increases as it accelerates at t he beginning of the journey. It remains the same in the middl e
of the journey (where there is no acceleration). It decrea ses as the object decelerates at the end of the journey.
To do this, we would also plot the slope of the velocit y vs time graph. In this graph, the acceleration is constant in the three
different stages of motion. As we noted earlier, the o bject is increasing speed and changing positions slo wly in the beginning. The
acceleration graph shows that the object was increasing at a positive constant acceleration during this tim e. In the middle, when the
object was changing position at a constant velocity, the acceleration was 0. This is because the object is no longer changing its
velocity and is moving at a constant rate. Towards the en d of the motion, the object slows down. This is depict ed as a negative
value on the acceleration graph. Note that in this ex ample, the motion of the object is still forward (posi tive), but since it is
decelerating, the acceleration is negative.
Acceleration vs Time Graph: The object has positive acceleration as it speeds u p at the beginning of the journey. It has no
acceleration as it travels at constant velocity in the mi ddle of the journey. Its acceleration is negative as it slo ws down at the end of
the journey.

2.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14440
High School Phy sics: Graphing MotionHigh School Phy sics: Graphing Motion
Graphing Motion: A brief introduction to particle diagrams and motion graphs.
Motion with Constant Acceleration
Constant acceleration occurs when an object’s velocity cha nges by an equal amount in every equal time period.
Describe how constant acceleration affects the motion of an object
learning objectives

2.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14440
One-Dimensional Motion: When you drop an object, it falls vertically toward the ce nter of the earth due to the constant
acceleration of gravity.
An object experiencing constant acceleration has a ve locity that increases or decreases by an equal amount for any constant period
of time. Acceleration can be derived easily from basi c kinematic principles. It is defined as the first time derivative of velocity (so
the second derivative of position with respect to time):
Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriousl y limit the situations we can study and does not deg rade the accuracy of our
treatment, because in a great number of situations, a cceleration is constant. When it is not, we can either consider it in s eparate
parts of constant acceleration or use an average accelera tion over a period of time.
The motion of falling objects is a simple, one-dimensi onal type of projectile motion in which there is no horizontal movement. For
example, if you held a rock out and dropped it, the rock would fall only vertically downward toward the ear th. If you were to throw
the rock instead of just dropping it, it would follow a mo re projectile-like pattern, similar to the one a kicked b all follows.
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projected into the air and is subject only to the acceleration of gravity. The
object thrown is called a projectile, and the object’s path is called its trajectory. In two-dimensional pro jectile motion, there is both
a vertical and a horizontal component.
Due to the algebraic properties of constant accelerat ion, there are kinematic equations that relate displa cement, initial velocity, final
velocity, acceleration, and time. A summary of these equa tions is given below.

2.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14440
Constant Acceleration Explained w ith V ectors and AConstant Acceleration Explained w ith V ectors and A
Constant Acceleration Explained with Vectors and Algebra: This video answers the question “what is acceleration? ".
Key Points
Acceleration is the rate at which the velocity of a body ch anges with time.
Acceleration is a vector that points in the same directi on as the change in velocity, though it may not always be in the direction
of motion.
Because acceleration is velocity in m/s divided by time in s, we can derive a graph of acceleration from a graph of an ob ject’s
speed or position.
Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously limi t the situations we can study and does not degrade the accu racy of
our treatment.
Due to the algebraic properties of constant acceleration, t here are kinematic equations that can be used to calcula te
displacement, velocity, acceleration, and time.
Calculations with constant acceleration can be done in re lation to one-dimensional motion as well as two-dimensiona l motion.

2.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14440Key Terms
acceleration: The amount by which a speed or velocity increases (and so a scalar quantity or a vector quantity).
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.
position: A place or location.
kinematic: of or relating to motion or kinematics
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
position. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/position. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Graphing Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYXf7Q9j9qA. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinematic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Graphing Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYXf7Q9j9qA. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Constant Acceleration Explained with Vectors and Algeb ra. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-4pV1HibhlU.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42102/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 2.3: Acceleration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

2.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144412.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Applications
There are four kinematic equations that describe the moti on of objects without consideration of its causes.
Choose which kinematics equation to use in problems in wh ich the initial starting position is equal to zero
Kinematics is the branch of classical mechanics that describes the motion of points, bodies (objects), and systems of bodies (groups
of objects) without consideration of the causes of mo tion. There are four kinematic equations when the in itial starting position is
the origin, and the acceleration is constant:
1.
2. or alternatively
3.
4.
Notice that the four kinematic equations involve five kinematic variables: and. Each of these equations contains only
four of the five variables and has a different one mi ssing. This tells us that we need the values of three variables to obtain the value
of the fourth and we need to choose the equation tha t contains the three known variables and one unknown v ariable for each
specific situation.
Here the basic problem solving steps to use these equation s:
Step one – Identify exactly what needs to be determined in th e problem (identify the unknowns).
Step two – Find an equation or set of equations that can hel p you solve the problem.
Step three – Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerica l solutions complete
with units.
Step four – Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does i t make sense?
Problem-solving skills are obviously essential to succ ess in a quantitative course in physics. More importan tly, the ability to apply
broad physical principles, usually represented by equa tions, to specific situations is a very powerful form o f knowledge. It is much
more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analytic al skills and problem-solving abilities can be appli ed to new situations,
whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contai n every possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are u seful both for
solving problems in a physics class and for applying phy sics in everyday and professional life.
Motion Diagrams
A motion diagram is a pictorial description of an o bject’s motion and represents the position of an obj ect at equally spaced time
intervals.
Construct a motion diagram
A motion diagram is a pictorial description of the m otion of an object. It displays the object’s location at various equally spaced
times on the same diagram; shows an object’s initial position and velocity; and presents several spots in the center of the diagram.
These spots reveal whether or not the object has acce lerated or decelerated. For simplicity, the object i s represented by a simple
shape, such as a filled circle, which contains inform ation about an object’s position at particular time instances. For this reason, a
motion diagram is more information than a path diagram. I t may also display the forces acting on the object at eac h time instance.
is a motion diagram of a simple trajectory. Imagine the object as a hockey puck sliding on ice. Notice th at the puck covers the same
distance per unit interval along the trajectory. We can conclude that the puck is moving at a constant velocity and, therefore, there is
no acceleration or deceleration during the motion.learning objectives
learning objectives

2.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14441
Puck Sliding on Ice: Motion diagram of a puck sliding on ice. The puck is moving at a constant velocity.
One major use of motion diagrams is the presentation o f film through a series of frames taken by a camera; this is sometimes called
stroboscopic technique (as seen in). Viewing an object on a motion diagram allows one to determine whether a n object is speeding
up or slowing down, or if it is at constant rest. As the f rames are taken, we can assume that an object is at a constant rest if it
occupies the same position over time. We can assume that an object is speeding up if there is a visible increase in the space between
objects as time passes, and that it is slowing down if t here is a visible decrease in the space between objec ts as time passes. The
objects on the frame come very close together.
Bouncing Ball: A bouncing ball captured with a stroboscopic flash at 25 images per second.
Key Points
The four kinematic equations involve five kinematic vari ables: and.
Each equation contains only four of the five variables and has a different one missing.
It is important to choose the equation that contains the t hree known variables and one unknown variable for each specific
situation.
Motion diagrams represent the motion of an object by di splaying its location at various equally spaced times on the same
diagram.
Motion diagrams show an object’s initial position and vel ocity and presents several spots in the center of the dia gram. These
spots reveal the object’s state of motion.
Motion diagrams contain information about an object’s po sition at particular time instances and is therefore mo re informative
than a path diagram.

2.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14441Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of physics concerned with objects in motion.
stroboscopic: Relating to an instrument used to make a cyclically movi ng object appear to be slow-moving, or stationary.
diagram: A graph or chart.
motion: A change of position with respect to time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42125/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Motion diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_diagram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/motion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
diagram. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diagram. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
stroboscopic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/stroboscopic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51129b2ee4b0c14bf464ce1b/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/3c/Bouncing_ball_strobe _edit.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

2.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144422.5: Free-Falling Objects
Solve basic problems concerning free fall and distingui sh it from other kinds of motion
The motion of falling objects is the simplest and mos t common example of motion with changing velocity. I f a coin and a piece of
paper are simultaneously dropped side by side, the pa per takes much longer to hit the ground. However, if y ou crumple the paper
into a compact ball and drop the items again, it will look like both the coin and the paper hit the floor simultaneously. This is
because the amount of force acting on an object is a function of not only its mass, but also area. Free fal l is the motion of a body
where its weight is the only force acting on an object.
Free Fall: This clip shows an object in free fall.
Galileo also observed this phenomena and realized that it disagreed with the Aristotle principle that heavi er items fall more quickly.
Galileo then hypothesized that there is an upward for ce exerted by air in addition to the downward force of gravity. If air resistance
and friction are negligible, then in a given locatio n (because gravity changes with location), all object s fall toward the center of
Earth with the same constant acceleration, independent of their mass, that constant acceleration is gravity. Air resistan ce opposes
the motion of an object through the air, while frict ion opposes motion between objects and the medium thr ough which they are
traveling. The acceleration of free-falling objects is referred to as the acceleration due to gravity gg. As we said earlier, gravity
varies depending on location and altitude on Earth (or any other planet), but the average acceleration due to gravity on Earth is 9.8
. This value is also often expressed as a negative a cceleration in mathematical calculations due to the downward direction of
gravity.
The best way to see the basic features of motion inv olving gravity is to start by considering straight u p and down motion with no
air resistance or friction. This means that if the obje ct is dropped, we know the initial velocity is zero. On ce the object is in motion,
the object is in free-fall. Under these circumstances, th e motion is one-dimensional and has constant acceler ation, gg. The
kinematic equations for objects experiencing free fall are:
where and.
Free Fall MotionFree Fall Motionlearning objectives

2.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14442Video: Free Fall Motion - Describes how to calculate the time for an object to fall if given the height and the height th at an
object fell if given the time to fall.
Some examples of objects that are in free fall include:
A spacecraft in continuous orbit. The free fall would en d once the propulsion devices turned on.
An stone dropped down an empty well.
An object, in projectile motion, on its descent.
Key Points
The acceleration of free-falling objects is called the acceleration due to gravity, since objects are pulled to wards the center of
the earth.
The acceleration due to gravity is constant on the surfac e of the Earth and has the value of 9.80.
Glossary
Acceleration
The amount by which a speed or velocity changes within a cer tain period of time (and so a scalar quantity or a vector qu antity).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS:
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike Provided by: Light and
Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution Free fall. Provided by: Wikipedia.
Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_fall. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike acceleration. Provided by:
Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike Free-fall.
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Free-fall.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free Fall Motion - YouTube. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C6-AxMc9mig. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 2.5: Free-Falling Objects is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
Example:

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
20: Circuits and Direct Currents
This page titled 20: Circuits and Direct Currents is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.20.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
20.5: RC CircuitsTopic hierarchy

20.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456420.1: Overview
Describe structure of an electrical circuit and identif y elements of a direct current circuit
Overview
An electrical network is an interconnection of electr ical elements such as resistors, inductors, capacitors, transmission lines, voltage
sources, current sources and switches. An electrical ci rcuit is a special type of network, one that has a clo sed loop giving a return
path for the current. Electrical networks that consist only of sources (voltage or current), linear lumped elements (resistors,
capacitors, inductors), and linear distributed elem ents (transmission lines) can be analyzed by algebra ic and transform methods. A
resistive circuit is a circuit containing only resis tors and ideal current and voltage sources. Analysis o f resistive circuits is less
complicated than analysis of circuits containing ca pacitors and inductors. If the sources are constant (DC) sources, the result is a
DC circuit. A network that contains active electronic c omponents is known as an electronic circuit. Such networ ks are generally
nonlinear and require more complex design and analysis tools.
High School Phy sics - CircuitsHigh School Phy sics - Circuitslearning objectives

20.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14564Circuits: A brief introduction to electric circuits and cur rent flow for introductory physics students.
Direct Current Circuits
Direct current (DC) is the unidirectional flow of elect ric charge. Direct current is produced by sources such as batteries,
thermocouples, solar cells, and commutator-type elec tric machines of the dynamo type. Direct current may flow in a conductor
such as a wire, but can also flow through semiconductor s, insulators, or even through a vacuum as in elect ron or ion beams. The
electric charge flows in a constant direction, distin guishing it from alternating current (AC). A term for merly used for direct current
was galvanic current.
A direct current circuit is an electrical circuit t hat consists of any combination of constant voltage so urces, constant current sources,
and resistors. In this case, the circuit voltages and c urrents are independent of time. A particular circuit voltage or current does not
depend on the past value of any circuit voltage or c urrent. This implies that the system of equations that represent a DC circuit do
not involve integrals or derivatives with respect to time. If a capacitor or inductor is added to a DC c ircuit, the resulting circuit is
not, strictly speaking, a DC circuit. However, most such c ircuits have a DC solution. This solution gives the ci rcuit voltages and
currents when the circuit is in DC steady state. Such a circuit is represented by a system of differential eq uations. The solution to
these equations usually contain a time varying or tr ansient part as well as constant or steady state part. It is this steady state part that
is the DC solution. In electronics, it is common to refe r to a circuit that is powered by a DC voltage source su ch as a battery or the
output of a DC power supply as a DC circuit even though what i s meant is that the circuit is DC powered.
A simple DC circuit is illustrated in. In circuit diag rams such as this, electrical elements are represente d by symbols and usually
labeled with appropriate characteristics, such as the resistance r of a resistor. The electric potential and current ma y also be labeled
at various points of the circuit. However, please be awa re that circuit diagram conventions do differ among textbooks and subject
fields, leading to different symbols being used for the same circuit elements.
Example Circuit Element Symbols: A set of example circuit elements and their associated symbols commonly used in circuit
diagrams.
A Simple Circuit: A simple DC circuit with a voltage source (V) and resistor (R). The current i flowing through the circuit is given
by Ohm’s law.
Physical Laws Related to Circuit Analysis
A number of electrical laws apply to all electrical networks. These include Ohm’s law, which has been discusse d in the “Resistance
and Resistors” module, Kirchhoff’s current and volta ge laws, which are covered in the “Kirchhoff’s Rules” m odule. The two
Kirchoff laws along with the current-voltage character istic (I-V curve) of each electrical element complete ly describe a circuit.
With these, it is possible to calculate the electric potential and current at each point in the circuit. In addition, Norton’s theorem and
Thévenin’s theorem are useful in analyzing complicated ci rcuits.

20.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14564Sources of EMF
Electromotive force (EMF) is the voltage voltage gene rated by a battery or by the magnetic force accordi ng to Faraday’s Law of
Induction.
Give examples of the devices that can provide the electrom otive force
Electromotive Force
Electromotive force, also called EMF (denoted and me asured in volts) refers to voltage generated by a bat tery or by the magnetic
force according to Faraday’s Law of Induction, which states that a time varying magnetic field will induce an electri c current.
Electromotive “force” is not considered a force (as fo rce is measured in newtons) but a potential, or energy per unit of charge,
measured in volts. Formally, EMF is classified as the e xternal work expended per unit of charge to produce an electric potential
difference across two open-circuited terminals. By sepa rating positive and negative charges, electric poten tial difference is
produced, generating an electric field. The created electrical potential difference drives current flo w if a circuit is attached to the
source of EMF. When current flows, however, the voltage a cross the terminals of the source of EMF is no longer t he open-circuit
value, due to voltage drops inside the device due to its int ernal resistance.
Devices that can provide EMF include electrochemical c ells (batteries), thermoelectric devices, solar cells, electrical generators,
transformers, and even Van de Graaff generators (examples shown in).
Examples of generators of electromotive force.: A variety of voltage sources (clockwise from top left): the Brazos Wind Farm in
Fluvanna, Texas (credit: Leaflet, Wikimedia Commons); th e Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia (credit: Alex Polezhaev); a sol ar farm
(credit: U.S. Department of Energy); and a group of nicke l metal hydride batteries (credit: Tiaa Monto). The volt age output of each
depends on its construction and load, and equals emf only if t here is no load.
In the case of a battery, charge separation that gi ves rise to a voltage difference is accomplished by chemical reactions at the
electrodes; voltaic cells can be thought of as having a “ch arge pump” of atomic dimensions at each electrode.
In the case of an electrical generator, a time-varyi ng magnetic field inside the generator creates an el ectric field via electromagnetic
induction, which in turn creates an energy difference between generator terminals. Charge separation takes place within the
generator, with electrons flowing away from one termina l and toward the other, until, in the open-circuit ca se, sufficient electric
field builds up to make further movement unfavorabl e. Again the EMF is countered by the electrical voltage due to charge
separation. If a load is attached, this voltage can drive a current. The general principle governing th e EMF in such electrical
machines is Faraday’s law of Induction.
In nature, EMF is generated whenever magnetic field fluc tuations occur through a surface. An example of this is the varying Earth
magnetic field during a geomagnetic storm, acting on anyth ing on the surface of the planet, like an extended electrica l grid.learning objectives

20.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14564Key Points
Direct current (DC) is the unidirectional flow of electric charge. Direct current is produced by sources such as batt eries,
thermocouples, solar cells, and commutator-type electric m achines of the dynamo type.
A direct current circuit is an electrical circuit that consists of constant voltage sources, constant current sou rces, and resistors. It
is common to refer to a circuit that is powered by a DC volt age source as a DC circuit even though what is meant is tha t the
circuit is DC powered.
A number of electrical laws apply to all electrical net works: Ohm ‘s law, Kirchhoff’s current and voltage laws, Norton’s
theorem, and Thévenin’s theorem. With these, it is possibl e to calculate the electric potential and current at e ach point in the
circuit.
EMF is classified as the external work expended per unit of c harge to produce an electric potential difference acro ss two opencircuited terminals.
Devices that can provide EMF include electrochemical ce lls, thermoelectric devices, solar cells, electrical gene rators,
transformers, and even Van de Graaff generators.
In nature, EMF is generated whenever magnetic field fluctua tions occur through a surface.
Key Terms
current-voltage characteristic: A current–voltage characteristic or I–V curve (curre nt–voltage curve) is a relationship between
the electric current through a circuit, device, or mater ial, and the corresponding voltage, or potential differe nce across it.
electrical circuit: An interconnection of electrical elements such as resist ors, inductors, capacitors, transmission lines, voltage
sources, current sources and switches that has a closed loop giving a return path for the current.
direct current: An electric current in which the electrons flow in one di rection, but may vary with time.
battery: A device that produces electricity by a chemical re action between two substances.
electromotive force: (EMF)—The voltage generated by a battery or by the magne tic force according to Faraday’s Law. It is
measured in units of volts, not newtons, and thus, is not a ctually a force.
Faraday’s law of induction: Is a basic law of electromagnetism that predicts how a magne tic field will interact with an electric
circuit to produce an electromotive force.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
FHSST Physics/Electricity/Flow of Charge. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/FHSST_Physics/Electricity/Flow_of_Charge. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/simplej.pdf. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Direct current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Physics with Calculus/Electromagnetism/Current and Circui ts. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_with_Calculus/Electromagnetism/Current_and_ Circuits. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
FHSST Physics/Electricity/Circuits. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/FHSST_Physics/Electricity/Circuits. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_circuit. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Direct current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electrical circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_circuit. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

20.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14564electrical circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electrical%20circuit. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
current-voltage characteristic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/currentvoltage%20characteristic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
direct current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/direct_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j5XxZ10Alig. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Ohm's_Law_with_Voltage_source.svg&page=1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Circuit Symbols for A-level-OCR-Physics A. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/File:Circuit_Symbols_for_A-level-OCR-Physics_ A.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Oka Kurniawan, Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11428/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltage source. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_source. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromotive_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
V oltage source. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_source. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
A-level Physics (Advancing Physics)/V oltage. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Alevel_Physics_(Advancing_Physics)/Voltage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Oka Kurniawan, Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11428/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Current source. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Current_source. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
IB Physics/Electric Currents. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/IB_Physics/Electric_Currents.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
A-level Physics/Electrons, Waves and Photons/D.C.ncircuits. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Alevel_Physics/Electrons,_Waves_and_Photons/D.C._circuits. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
V oltage source. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_source. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromotive_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Oka Kurniawan, Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11428/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/faraday-s-law-ofinduction--3. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
battery. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/battery. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j5XxZ10Alig. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Ohm's_Law_with_Voltage_source.svg&page=1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Circuit Symbols for A-level-OCR-Physics A. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/File:Circuit_Symbols_for_A-level-OCR-Physics_ A.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

20.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14564OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 20.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

20.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456520.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
Calculate the total resistance in the circuit with resist ors connected in series
Overview
Most circuits have more than one component, called a r esistor, that limits the flow of charge in the circui t. A measure of this limit
on charge flow is called resistance. The simplest comb inations of resistors are the series and parallel con nections. The total
resistance of a combination of resistors depends on both th eir individual values and how they are connected.
High School Phy sics - Series CircuitsHigh School Phy sics - Series Circuits
Series Circuits: A brief introduction to series circuit and series circuit analysis, including Kirchhoff’s Current Law (KCL) and
Kirchhoff’s V oltage Law (KVL).
Resistors in Series
Resistors are in series whenever the flow of charge, or the curr ent, must flow through components sequentially.learning objectives

20.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565
Resistors in Series: These four resistors are connected in series because i f a current was applied at one end, it would flow through
each resistor sequentially to the end.
shows resistors in series connected to a voltage sou rce. The total resistance in the circuit is equal to the sum of the individual
resistances, since the current has to pass through each r esistor in sequence through the circuit.
Resistors connected in a series circuit: Three resistors connected in series to a battery (left) and the equivalent single or series
resistance (right).
Using Ohm ‘s Law to Calculate Voltage Changes in Resistors in Series
According to Ohm’s law, the voltage drop, V, across a resistor when a current flows through it is calculated by using the equation
V=IR, where I is current in amps (A) and R is the resistance in ohms (Ω).
So the voltage drop across R is, across R is, and across R is. The sum of the voltages would equal:
, based on the conservation of energy and charge. If we su bstitute the values for individual voltages, we get:
or
This implies that the total resistance in a series is equal to the sum of the individual resistances. Theref ore, for every circuit with N
number of resistors connected in series:
Since all of the current must pass through each resisto r, it experiences the resistance of each, and resist ances in series simply add
up.
Since voltage and resistance have an inverse relationshi p, individual resistors in series do not get the total sourc e voltage, but divide
it. This is indicated in an example of when two light bulbs are connected together in a series circuit wit h a battery. In a simple
circuit consisting of one 1.5V battery and one ligh t bulb, the light bulb would have a voltage drop of 1.5V across it. If two
lightbulbs were connected in series with the same batt ery, however, they would each have 1.5V/2, or 0.75V drop across them. This
would be evident in the brightness of the lights: ea ch of the two light bulbs connected in series would b e half as dim as the single
light bulb. Therefore, resistors connected in serie s use up the same amount of energy as a single resist or, but that energy is divided
up between the resistors depending on their resistances.
Resistors in Parallel
The total resistance in a parallel circuit is equal to t he sum of the inverse of each individual resistances.1 2 3

20.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Calculate the total resistance in the circuit with resist ors connected in parallel
Overview
Resistors in a circuit can be connected in series or in parallel. The total resistance of a combination of resistors depends on both
their individual values and how they are connected.
High School Phy sics - Parallel CircuitsHigh School Phy sics - Parallel Circuits
Parallel Circuits: A brief overview of parallel circuit analysis using VI RP tables for high school physics students.
Resistors in Parallel
Resistors are in parallel when each resistor is connec ted directly to the voltage source by connecting wire s having negligible
resistance. Each resistor thus has the full voltage of t he source applied to it.learning objectives

20.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565
Resistors in Parallel: A parallel connection of resistors.
Each resistor draws the same current it would if it wer e the only resistor connected to the voltage source. T his is true of the
circuitry in a house or apartment. Each outlet that is connected to a appliance (the “resistor”) can ope rate independently, and the
current does not have to pass through each appliance se quentially.
Ohm ‘s Law and Parallel Resistors
Each resistor in the circuit has the full voltage. According to Ohm’s law, the currents flowing through t he individual resistors are
and. Conservation of charge implies that the total cu rrent is the sum of these currents:
Parallel resistors: Three resistors connected in parallel to a battery and the equivalent single or parallel resistance.
Substituting the expressions for individual currents giv es:
or
This implies that the total resistance in a parallel ci rcuit is equal to the sum of the inverse of each ind ividual resistances. Therefore,
for every circuit with nn number or resistors connected in p arallel,
This relationship results in a total resistance that is less than the smallest of the individual resistances. When resistors are connected
in parallel, more current flows from the source than would flo w for any of them individually, so the total resistance is lo wer.
Each resistor in parallel has the same full voltage of the source applied to it, but divide the total c urrent amongst them. This is
exemplified by connecting two light bulbs in a paral lel circuit with a 1.5V battery. In a series circuit, the two light bulbs would be
half as dim when connected to a single battery sourc e. However, if the two light bulbs were connected in paral lel, they would be
equally as bright as if they were connected individua lly to the battery. Because the same full voltage is being applied to both light
bulbs, the battery would also die more quickly, since i t is essentially supplying full energy to both light bulbs. In a series circuit, the
battery would last just as long as it would with a single li ght bulb, only the brightness is then divided amongst the bulbs.

20.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Combination Circuits
A combination circuit can be broken up into similar part s that are either series or parallel.
Describe arrangement of resistors in a combination circuit and its practical implications
Combination Circuits
More complex connections of resistors are sometimes j ust combinations of series and parallel. This is common ly encountered,
especially when wire resistances is considered. In that ca se, wire resistance is in series with other resistances that are in parallel.
A combination circuit can be broken up into similar parts that are either series or parallel, as diagrammed in. In the figure, the total
resistance can be calculated by relating the three resistors to each other as in series or in parallel. R and R are connected in
parallel in relation to each other, so we know that for that subset, the inverse of resistance would be equal to:
Resistor Network: In this combination circuit, the circuit can be broken up into a series component and a parallel component.
Resistors in Electric Circuits (9 of 16) Combinatio n R Resistors in Electric Circuits (9 of 16) Combinatio n R
……learning objectives
1 2

20.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Combination Circuits: Two parallel resistors in series with one resistor.
or
R is connected in series to both R and R, so the resistance would be calculated as:
Complex Combination Circuits
For more complicated combination circuits, various p arts can be identified as series or parallel, reduc ed to their equivalents, and
then further reduced until a single resistance is left, as shown in. In this figure, the combination of seve n resistors was identified by
being either in series or in parallel. In the initial ima ge, the two circled sections show resistors that are in par allel.
Reducing a combination circuit: This combination of seven resistors has both series and par allel parts. Each is identified and
reduced to an equivalent resistance, and these are furt her reduced until a single equivalent resistance is reache d.
Reducing those parallel resistors into a single R valu e allows us to visualize the circuit in a more simpli fied manner. In the top right
image, we can see that the circled portion contains t wo resistors in series. We can further reduce that to another R value by adding
them. The next step shows that the circled two resistor s are in parallel. Reducing those highlights that th e last two are in series, and
thus can be reduced to a single resistance value for the entire circuit.
One practical implication of a combination circuit i s that resistance in wires reduces the current and power delivered to a resistor.
Combination circuit can be transformed into a series circuit, based on an understanding of the equivalen t resistance of parallel
branches to a combination circuit. A series circuit can be used to determine the total resistance of the circuit. Essentially, wire
resistance is a series with the resistor. It thus incr eases the total resistance and decreases the current. If wire resistance is relatively
large, as in a worn (or a very long) extension cord, th en this loss can be significant. If a large current is drawn, the IR drop in the
wires can also be significant.
3 1 2

20.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Charging a Battery: EMFs in Series and Parallel
When voltage sources are connected in series, their emfs an d internal resistances are additive; in parallel, they sta y the same.
Compare the resistances and electromotive forces for the voltage sources connected in the same and opposite pol arity, and
in series and in parallel
When more than one voltage source is used, they can be connected either in series or in parallel, simi lar to resistors in a circuit.
When voltage sources are in series facing the same d irection, their internal resistances add and their electromotive force, or emf,
add algebraically. These types of voltage sources are common in flashlights, toys, and other appliances. Usu ally, the cells are in
series in order to produce a larger total emf.
Flashlight and Bulb: A series connection of two voltage sources in the same dire ction. This schematic represents a flashlight with
two cells (voltage sources) and a single bulb (load resis tance) in series.
A battery is a multiple connection of voltaic cells. The disadvantage of series connections of cells in t his manner, though, is that
their internal resistances add. This can sometimes be problematic. For example, if you placed two 6v batte ries in your car instead of
the typical 12v single battery, you would be adding b oth the emfs and the internal resistances of each b attery. You would therefore
end up with the same 12v emf, though the internal re sistance would then be doubled, causing issues for you when you want to start
your engine.
But, if the cells oppose one another—such as when one is put into an appliance backwards—the total emf is le ss, since it is the
algebraic sum of the individual emfs. When it is reve rsed, it produces an emf that opposes the other, and results in a difference
between the two voltage sources.
Battery Charger: This represents two voltage sources connected in series with their emfs in opposition. Current flows in the
direction of the greater emf and is limited by the sum of t he internal resistances. (Note that each emf is represen ted by script E in
the figure.) A battery charger connected to a battery is an example of such a connection. The charger must hav e a larger emf than
the battery to reverse current through it.learning objectives

20.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565When two voltage sources with identical emfs are conne cted in parallel and also connected to a load resis tance, the total emf is the
same as the individual emfs. But the total internal resistance is reduced, since the internal resistances are in parallel. Thus, the
parallel connection can produce a larger current.
Two Identical EMFs: Two voltage sources with identical emfs (each labeled by script E) connected in parallel produce the same
emf but have a smaller total internal resistance than the individual sources. Parallel combinations are often use d to deliver more
current.
EMF and Terminal Voltage
The output, or terminal voltage of a voltage source suc h as a battery, depends on its electromotive force and it s internal resistance.
Express the relationship between the electromotive force an d terminal voltage in a form of equation
When you forget to turn off your car lights, they slo wly dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they simpl y blink off when the
battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming imp lies that battery output voltage decreases as the batt ery is depleted. The reason
for the decrease in output voltage for depleted or overloaded batteries is that all voltage sources hav e two fundamental parts—a
source of electrical energy and an internal resistance.
Electromotive Force
All voltage sources create a potential difference an d can supply current if connected to a resistance. On a small scale, the potential
difference creates an electric field that exerts for ce on charges, causing current. We call this potenti al difference the electromotive
force (abbreviated emf). Emf is not a force at all; it is a special type of potential difference of a sou rce when no current is flowing.
Units of emf are volts.
Electromotive force is directly related to the sourc e of potential difference, such as the particular co mbination of chemicals in a
battery. However, emf differs from the voltage output o f the device when current flows. The voltage across the terminals of a
battery, for example, is less than the emf when the b attery supplies current, and it declines further as t he battery is depleted or
loaded down. However, if the device’s output voltage c an be measured without drawing current, then output v oltage will equal emf
(even for a very depleted battery).learning objectives

20.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Terminal Voltage
presents a schematic representation of a voltage source. The voltage output of a device is measured across i ts terminals and is
called its terminal voltage V. Terminal voltage is given by the equation:
Schematic Representation of a Voltage Source: Any voltage source (in this case, a carbon-zinc dry cell) has an emf related to its
source of potential difference, and an internal resistan ce r related to its construction. (Note that the script E stands for emf.) Also
shown are the output terminals across which the terminal voltage V is measured. Since V=emf−Ir, terminal voltage equals emf only
if there is no current flowing.
where r is the internal resistance and I is the current flo wing at the time of the measurement.
I is positive if current flows away from the positive terminal. The larger the current, the smaller the t erminal voltage. Likewise, it is
true that the larger the internal resistance, the smaller th e terminal voltage.
Key Points
The same current flows through each resistor in series.
Individual resistors in series do not get the total sourc e voltage, but divide it.
The total resistance in a series circuit is equal to the s um of the individual resistances:.
The total resistance in a parallel circuit is less than t he smallest of the individual resistances.
Each resistor in parallel has the same voltage of the sou rce applied to it (voltage is constant in a parallel c ircuit).
Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; they divide it (current is dependent on the value of each resi stor and the
number of total resistors in a circuit).
More complex connections of resistors are sometimes just combinations of series and parallel.
Various parts of a combination circuit can be identified as series or parallel, reduced to their equivalents, and the n further
reduced until a single resistance is left.
Resistance in wires reduces the current and power delivere d to a resistor. If the resistance in wires is relatively la rge, as in a
worn (or a very long) extension cord, then this loss can b e significant and affect power output into appliances.
Emfs connected in the same polarity in series are addi tive and result in a higher total emf.
Two emfs connected in the opposite polarity in series have a to tal emf equal to the difference between them, and can be used to
charge the lower voltage source.

20.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Two voltage sources with identical emfs connected in parallel have a net emf equivalent to one emf source, however, the net
internal resistance is less, and therefore produces a high er current.
Key Terms
series: A number of things that follow on one after the other or are connected one after the other.
resistance: The opposition to the passage of an electric current through that element.
parallel: An arrangement of electrical components such that a c urrent flows along two or more paths.
combination circuit: An electrical circuit containing multiple resistors t hat are connected in a combination of both series and
parallel connections.
electromotive force: (EMF)—The voltage generated by a battery or by the magne tic force according to Faraday’s Law. It is
measured in units of volts, not newtons, and thus, is not a ctually a force.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lml.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
series. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/series. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resistance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/resistance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Series Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNpnjfBFCyo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lml.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
parallel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/parallel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resistance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/resistance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Series Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNpnjfBFCyo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAGrHdSI7fM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

20.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors%23Series_and_parallel_resistors.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
combination circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/combination%20circuit. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
parallel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/parallel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
series. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/series. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Series Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNpnjfBFCyo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAGrHdSI7fM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Combination Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtTlCL3pb-w. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
parallel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/parallel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
series. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/series. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Series Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNpnjfBFCyo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAGrHdSI7fM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Combination Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtTlCL3pb-w. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright

20.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14565OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/terminal-voltage.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential difference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/potential_difference. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Series Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JNpnjfBFCyo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Parallel Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAGrHdSI7fM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Combination Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtTlCL3pb-w. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 2, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42356/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resistors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resistors. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42357/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

20.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456620.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
learning objectives
Describe relationship between the Kirchhoff’s circuit laws and the energy and charge in the electrical circuits
Introduction to Kirchhoff’s Laws
Kirchhoff’s circuit laws are two equations first publishe d by Gustav Kirchhoff in 1845. Fundamentally, they addr ess conservation
of energy and charge in the context of electrical circu its.
Although Kirchhoff’s Laws can be derived from the equat ions of James Clerk Maxwell, Maxwell did not publish his set of
differential equations (which form the foundation of classical electrodynamics, optics, and electric circ uits) until 1861 and 1862.
Kirchhoff, rather, used Georg Ohm’s work as a foundation for Kirchhoff’ s current law (KCL) and Kirchhoff’ s voltage law (KVL).
Kirchhoff’s laws are extremely important to the analy sis of closed circuits. Consider, for example, the circ uit illustrated in the
figure below, consisting of five resistors in a com bination of in series and parallel arrangements. Simp lification of this circuit to a
combination of series and parallel connections is im possible. However, using Kirchhoff’s rules, one can analy ze the circuit to
determine the parameters of this circuit using the v alues of the resistors (R, R, R, r and r). Also of import ance in this example
is that the values E and E represent sources of volta ge (e.g., batteries).
Closed Circuit: To determine all variables (i.e., current and voltage dro ps across the different resistors) in this circuit, Kirch hoff’s
rules must be applied.
As a final note, Kirchhoff’s laws depend on certain cond itions. The voltage law is a simplification of Farada y’s law of induction,
and is based on the assumption that there is no fluctuating magnetic field within the closed loop. Th us, although this law can be
applied to circuits containing resistors and capacitor s (as well as other circuit elements), it can only be u sed as an approximation to
the behavior of the circuit when a changing current and therefore magnetic field are involved.
The Junction Rule
Kirchhoff’s junction rule states that at any circuit junctio n, the sum of the currents flowing into and out of that juncti on are equal.
Describe relationship between the Kirchhoff’s circuit laws and the energy and charge in the electrical circuits
Kirchhoff’s junction rule, also known as Kirchhoff’s curr ent law (KCL), Kirchoff’s first law, Kirchhoff’s point rule, and
Kirchhoff’s nodal rule, is an application of the principle of conservation of electric charge.
Kirchhoff’s junction rule states that at any junction (node) in an electrical circuit, the sum of the cur rents flowing into that
junction is equal to the sum of the currents flowing o ut of that junction. In other words, given that a cur rent will be positive or1 2 3 1 2
1 2
learning objectives

20.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566negative depending on whether it is flowing towards or a way from a junction, the algebraic sum of currents in a network of
conductors meeting at a point is equal to zero. A visual re presentation can be seen in.
Kirchhoff’s Junction Law: Kirchhoff’s Junction Law illustrated as currents flowing into and out of a junction.
Kirchhoff' s Loop and Junction Rules Theory | Doc PhKirchhoff' s Loop and Junction Rules Theory | Doc Ph
Kirchhoff’s Loop and Junction Rules Theory: We justify Kirchhoff’s Rules from diarrhea and conservat ion of energy. Some
people call ’em laws, but not me!
Thus, Kirchoff’s junction rule can be stated mathematicall y as a sum of currents (I):

20.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566where n is the total number of branches carrying current to wards or away from the node.
This law is founded on the conservation of charge (me asured in coulombs), which is the product of current (amperes) and time
(seconds).
Limitation
Kirchhoff’s junction law is limited in its applicabili ty. It holds for all cases in which total electric cha rge (Q) is constant in the
region in consideration. Practically, this is always tr ue so long as the law is applied for a specific poin t. Over a region, however,
charge density may not be constant. Because charge is conserved, the only way this is possible is if there i s a flow of charge across
the boundary of the region. This flow would be a current, t hus violating Kirchhoff’s junction law.
The Loop Rule
Kirchhoff’s loop rule states that the sum of the emf values i n any closed loop is equal to the sum of the potential dr ops in that loop.
Formulate the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, noting its assumptions
Kirchhoff’ s loop rule (otherwise known as Kirchhoff’ s voltage law (KVL), Kirchhoff’ s mesh rule, Kirchhoff’ s second law,
orKirchhoff’ s second rule) is a rule pertaining to circuits, and is based on the principle of conservation of energy.
Conservation of energy—the principle that energy is neither created nor destroyed—is a ubiquitous princ iple across many studies
in physics, including circuits. Applied to circuitry, it is implicit that the directed sum of the electrica l potential differences
(voltages) around any closed network is equal to zer o. In other words, the sum of the electromotive force (emf) values in any closed
loop is equal to the sum of the potential drops in that loop (which may come from resistors).
Another equivalent statement is that the algebraic s um of the products of resistances of conductors (and cu rrents in them) in a
closed loop is equal to the total electromotive force available in that loop. Mathematically, Kirchhoff’s loop rule can be represented
as the sum of voltages in a circuit, which is equated with zero:
Kirchhoff' s Loop and Junction Rules Theory | Doc PhKirchhoff' s Loop and Junction Rules Theory | Doc Ph
……learning objectives

20.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566Kirchhoff’s Loop and Junction Rules Theory: We justify Kirchhoff’s Rules from diarrhea and conservat ion of energy. Some
people call ’em laws, but not me!
Here, V is the voltage across element k, and n is the t otal number of elements in the closed loop circuit. An illustration of such a
circuit is shown in. In this example, the sum of v, v, v, and v (and v if it is included), is zero.
Kirchhoff’s Loop Rule: Kirchhoff’s loop rule states that the sum of all the v oltages around the loop is equal to zero: v1 + v2 + v3
– v4 = 0.
Given that voltage is a measurement of energy per un it charge, Kirchhoff’s loop rule is based on the law of conservation of energy,
which states: the total energy gained per unit charge must equal the amoun t of energy lost per unit of charge.
illustrates the changes in potential in a simple seri es circuit loop. Kirchhoff’s second rule requires emf− Ir−IR −IR =0.
Rearranged, this is emf=Ir+IR +IR, meaning that the em f equals the sum of the IR (voltage) drops in the lo op. The emf
supplies 18 V, which is reduced to zero by the resist ances, with 1 V across the internal resistance, and 12 V and 5 V across the
two load resistances, for a total of 18 V.
k
1 2 3 4 5
Example:
1 2
1 2

20.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566
The Loop Rule: An example of Kirchhoff’s second rule where the sum o f the changes in potential around a closed loop must
be zero. (a) In this standard schematic of a simple series cir cuit, the emf supplies 18 V, which is reduced to zero by the
resistances, with 1 V across the internal resistance, an d 12 V and 5 V across the two load resistances, for a total o f 18 V. (b)
This perspective view represents the potential as somethin g like a roller coaster, where charge is raised in potentia l by the emf
and lowered by the resistances. (Note that the script E stands for emf.)
Limitation
Kirchhoff’s loop rule is a simplification of Faraday’s law of induction, and holds under the assumption that there is no fluctuating
magnetic field linking the closed loop. In the presen ce of a variable magnetic field, electric fields co uld be induced and emf could
be produced, in which case Kirchhoff’s loop rule breaks d own.
Applications
Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any circuit and m odified for those with EMFs, resistors, capacitors and mo re.
Describe conditions when the Kirchoff’s rules are useful to apply
Overview
Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any circuit by modifying them for those circuits with electromoti ve forces, resistors,
capacitors and more. Practically speaking, however, the rules are only useful for characterizing those circ uits that cannot be
simplified by combining elements in series and parallel.learning objectives

20.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566Combinations in series and parallel are typically much easier to perform than applying either of Kirchhoff’ s rules, but Kirchhoff’s
rules are more broadly applicable and should be used to solve problems involving complex circuits that can not be simplified by
combining circuit elements in series or parallel.
Example of Kirchoff’s Rules
shows a very complex circuit, but Kirchhoff’s loop and junction rules can be applied. To solve the circuit for currents I, I, and I,
both rules are necessary.
Kirchhoff’s Rules: sample problem: This image shows a very complicated circuit, which can be re duced and solved using
Kirchoff’s Rules.
Applying Kirchhoff’s junction rule at point a, we find:
because I flows into point a, while I and I3 flow out. T he same can be found at point e. We now must solve thi s equation for each
of the three unknown variables, which will require three di fferent equations.
Considering loop abcdea, we can use Kirchhoff’s loop ru le:
Substituting values of resistance and emf from the figure d iagram and canceling the ampere unit gives:
This is the second part of a system of three equation s that we can use to find all three current values. Th e last can be found by
applying the loop rule to loop aefgha, which gives:
Using substitution and simplifying, this becomes:
In this case, the signs were reversed compared with the ot her loop, because elements are traversed in the opposite direction.
We now have three equations that can be used in a system. T he second will be used to define I, and can be rearranged to:
The third equation can be used to define I, and can be r earranged to:1 2 3
1 2

20.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566Substituting the new definitions of I and I (which are both in common terms of I), into the first equation (I =I +I), we get:
Simplifying, we find that I =4.75 A. Inserting this value int o the other two equations, we find that I =-3.50 A and I =8.2 5 A.
Key Points
Kirchhoff used Georg Ohm ‘s work as a foundation to create Kirc hhoff’s current law (KCL) and Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL)
in 1845. These can be derived from Maxwell’s Equations, wh ich came 16-17 years later.
It is impossible to analyze some closed-loop circuits by si mplifying as a sum and/or series of components. In these cas es,
Kirchhoff’s laws can be used.
Kirchhoff’s laws are special cases of conservation of en ergy and charge.
Kirchhoff’s junction rule is an application of the princ iple of conservation of electric charge: current is flow o f charge per time,
and if current is constant, that which flows into a point in a circuit must equal that which flows out of it.
The mathematical representation of Kirchhoff’s law is: where I is the current of k, and n is the total number o f
wires flowing into and out of a junction in consideration.
Kirchhoff’s junction law is limited in its applicability over regions, in which charge density may not be constant. Bec ause
charge is conserved, the only way this is possible is if th ere is a flow of charge across the boundary of the region. This flow
would be a current, thus violating the law.
Kirchhoff’s loop rule is a rule pertaining to circuits that is based upon the principle of conservation of energ y.
Mathematically, Kirchoff’s loop rule can be represented as the sum of voltages (V) in a circuit, which is equated with zero:
Kirchhoff’s loop rule is a simplification of Faraday’s law of induction and holds under the assumption that there is n o
fluctuating magnetic field linking the closed loop.
Kirchhoff’s rules can be applied to any circuit, regard less of its composition and structure.
Because combining elements is often easy in parallel an d series, it is not always convenient to apply Kirchhoff’s rules.
To solve for current in a circuit, the loop and junction rules can be applied. Once all currents are related by th e junction rule,
one can use the loop rule to obtain several equations to u se as a system to find each current value in terms of oth er currents.
These can be solved as a system.
Key Terms
resistor: An electric component that transmits current in direc t proportion to the voltage across it.
electromotive force: (EMF)—The voltage generated by a battery or by the magne tic force according to Faraday’s Law. It is
measured in units of volts (not newtons, N; EMF is not a force).
capacitor: An electronic component consisting of two conductor pla tes separated by empty space (sometimes a dielectric
material is instead sandwiched between the plates), and c apable of storing a certain amount of charge.
electric charge: A quantum number that determines the electromagnetic interactions of some subatomic particles; by
convention, the electron has an electric charge of -1 an d the proton +1, and quarks have fractional charge.
current: The time rate of flow of electric charge.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
resistor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike2 3 1 1 2 3
1 2 3
k
k

20.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. January 14, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/current. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electric charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. January 14, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
KCL - Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:KCL__Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kirchhoff's Loop and Junction Rules Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlyUtYRqMLs. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resistor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. January 14, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
KCL - Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:KCL__Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kirchhoff's Loop and Junction Rules Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlyUtYRqMLs. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Kirchhoff voltage law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Kirchhoff_voltage_law.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kirchhoff's Loop and Junction Rules Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlyUtYRqMLs. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. February 15, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. January 14, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
KCL - Kirchhoff's circuit laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:KCL__Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kirchhoff's Loop and Junction Rules Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlyUtYRqMLs. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Kirchhoff voltage law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Kirchhoff_voltage_law.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kirchhoff's Loop and Junction Rules Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlyUtYRqMLs. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. February 15, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Kirchhoffu2019s Rules. January 14, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42359/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

20.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14566This page titled 20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

20.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456720.4: Voltmeters and Ammeters
Compare circuit connection of an ammeter and a voltmeter
V oltmeters and ammeters measure the voltage and curr ent, respectively, of a circuit. Some meters in automo bile dashboards, digital
cameras, cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are voltmete rs or ammeters.
High School Phy sics - V oltmeters and AmmetersHigh School Phy sics - V oltmeters and Ammeters
Voltmeters and Ammeters: A brief introduction to voltmeters and ammeters fo r introductory physics students.
Voltmeters
A voltmeter is an instrument that measures the differe nce in electrical potential between two points in an electric circuit. An analog
voltmeter moves a pointer across a scale in proportio n to the circuit’s voltage; a digital voltmeter pro vides a numerical display. Any
measurement that can be converted to voltage can be displayed on a meter that is properly calibrated; such measurements include
pressure, temperature, and flow.learning objectives

20.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567
Voltmeter: Demonstration voltmeter from a physics class
In order for a voltmeter to measure a device’s volt age, it must be connected in parallel to that device. This is necessary because
objects in parallel experience the same potential differ ence.
Voltmeter in Parallel: (a) To measure the potential difference in this series ci rcuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel with the
voltage source or either of the resistors. Note that termi nal voltage is measured between points a and b. It is not possible to connect
the voltmeter directly across the EMF without including its i nternal resistance, r. (b) A digital voltmeter in use

20.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567Ammeters
An ammeter measures the electric current in a circuit. The name is derived from the name for the SI unit f or electric current,
amperes (A).
In order for an ammeter to measure a device’s current, it must be connected in series to that device. Thi s is necessary because
objects in series experience the same current. They must not be connected to a voltage source — ammeter s are designed to work
under a minimal burden, (which refers to the voltage dro p across the ammeter, typically a small fraction of a vol t).
Ammeter in Series: An ammeter (A) is placed in series to measure current. All of the current in this circuit flows through the
meter. The ammeter would have the same reading if located b etween points d and e or between points f and a, as it does in the
position shown. (Note that the script capital E stands for EMF, and r stands for the internal resistance of the s ource of potential
difference.)
Galvanometers (Analog Meters)
Analog meters have needles that swivel to point at num bers on a scale, as opposed to digital meters, which have numerical
readouts.The heart of most analog meters is a devic e called a galvanometer, denoted by G. Current flow through a galvanometer,
I, produces a proportional movement, or deflection, of the ne edle.
The two crucial characteristics of any galvanometer are its resistance and its current sensitivity. Cur rent sensitivity is the current
that gives a full-scale deflection of the galvanome ter’s needle — in other words, the maximum current tha t the instrument can
measure. For example, a galvanometer with a current sensi tivity of 50 μA has a maximum deflection of its needl e when 50 μA
flows through it, is at the scale’s halfway point when 25 μA flows through it, and so on.
If such a galvanometer has a 25-Ω resistance, then a voltage of only produces a full-scale
reading. By connecting resistors to this galvanometer in different ways, you can use it as either a voltmeter or ammeter to measure
a broad range of voltages or currents.
Galvanometers as Voltmeters
A galvanometer can function as a voltmeter when it i s connected in series with a large resistance R. The value of R is determined by
the maximum voltage that will be measured. Suppose you want 10 V to produce a full-scale deflection of a vol tmeter containing a
25-Ω galvanometer with a 50-μA sensitivity. Then 10 V ap plied to the meter must produce a current of 50 μA. The total resistance
must be:
or:
(R is so large that the galvanometer resistance, r, is nearly negligible.) Note that 5 V applied to this v oltmeter produces a half-scale
deflection by sending a 25-μA current through the me ter, and so the voltmeter’s reading is proportional to voltage, as desired. This
voltmeter would not be useful for voltages less than a bout half a volt, because the meter deflection would be too small to readG

20.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567accurately. For other voltage ranges, other resistanc es are placed in series with the galvanometer. Many me ters allow a choice of
scales, which involves switching an appropriate resistance i nto series with the galvanometer.
Galvanometers as Ammeters
The same galvanometer can also function as an ammeter when it is placed in parallel with a small resistance R, often called the
shunt resistance. Since the shunt resistance is small, most of the current passes through it, allowing an amme ter to measure currents
much greater than those that would produce a full-scal e deflection of the galvanometer.
Suppose, for example, we need an ammeter that gives a full-scale deflection for 1.0 A and that contains th e same 25-Ω
galvanometer with 50-μA sensitivity. Since R and r are in parallel, the voltage across them is the same.
These IR drops are: IR = I r
so that:.
Solving for R, and noting that IG is 50 μA and I is 0.999950 A, we have:
Null Measurements
Null measurements balance voltages so there is no curren t flowing through the measuring devices that would in terfere with the
measurement.
Explain why null measurements are employed
Null Measurements
Standard measurements of voltage and current alter c ircuits, introducing numerical uncertainties. V oltm eters draw some extra
current, whereas ammeters reduce current flow. Null measu rements balance voltages, so there is no current flowi ng through the
measuring device and the circuit is unaltered. Null m easurements are generally more accurate but more co mplex than standard
voltmeters and ammeters. Their precision is still lim ited.
The Potentiometer
When measuring the EMF of a battery and connecting th e battery directly to a standard voltmeter, as shown i n, the actual quantity
measured is the terminal voltage V. V oltage is related to the EMF of the battery by V=emf−Ir, where I is the current that flows and r
is the internal resistance of the battery.
Voltmeter Connected to Battery: An analog voltmeter attached to a battery draws a small but nonzero current and measures a
terminal voltage that differs from the EMF of the battery. (No te that the script capital E symbolizes electromotive f orce, or EMF.)
Since the internal resistance of the battery is not known p recisely, it is not possible to calculate the EMF precisely.G
learning objectives

20.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567The EMF could be accurately calculated if r were known, which is rare. If the current I could be made zero, then V=emf, and EMF
could be directly measured. However, standard voltmeters need a current to operate.
A potentiometer is a null measurement device for me asuring potentials (voltages). A voltage source is conn ected to resistor R,
passing a constant current through it. There is a stea dy drop in potential (IR drop) along the wire, so a v ariable potential is obtained
through contact along the wire.
An unknown emf (represented by script E) connected in series with a galvanometer is shown in. Note that emf opposes the other
voltage source. The location of the contact point i s adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. When the galvanometer reads zero,
emf=IR, where Ris the resistance of the wire section up to the cont act point. Since no current flows through the galvanome ter,
none flows through the unknown EMF, and emf is sensed.
Potentiometer: The potentiometer is a null measurement device. (a.) A v oltage source connected to a long wire resistor passes a
constant current I through it. (b.) An unknown EMF (labeled sc ript Ex) is connected as shown, and the point of contact alo ng R is
adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. The segme nt of wire has a resistance Rx and script Ex=IRx, where I is unaf fected by the
connection, since no current flows through the galvanom eter. The unknown EMF is thus proportional to the resistan ce of the wire
segment.
Standard EMF is substituted for emf, and the contact point is adjusted until the galvano meter reads zero, so that emf =IR. In both
cases, no current passes through the galvanometer. The cu rrent Ithrough the long wire is identical. Taking the ratio emf/emf,
Icancels, and solving for emf gives what is seen in.
Because a long uniform wire is used for R, the ratio of resistances R /R is the same as the ratio of the lengths of wire that z ero the
galvanometer for each EMF. The three quantities on t he right-hand side of the equation are now known or me asured, and emf can
be calculated. There is often less uncertainty in th is calculation than when using a voltmeter directly, but it is not zero. There is
always some uncertainty in the ratio of resistances R /R and in the standard EMFs. Furthermore, it is not possi ble to tell when the
galvanometer reads exactly zero, which introduces error i nto both R and R, and may also affect the current I.x x x
x x x
x
x s s
x s
x
x s
x
x s
x s

20.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567Resistance Measurements
Many so-called ohmmeters measure resistance. Most common ohmmeters apply a voltage to a resistance, measure t he current, and
calculate the resistance using Ohm ‘s law. Their read out is this calculated resistance. Simple configurati ons using standard
voltmeters and ammeters have limited accuracy, beca use the meters alter both the voltage applied to th e resistor and the current
flowing through it. The Wheatstone bridge is a null mea surement device for calculating resistance by balanc ing potential drops in a
circuit. The device is called a bridge because the galvanometer forms a bridge between two branches. A v ariety of bridge
devicesare used to make null measurements in circuits. Resistors R and R are precisely known, while the arrow through
Rindicates that it is a variable resistance. The val ue of R can be precisely read. With the unknown resistance R x in the circuit, R
is adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero.
Wheatstone Bridge: The Wheatstone bridge is used to calculate unknown res istances. The variable resistance R3 is adjusted until
the galvanometer reads zero with the switch closed. T his simplifies the circuit, allowing Rx to be calculated based on the IR drops.
The potential difference between points b and d is then zero, meaning that b and d are at the same potential. With no current
running through the galvanometer, it has no effect o n the rest of the circuit. So the branches abc and adc are in parallel, and each
branch has the full voltage of the source. Since b and d are at the same potential, the IR drop along ad must equal the IR drop along
ab. Again, since b and d are at the same potential, the IR drop along dcmust equal the IR drop along bc. This equation is used to
calculate the unknown resistance when current through the galvanometer is zero. This method can be very a ccurate, but it is limited
by two factors. First, it is not possible for the cur rent through the galvanometer to be exactly zero. Se cond, there are always
uncertainties in R, R, and R, which contribute to the uncerta inty in R.
Key Points
A voltmeter is an instrument used for measuring electr ical potential difference between two points in an electr ic circuit.
An ammeter is a measuring device used to measure the elect ric current in a circuit.
A voltmeter is connected in parallel with a device to meas ure its voltage, while an ammeter is connected in series wit h a device
to measure its current.
At the heart of most analog meters is a galvanometer, an in strument that measures current flow using the movement, o r
deflection, of a needle. The needle deflection is produ ced by a magnetic force acting on a current-carrying wir e.
Measurements of voltages and current with standard voltmet ers and ammeters alter the circuit being measured, introd ucing
uncertainties. V oltmeters draw some extra current, whereas ammeters reduce current flow.
Null measurements are employed to reduce the uncertaint y in the measured voltage and current.
The potentiometer and the Wheatstone bridge are two me thods for making null measurements.
The potentiometer is an instrument that measures an un known voltage by opposing with a known voltage, without dra wing
current from the voltage source being measured.1 2
3 3 3
1 2 3 x

20.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567A Wheatstone bridge is an electrical circuit used to me asure an unknown electrical resistance by balancing two leg s of a bridge
circuit, one leg of which includes the unknown component.
Key Terms
shunt resistance: a small resistance R placed in parallel with a galvanometer G to produce an ammeter; the larger the current to
be measured, the smaller R must be; most of the current f lowing through the meter is shunted through R to protect the
galvanometer
galvanometer: An analog measuring device, denoted by G, that measures c urrent flow using a needle deflection caused by a
magnetic field force acting upon a current-carrying wir e.
null measurements: methods of measuring current and voltage more accurately by balancing the circuit so that no current
flows through the measurement device
potentiometer: an instrument that measures a voltage by opposing it wi th a precise fraction of a known voltage, and without
drawing current from the unknown source.
Wheatstone bridge: An instrument used to measure an unknown electrical res istance by balancing two legs of a bridge circuit,
one leg of which includes the unknown component.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42360/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltmeters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltmeters. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Ammeters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ammeters. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/galvanometer. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/shunt-resistance.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42360/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltmeters and Ammeters. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6-c4jLXkMo. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42360/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltmeters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltmeters. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potentiometer (measuring instrument). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potentiometer_(measuring_instrument). License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42362/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wheatstone bridge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wheatstone_bridge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
potentiometer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/potentiometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/null-measurements.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wheatstone bridge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Wheatstone_bridge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

20.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14567OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42360/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltmeters and Ammeters. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6-c4jLXkMo. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42360/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
V oltmeters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltmeters. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42362/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42362/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42362/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

20.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456820.5: RC Circuits
Describe the components and function of an RC circut, no ting especially the time-dependence of the capacitor’s charge
An RC circuit is one containing a resistor R and a cap acitor C. The capacitor is an electrical component th at houses electric charge.
In this Atom, we will study how a series RC circuit behav es when connected to a DC voltage source. (In subsequent Atoms, we
will study its AC behavior.)
Charging
Fig 1 shows a simple RC circuit that employs a DC voltag e source. The capacitor is initially uncharged. As soo n as the switch is
closed, current flows to and from the initially uncha rged capacitor. As charge increases on the capacitor pl ates, there is increasing
opposition to the flow of charge by the repulsion of lik e charges on each plate.
Charging an RC Circuit: (a) An RC circuit with an initially uncharged capacitor. Current flows in the direction shown as soon as
the switch is closed. Mutual repulsion of like charges in t he capacitor progressively slows the flow as the capacito r is charged,
stopping the current when the capacitor is fully charged and Q=C ⋅emf. (b) A graph of voltage across the capacitor versus tim e, with
the switch closing at time t=0. (Note that in the two parts of the figure, the capital script E stands for emf, q stands f or the charge
stored on the capacitor, and τ is the RC time constant.)
In terms of voltage, across the capacitor voltage is given by V =Q/C, where Q is the amount of charge stored on each plate and C is
the capacitance. This voltage opposes the battery, gr owing from zero to the maximum emf when fully charged. Thus, the current
decreases from its initial value of I =emf/R to zero as the voltage on the capacitor reaches the same val ue as the emf. When there is
no current, there is no IR drop, so the voltage on the capac itor must then equal the emf of the voltage source.
Initially, voltage on the capacitor is zero and rises rapidly at first since the initial current is a max imum. Fig 1 (b) shows a graph of
capacitor voltage versus time (t) starting when the swi tch is closed at t=0. The voltage approaches emf asym ptotically since the
closer it gets to emf the less current flows. The equat ion for voltage versus time when charging a capacitor C through a resistor R,
is:
where V(t) is the voltage across the capacitor and emf is equal to the emf of the DC voltage source. (The ex act form can be derived
by solving a linear differential equation describin g the RC circuit, but this is slightly beyond the sco pe of this Atom.) Note that the
unit of RC is second. We define the time constant τ for an RC circuit as. τ shows how quickly the circuit charges or
discharges.
Discharging
Discharging a capacitor through a resistor proceeds in a similar fashion, as illustrates. Initially, the c urrent is I =V /R, driven by the
initial voltage V on the capacitor. As the voltage de creases, the current and hence the rate of discharge d ecreases, implying another
exponential formula for V. Using calculus, the voltage V on a capacitor C being discharged through a resistor R i s found to belearning objectives
c
0 0

20.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14568Impedance
Impedance is the measure of the opposition that a circui t presents to the passage of a current when a voltage i s applied.
Express the relationship between the impedance, the resista nce, and the capacitance of a series RC circuit in a form o f
equation
Rather than solving the differential equation relat ing to circuits that contain resistors and capacito rs, we can imagine all sources in
the circuit are complex exponentials having the sam e frequency. This technique is useful in solving pr oblems in which phase
relationship is important. The phase of the complex impe dance is the phase shift by which the current is ahead of t he voltage.
Complex Analysis
For an RC circuit in, the AC source driving the circuit is given as:
Series RC Circuit: Series RC circuit.
where V is the amplitude of the AC voltage, j is the ima ginary unit (j =-1), and ωω is the angular frequency o f the AC source. Two
things to note:
1. We use lower case alphabets for voltages and sources to rep resent that they are alternating (i.e., we use v (t) instead o f V (t)).
2. The imaginary unit is given the symbol “j”, not the usu al “i”. “i” is reserved for alternating currents.
Complex Impedance
The advantage of assuming sources take this form is t hat all voltages and currents in the circuit are al so complex exponentials
(having the same frequency as the source). To appreci ate the reason for this, we can investigate how each circuit element behaves
when either the voltage or current is a complex expo nential. For the resistor,. From our voltage given ab ove,. Thus
the resistor’s voltage is a complex, as is the curren t with an amplitude. For a capacitor,. Letting the voltage be a
complex exponential we have. The amplitude of this co mplex exponential is.
The major consequence of assuming complex exponenti al voltage and currents is that the ratio for rathe r than depending on
time each element depends on source frequency. This q uantity is known as the element’s (complex) impedance. The magnitude of
the complex impedance is the ratio of the voltage a mplitude to the current amplitude. Just like resista nce in DC cases, impedance is
the measure of the opposition that a circuit presen ts to the passage of a current when a voltage is appli ed. The impedance of a
resistor is R, while that of a capacitor (C) is. In the case of the circuit in, to find the complex imp edance of the RC circuit, we
add the impedance of the two components, just as with two re sistors in series:.
Finding Real Currents and Voltages
Since, to find the real currents and voltages we simp ly need to take the real part of the i(t) and v(t). The
(real value) impedance is the real part of the comp lex impedance Z. For a series RC circuit, we get. We see that
the amplitude of the current will be.
Phase Angle and Power Factor
In a series RC circuit connected to an AC voltage sou rce, voltage and current maintain a phase difference.learning objectives
in in

20.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14568Compare the currents in the resistor and capacitor in a se ries RC circuit connected to an AC voltage source
Phase Angle
Impedance is an AC (alternating current) analogue to resistance in a DC circuit. As we studied in a previousl y Atom
(“Impedance”), current, voltage and impedance in an R C circuit are related by an AC version of Ohm ‘s law:, where I and V
are peak current and peak voltage respectively, and Z is the impedance of the circuit.
In a series RC circuit connected to an AC voltage so urce as shown in, conservation of charge requires current be the same in each
part of the circuit at all times. Therefore we can say: the currents in the resistor and capacitor are equal an d in phase. (We will
represent instantaneous current as i(t).)
Series RC Circuit: Series RC circuit.
On the other hand, because the total voltage should be equal to the sum of voltages on the resistor and capacitor, so we have:
where ωω is the angular frequency of the AC voltage sou rce and j is the imaginary unit; j =-1. Since the com plex number
has a phase angle that satisfies,
we notice that voltage and current has a phase differe nce of.
For. As learned from the preceding series of Atoms—the voltage across the capacitor V follows the current by onefourth of a cycle (or 90º).
Power Factor
Because voltage and current are out of phase, power d issipated by the circuit is not equal to: (peak voltage) times (peak current).
The fact that source voltage and current are out of phase affects the power delivered to the circuit. It can be shown that the average
power is I V cos ϕ, where I and V are the root mean square (rms) averages of the current and voltage, respectively. For
this reason, cos ϕ is called the power factor, which can range from 0 to 1.
Key Points
In an RC circuit connected to a DC voltage source, the current decreases from its initial value of I =emf/R to ze ro as the voltage
on the capacitor reaches the same value as the emf.
In an RC circuit connected to a DC voltage source, vol tage on the capacitor is initially zero and rises rapi dly at first since the
initial current is a maximum:.
The time constant τ for an RC circuit is defined to be RC. It’s unit is in seconds and shows how quickly the circuit char ges or
discharges.
The advantage of assuming that sources have complex exp onential form is that all voltages and currents in the circui t are also
complex exponentials, having the same frequency as the so urce.
The major consequence of assuming complex exponential v oltage and currents is that the ratio (Z = V/I) for each element does
not depend on time, but does depend on source frequency.
For a series RC circuit, the impedance is given as.learning objectives
C
rms rms rms rms

20.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14568In a series RC circuit connected to an AC voltage sou rce, the currents in the resistor and capacitor are equal a nd in phase.
In a series RC circuit connected to an AC voltage sou rce, the total voltage should be equal to the sum of vol tages on the resistor
and capacitor.
In a series RC circuit connected to an AC voltage sou rce, voltage and current have a phase difference of, where
. cos ϕ is called the power factor.
Key Terms
DC: Direct current; the unidirectional flow of electric char ge.
capacitor: An electronic component capable of storing an electric charge, especially one consisting of two conductors separ ated
by a dielectric.
differential equation: An equation involving the derivatives of a function.
impedance: A measure of the opposition to the flow of an alternat ing current in a circuit; the aggregation of its resista nce,
inductive and capacitive reactance. Represented by the symbol Z.
resistor: An electric component that transmits current in direc t proportion to the voltage across it.
alternating current: (AC)—An electric current in which the direction of flow of the electrons reverses periodically having an
average of zero, with positive and negative values (with a fre quency of 50 Hz in Europe, 60 Hz in the US, 400 Hz for airport
lighting, and some others); especially such a current pro duced by a rotating generator or alternator.
rms: Root mean square: a statistical measure of the magnit ude of a varying quantity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
DC. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/DC. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Cap acitors. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42363/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
differential equation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/differential_equation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Cap acitors. February 15, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42363/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electrical impedance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_impedance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Don Johnson, The Impedance Concept. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m0024/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
resistor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resistor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
impedance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/impedance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
capacitor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capacitor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/ac. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Cap acitors. February 15, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42363/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
RC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RC_circuit. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

20.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14568impedance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/impedance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
alternating current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/alternating_current. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Cap acitors. February 15, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42363/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
RC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RC_circuit. License: CC BY: Attribution
RC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RC_circuit. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 20.5: RC Circuits is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
21: Magnetism
21: Magnetism is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
21.2: Magnets
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and Conductors
21.6: Applications of MagnetismTopic hierarchy

21.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1564621.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
Describe shape of a magnetic field produced by an elect ric current flowing through a wire
Electric Current and Magnetic Fields
Electric current produces a magnetic field. This magn etic field can be visualized as a pattern of circula r field lines surrounding a
wire. One way to explore the direction of a magnetic fi eld is with a compass, as shown by a long straight cur rent-carrying wire in.
Hall probes can determine the magnitude of the field. Another version of the right hand rule emerges from this exploration and is
valid for any current segment— point the thumb in the direction of the current, and the fingers curl in the direction of the magnetic
field loops created by it.
Magnetic Field Generated by Current: (a) Compasses placed near a long straight current-ca rrying wire indicate that field lines
form circular loops centered on the wire. (b) Right hand ru le 2 states that, if the right hand thumb points in the dir ection of the
current, the fingers curl in the direction of the fie ld. This rule is consistent with the field mapped for the long straight wire and is
valid for any current segment.
High School Phy sics - Magnets and Magnetic FieldsHigh School Phy sics - Magnets and Magnetic Fieldslearning objectives

21.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646Magnets and Magnetic Fields: A brief introduction to magnetism for introductory p hysics students.
Magnitude of Magnetic Field from Current
The equation for the magnetic field strength (magnitud e) produced by a long straight current-carrying wire is:
For a long straight wire where I is the current, r is the shortest distance to the wire, and the constant =4π10 T ⋅m/A is the
permeability of free space. (μ is one of the basic c onstants in nature, related to the speed of light.) Si nce the wire is very long, the
magnitude of the field depends only on distance from the wire r, not on position along the wire. This is one of the s implest cases to
calculate the magnetic field strenght from a current.
The magnetic field of a long straight wire has more i mplications than one might first suspect. Each segment of current produces a
magnetic field like that of a long straight wire, and the total field of any shape current is the vector sum of the fields due to each
segment. The formal statement of the direction and magnitud e of the field due to each segment is called the Bi ot-Savart law.
Integral calculus is needed to sum the field for an arbitra ry shape current. The Biot-Savart law is written in its comp lete form as:
where the integral sums over the wire length where vecto r dℓ is the direction of the current; r is the distance between the location of
dℓ, and the location at which the magnetic field is bei ng calculated; and r ̂ is a unit vector in the direction of r. The reader may apply
the simplifications in calculating the magnetic field from an infinite straight wire as above and see that the Biot-Savart law reduces
to the first, simpler equation.
Ampere’s Law
A more fundamental law than the Biot-Savart law is Amper e’s Law, which relates magnetic field and current in a general way. In SI
units, the integral form of the original Ampere’s circ uital law is a line integral of the magnetic field a round some closed curve C
(arbitrary but must be closed). The curve C in turn bounds both a surface S through which the electric cu rrent passes through (again
arbitrary but not closed—since no three-dimensional volume is enclosed by S), and encloses the current. Y ou can think of the
“surface” as the cross-sectional area of a wire carrying cu rrent.
The mathematical statement of the law states that the total magnetic field around some path is directly pr oportional to the current
which passes through that enclosed path. It can be written in a number of forms, one of which is given below.
where the magnetic field is integrated over a curve (circumfrence of a wire), equivalent to integrating t he current density (in
amperes per square meter, Am) over the cross section ar ea of the wire (which is equal to the permeability con stant times the
enclosed current I. Ampere’s law is always valid for steady currents and c an be used to calculate the B-field for certain high ly
symmetric situations such as an infinite wire or an infini te solenoid. Ampere’s Law is also a component of Maxwell’ s Equations.
0−7
-2
enc)

21.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646Force on a Current-Carrying Wire
The force on a current carrying wire (as in) is simi lar to that of a moving charge as expected since a c harge carrying wire is a
collection of moving charges. A current-carrying wire feels a force in the presence of a magnetic field. C onsider a conductor (wire)
of length ℓ, cross section A, and charge q which is due to electric current i. If this conductor is placed in a magnetic field of
magnitude B which makes an angle with the velocity of charges (curren t) in the conductor, the force exerted on a single charge q is
Force on a Current-Carrying Wire: The right hand rule can be used to determine the dir ection of the force on a current-carrying
wire placed in an external magnetic field.
So, for N charges where
the force exerted on the conductor is
where. The right hand rule can give you the directi on of the force on the wire, as seen in the above figu re. Note that the Bfield in this case is the external field.
Permanent Magnets
Permanent magnets are objects made from ferromagnetic mate rial that produce a persistent magnetic field.
Give examples and counterexamples of permanent magnets
Permanent Magnets
Overview
Recall that a magnet is a material or object that g enerates a magnetic field. This magnetic field is in visible but is responsible for the
most notable property of a magnet: a force that pul ls on other ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, and a ttracts or repels other
magnets.
Types of Magnets
A permanent magnet is an object made from a material that is magnetized and creates its own persistent ma gnetic field. An
everyday example is a refrigerator magnet used to h old notes on a refrigerator door. Materials that can be magnetized, which are
also the ones that are strongly attracted to a magnet, are called ferromagnetic. These include iron, nickel, cobalt, some alloys of rare
earth metals, and some naturally occurring minerals such as lodestone. Although ferromagnetic materials a re the only ones attracted
to a magnet strongly enough to be commonly consider ed magnetic, all other substances respond weakly to a magnetic field, by one
of several other types of magnetism. The counterexamp le to a permanent magnet is an electromagnet, which only becomes
magnetized when an electric current flows through it.learning objectives

21.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646
Example of a Permanent Magnet: An example of a permanent magnet: a “horseshoe magnet” made of alnico, an iron alloy. The
magnet is made in the shape of a horseshoe to bring the two magnetic poles close to each other, to create a strong mag netic field
there that can pick up heavy pieces of iron.
Polarity
All magnets have two poles, one called the north pole an d one called the south pole. Like poles repel and un like polls attract (in
analogy to positive and negative charges in electro statics). North and south poles always exist in pairs (there are no magnetic
monopoles in nature), so if one were to split a permane nt magnet in half, two smaller magnets would be creat ed, each with a north
pole and south pole.
North and South Poles Always Come in Pairs: North and south poles always occur in pairs. Attempts to separat e them result in
more pairs of poles. If we continue to split the magnet, we wi ll eventually get down to an iron atom with a north pole a nd a south
pole—these, too, cannot be separated.
Manufacturing Permanent Magnets
Ferromagnetic materials can be divided into magnetic ally “soft” materials like annealed iron, which can be magnetized but do not
tend to stay magnetized, and magnetically “hard” mat erials, which do. Permanent magnets are made from “har d” ferromagnetic
materials such as alcino and ferrite that are subje cted to special processing in a powerful magnetic fi eld during manufacture, to
align their internal microcrystalline structure, makin g them very hard to demagnetize.

21.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagneti zed ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetizat ion of the material
with unlike poles closest. (This results in the attra ction of the previously unmagnetized material to the magnet.) On the
microscopic scale, there are regions in the unmagnet ized ferromagnetic material that act like small bar magnets. In each region the
poles of individual atoms are aligned. However, before m agnetization these regions are small and randomly o riented throughout the
unmagnetized ferromagnetic objects, so there is no net magnetic field. In response to an external magnet ic field like the one applied
in the above figure, these regions grow and become ali gned. This arrangement can become permanent when the ferromagnetic
material is heated and then cooled.
Making a Ferromagnet: An unmagnetized piece of iron is placed between two magnet s, heated, and then cooled, or simply tapped
when cold. The iron becomes a permanent magnet with the poles al igned as shown: its south pole is adjacent to the north p ole of
the original magnet, and its north pole is adjacent to the south pole of the original magnet. Note that there ar e attractive forces
between the magnets.
Magnetic Field Lines
Magnetic field lines are useful for visually representing the strength and direction of the magnetic field.
Relate the strength of the magnetic field with the densi ty of the magnetic field lines
Magnetic Field Lines
Einstein is said to have been fascinated by a compas s as a child, perhaps musing on how the needle felt a force without direct
physical contact. His ability to think deeply and cle arly about action at a distance, particularly for gr avitational, electric, and
magnetic forces, later enabled him to create his re volutionary theory of relativity. Since magnetic for ces act at a distance, we define
a magnetic field to represent magnetic forces. A pict orial representation of magnetic field lines is very useful in visualizing the
strength and direction of the magnetic field. The d irection of magnetic field lines is defined to be the direction in which the north
end of a compass needle points. The magnetic field is tr aditionally called the B-field.
Visualizing Magnetic Field Lines: Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction t hat a small compass points when placed
at a location. (A) If small compasses are used to map the mag netic field around a bar magnet, they will point in the dire ctions
shown: away from the north pole of the magnet, toward the s outh pole of the magnet (recall that Earth’s north magnetic pole is
really a south pole in terms of definitions of poles on a b ar magnet.) (B) Connecting the arrows gives continuous ma gnetic field
lines. The strength of the field is proportional to the clo seness (or density) of the lines. (C) If the interior of th e magnet could be
probed, the field lines would be found to form continuous closed loops.
Mapping the magnetic field of an object is simple in principle. First, measure the strength and direction of the magnetic field at a
large number of locations (or at every point in spac e). Then, mark each location with an arrow (called a v ector) pointing in thelearning objectives

21.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646direction of the local magnetic field with its magnit ude proportional to the strength of the magnetic fi eld (producing a vector field).
You can “connect” the arrows to form magnetic field lines. The direction of the magnetic field at any p oint is parallel to the
direction of nearby field lines, and the local density o f field lines can be made proportional to its strength.
Magnetic field lines are like the contour lines (cons tant altitude) on a topographic map in that they re present something continuous,
and a different mapping scale would show more or fewer lines. An advantage of using magnetic field lines as a representation is
that many laws of magnetism (and electromagnetism) c an be stated completely and concisely using simple concepts such as the
“number” of field lines through a surface. These conc epts can be quickly translated to their mathematical form. For example, the
number of field lines through a given surface is the surface integral of the magnetic field.
Bar Magnet and Magnetic Field Lines: The direction of magnetic field lines represented by the alignment of iron filings
sprinkled on paper placed above a bar magnet.
Various phenomena have the effect of “displaying” m agnetic field lines as though the field lines are phy sical phenomena. For
example, iron filings placed in a magnetic field lin e up to form lines that correspond to “field lines. ” Magnetic fields’ lines are also
visually displayed in polar auroras, in which plasma particle dipole interactions create visible streak s of light that line up with the
local direction of Earth’s magnetic field.
Small compasses used to test a magnetic field will not d isturb it. (This is analogous to the way we tested elect ric fields with a small
test charge. In both cases, the fields represent only th e object creating them and not the probe testing th em.) Figure 15051 shows
how the magnetic field appears for a current loop an d a long straight wire, as could be explored with smal l compasses. A small
compass placed in these fields will align itself para llel to the field line at its location, with its nort h pole pointing in the direction of
B. Note the symbols used for field into and out of the paper. We’ll explore the consequences of these var ious sources of magnetic
fields in further sections.
Mapping Magnetic Field Lines: Small compasses could be used to map the fields shown he re. (A) The magnetic field of a
circular current loop is similar to that of a bar magnet. (B) A long and straight wire creates a field with magnetic field lines forming
circular loops. (C) When the wire is in the plane of the pa per, the field is perpendicular to the paper. Note that the symbols used for
the field pointing inward (like the tail of an arrow) and th e field pointing outward (like the tip of an arrow).
Extensive exploration of magnetic fields has reveale d a number of hard-and-fast rules. We use magnetic fi eld lines to represent the
field (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in and of themselves). The properties of mag netic field lines can be
summarized by these rules:
1. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the fi eld line at any point in space. A small compass will poin t in the direction
of the field line.
2. The strength of the field is proportional to the clo seness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the nu mber of lines per unit
area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal densi ty).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the f ield is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without beginning or end. They go from the north pole to the south
pole.

21.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646The last property is related to the fact that the n orth and south poles cannot be separated. It is a dis tinct difference from electric
field lines, which begin and end on the positive and negative charges. If magnetic monopoles existed, then magnetic field lines
would begin and end on them.
Geomagnetism
Earth’s magnetic field is caused by electric currents in the molten outer core and varies with time.
Explain the origin of the Earth’s magnetic field and it s importance for the life on Earth
Geomagnetism
The Structure of Earth’s Magnetic Field
Earth is largely protected from the solar wind, a stre am of energetic charged particles emanating from the sun, by its magnetic field,
which deflects most of the charged particles. These p articles would strip away the ozone layer, which protect s Earth from harmful
ultraviolet rays. The region above the ionosphere, and extending several tens of thousands of kilometers into space, is called the
magnetosphere. This region protects Earth from cosm ic rays that would strip away the upper atmosphere, inc luding the ozone layer
that protects our planet from harmful ultraviolet ra diation. The magnetic field strength ranges from appr oximately 25 to 65
microteslas (0.25 to 0.65 G; by comparison, a strong ref rigerator magnet has a field of about 100 G). The int ensity of the field is
greatest near the poles and weaker near the equator. An isodynamic chart of Earth’s magnetic field, shows a m inimum intensity
over South America while there are maxima over norther n Canada, Siberia, and the coast of Antarctica south o f Australia. Near the
surface of Earth, its magnetic field can be closely a pproximated by the field of a magnetic dipole posit ioned at the center of Earth
and tilted at an angle of about 10° with respect to the r otational axis of Earth.
Physical Origin
Earth’s magnetic field is mostly caused by electric currents in the liquid outer core, which is composed o f highly conductive molten
iron. A magnetic field is generated by a feedback lo op: Current loops generate magnetic fields (Ampère’s law); a changing
magnetic field generates an electric field (Faraday’ s law); and the electric and magnetic fields exert a force on the charges that are
flowing in currents (the Lorentz force). These effect s can be combined into a partial differential equat ion called the magnetic
induction equation:
In this equation u is the velocity of the fluid, B is the magnetic field, and eta is the magnetic diffus ivity. The first term on the right
hand side of the induction equation is a diffusion t erm. If Earth’s dynamo shut off, the dipole part woul d disappear in a few tens of
thousands of years. The motion of the molten outer ir on core is sustained by convection, or motion driven by buoyancy. The
temperature increases toward the center of Earth, and t he higher temperature of the fluid lower down makes i t buoyant. The
Coriolis effect, caused by the overall planetary ro tation, tends to organize the flow into rolls aligned along the north-south polar
axis.
learning objectives

21.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646Origin of Earth’s Magnetic Field: A schematic illustrating the relationship between mot ion of conducting fluid, organized into
rolls by the Coriolis force, and the magnetic field the moti on generates.
Electric currents induced in the ionosphere generat e magnetic fields (ionospheric dynamo region). Such a field is always generated
near where the atmosphere is closest to the sun, cau sing daily alterations that can deflect surface magn etic fields by as much as one
degree. Typical daily variations of field strength ar e about 25 nanoteslas (nT), with variations over a few s econds of typically
around 1 nT.
Time Variations
The geomagnetic field changes on time scales from milli seconds to millions of years. Shorter time scales mostly ari se from currents
in the ionosphere (ionospheric dynamo region) and mag netosphere, and some changes can be traced to geomagn etic storms or daily
variations in currents. Changes over time scales of a year or more mostly reflect changes in Earth’s int erior, particularly the ironrich core. Frequently, Earth’s magnetosphere is hit by so lar flares causing geomagnetic storms, provoking disp lays of aurorae. At
present, the overall geomagnetic field is becoming we aker; the present strong deterioration corresponds to a 10 to 15 percent
decline over the last 150 years and has accelerated in the past several years. Geomagnetic intensity has declined almost
continuously from a maximum 35 percent above the mo dern value achieved approximately 2,000 years ago. Earth’s magnetic
North Pole is drifting from northern Canada toward Siberi a with a presently accelerating rate—10 km per year at the beginning of
the 20th century, up to 40 km per year in 2003, and since then has only accelerated.
Although Earth’s field is generally well approximated by a magnetic dipole with its axis near the rotation al axis, there are
occasional dramatic events where the North and South ge omagnetic poles trade places. These events are called g eomagnetic
reversals. Evidence for these events can be found wor ldwide in basalts, sediment cores taken from the ocea n floors, and seafloor
magnetic anomalies. Reversals occur at apparently ran dom intervals ranging from less than 0.1 million year s to as much as 50
million years. The most recent such event, called the Bru nhes-Matuyama reversal, occurred about 780,000 years ag o.
Key Points
A wire carrying electric current will produce a magnetic field with closed field lines surrounding the wire.
Another version of the right hand rules can be used to det ermine the magnetic field direction from a current—point the thumb in
the direction of the current, and the fingers curl in the direction of the magnetic field loops created by i t. See.
The Biot-Savart Law can be used to determine the magne tic field strength from a current segment. For the simple case of an
infinite straight current-carrying wire it is reduced t o the form.
A more fundamental law than the Biot-Savart law is Ampere ‘s Law, which relates magnetic field and current in a gene ral way.
It is written in integral form as, where I is the enclosed current and μ is a constant.
A current-carrying wire feels a force in the presence of an e xternal magnetic field. It is found to be, where ℓ is the
length of the wire, i is the current, and θ is the angle b etween the current direction and the magnetic field.
Permanent magnets are objects made from magnetized materi al and produce continual magnetic fields. Everyday examp les
include refrigerator magnets used to hold notes on a refri gerator door.
Materials that can be magnetized, which are also the ones that a re strongly attracted to a magnet, are called ferromagn etic.
Examples of these materials include iron, nickel, and cob alt.
The counterexample to a permanent magnet is an electro magnet, which only becomes magnetized when an electric curr ent
flows through it.
Magnets always have a north pole and a south pole, so if one were to split a permanent magnet in half, two smaller magnets
would be created, each with a north pole and south pole.
Permanent magnets are made from ferromagnetic material s that are exposed to a strong external magnetic field a nd heated to
align their internal microcrystalline structure, makin g them very hard to demagnetize.
The magnetic field direction is the same direction a com pass needle points, which is tangent to the magnetic field line at any
given point.
The strength of the B-field is inversely proportional t o the distance between field lines. It is exactly proport ional to the number
of lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.
A magnetic field line can never cross another field lin e. The magnetic field is unique at every point in space.enc 0

21.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646Magnetic field lines are continuous and unbroken, forming c losed loops. Magnetic field lines are defined to begin o n the north
pole of a magnet and terminate on the south pole.
Earth is largely protected from the solar wind, a strea m of energetic charged particles emanating from the su n, by its magnetic
field. These particles would strip away the ozone layer, whi ch protects Earth from harmful ultraviolet rays.
Earth’s magnetic field is generated by a feedback loop i n the liquid outer core: Current loops generate magnetic fields; a
changing magnetic field generates an electric field; a nd the electric and magnetic fields exert a force on th e charges that are
flowing in currents (the Lorentz force).
The geomagnetic field varies with time. Currents in the io nosphere and magnetosphere cause changes over short tim e scales,
while dramatic geomagnetic reversald (where the North and South poles switch locations) occur at apparently rando m intervals
ranging from 0.1 to 50 million years.
Key Terms
Biot-Savart Law: An equation that describes the magnetic field generated by an electric current. It relates the magnetic field to
the magnitude, direction, length, and proximity of the e lectric current. The law is valid in the magnetostatic ap proximation, and
is consistent with both Ampère’s circuital law and Gauss’s law f or magnetism.
Ampere’s Law: An equation that relates magnetic fields to electric currents that produce them. Using Ampere’s law, one can
determine the magnetic field associated with a given curren t or current associated with a given magnetic field, pr oviding there
is no time changing electric field present.
permanent magnet: A material, or piece of such material, which retains its m agnetism even when not subjected to any external
magnetic fields.
ferromagnetic: Of a material, such as iron or nickel, that is easily magn etized.
electromagnet: A magnet which attracts metals only when electrically ac tivated.
B-field: A synonym for the magnetic field.
magnetic field lines: A graphical representation of the magnitude and the di rection of a magnetic field.
dynamo: A mechanism by which a celestial body such as Earth or a s tar generates a magnetic field over astronomical
timescales via a rotating, convecting, and electrically co nducting fluid.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Ampere's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ampere's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Biotu2013Savart law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biot%E2%80%93Savart_law. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Magnetic_pole_model_and_the_ H-field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric current. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current%23Electromagnetism.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42382/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ampere's Law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ampere's%20Law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Biot-Savart Law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biot-Savart%20Law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Magnetic_pole_model_and_the_ H-field. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright

21.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646OpenStax College, Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Amper eu2019s Law. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42382/latest/#import-auto-id116699185 2141. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnets and Magnetic Fields. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwRDfB0nYrA. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Permanent magnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Permanent_magnets. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42366/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
electromagnet. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electromagnet. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
ferromagnetic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ferromagnetic. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
permanent magnet. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/permanent_magnet. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Magnetic_pole_model_and_the_ H-field. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Amper eu2019s Law. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42382/latest/#import-auto-id116699185 2141. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnets and Magnetic Fields. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwRDfB0nYrA. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 21, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42366/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Permanent magnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Permanent_magnets. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/magnetic-field-lines.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/b-field. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Magnetic_pole_model_and_the_ H-field. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Amper eu2019s Law. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42382/latest/#import-auto-id116699185 2141. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnets and Magnetic Fields. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwRDfB0nYrA. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 21, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42366/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Permanent magnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Permanent_magnets. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

21.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15646OpenStax College, College Physics. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Geomagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geomagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dynamo. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dynamo. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Magnetic_pole_model_and_the_ H-field. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Amper eu2019s Law. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42382/latest/#import-auto-id116699185 2141. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnets and Magnetic Fields. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwRDfB0nYrA. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 21, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42366/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Permanent magnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Permanent_magnets. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Earth's magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth's_magnetic_field. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

21.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1564721.2: Magnets
Identify two types of magnets
Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
In common language it is often understood that ‘mag net’ refers to a permanent magnet, like one that migh t adorn a family’s
refrigerator, or function as the needle in a hiker’ s compass. Such magnets are called ferromagnets. In the second class of magnets—
known as electromagnets—the magnetic field is generate d through the use of electric current. These magnets c an be found in all
types of electronic devices. We’ll explore these two types o f magnets below.
Ferromagnets
Only certain materials (e.g., iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium) exhibit strong magnetic effects. These materials are called
ferromagnetic, after the Latin word ferrum (iron). A group of materials made from the alloys of the rare earth elements are also
used as strong and permanent magnets (neodymium is a common one). Other materials exhibit weak magnetic ef fects detectable
only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic materials respond strongly to magnets (the way iron i s attracted to
magnets), they can also be magnetized themselves—tha t is, they can be induced to become magnetic or made i nto permanent
magnets.
When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagneti zed ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetizat ion of the material
with unlike poles closest, as in. This results in the at traction of the previously unmagnetized material to the magnet as diagramed
in. When current produces a magnetic field on a micro scopic scale, as illustrated in, the regions within th e material called magnetic
domainsact like small bar magnets. Within domains, th e poles of individual atoms are aligned, and each at om acts like a tiny bar
magnet. In an unmagnetized ferromagnetic object, dom ains are small and randomly oriented. In response to an external magnetic
field, the domains may grow to millimeter size, alignin g themselves as shown in part (b) of the second figur e. This induced
magnetization can become permanent if the material is hea ted and then cooled, or simply tapped in the presence o f other magnets.
Current Produces a Magnetic Field: Current (I) through a wire produces a magnetic field (B). The field is oriented according to
the right-hand rule.learning objectives

21.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15647
Unmagnetized to Magnetized Iron: (a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented
domains. (b) When magnetized by an external field, the d omains show greater alignment, and some grow at the exp ense of others.
Individual atoms are aligned within domains; each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet.
Conversely, a permanent magnet can be demagnetized by hard blows or by heating it in the absence of ano ther magnet. Increased
thermal motion at higher temperature can disrupt and randomize the orientation and the size of the domai ns. There is a well-defined
temperature for ferromagnetic materials called the Curie temperature, above which they cannot be magneti zed. The Curie
temperature for iron is well above room temperature a t 1043 K (770ºC). Several elements and alloys have Curi e temperatures much
lower than room temperature, and are ferromagnetic only below those temperatures.
Electromagnets
In an electromagnet the magnetic field is produced b y the flow of electric current. If the current disap pears, the magnetic field is
turned off. Electromagnets are widely used as compon ents of electrical devices, such as motors, generato rs, relays, loudspeakers,
hard disks, MRI machines, scientific instruments and mag netic separation equipment; they are also employed as industrial lifting
electromagnets for picking up and moving heavy iron obje cts like scrap iron.
An electric current flowing in a wire creates a magnet ic field around the wire. To concentrate the magneti c field, the wire is wound
into a coil with many turns of wire lying side by side. The magnetic field from all the turns of wire passes through the center of the
coil creating a strong magnetic field there. The coi l forming the shape of a straight tube (a helix) is called a solenoid, as shown in.
Much stronger magnetic fields can be produced if a “ core” of ferromagnetic material (such as soft iron) i s placed inside the coil.
Due to the high magnetic permeability μ of the ferrom agnetic material, the ferromagnetic core increases the magnetic field to
thousands of times the strength of the field of the coil al one. This is called a ferromagnetic-core or iron-core e lectromagnet.
Electromagnet (Solenoid): A simple electromagnet consisting of a coil of insulate d wire wrapped around an iron core. The
strength of magnetic field generated is proportional to the amount of current.
The direction of the magnetic field through a coil of wire can be likend to a form of the right-hand ru le. If the fingers of the right
hand are curled around the coil in the direction of current flow (conventional current, flow of positive c harge) through the
windings, the thumb points in the direction of the fi eld inside the coil. The side of the magnet from which the field lines emerge is
defined as the north pole.The main advantage of an electromagnet over a permanent magnet is that the ma gnetic field can be
rapidly manipulated over a wide range by controlling the amount of electric current; a continuous supply of electrical energy is
required to maintain the field.
Key Points
Only certain materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gad olinium, exhibit strong magnetic effects. These material s are called
ferromagnetic. Ferromagnetic materials will respond stron gly to magnets and can also be magnetized themselves.
Regions of uniform called magnetic domains are randomly o riented in unmagnetized ferromagnetic material, but m ay become
aligned under the influence of an external magnetic field. This process may become permanent if heated and cooled in the
presence of a magnetic field.

21.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15647A ferromagnet will lose its magnetism if heated about its Curie temperature.
Electromagnets are a type of magnet in which the magnetic field is produced by the flow of current.
A strong electromagnet called a solenoid may be produced by wrapping wires into a coil and passing a current through them.
The magnetic field of all the turns of wire passes through th e center of the coil, creating a strong magnetic field the re.
Key Terms
magnetic domain: A region within a magnetic material which has uniform magnetization. This means that the individual
magnetic moments of the atoms are aligned with one anoth er and they point in the same direction.
Curie temperature: The temperature above which a material will lose its mag netism.
solenoid: A coil of wire that acts as a magnet when an electric cur rent flows through it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnets. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ferromagnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferromagnets. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
magnetic domain. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/magnetic%20domain. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
solenoid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/solenoid. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/curie-temperature.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnets. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/Figure_23_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnets. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnets. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
21.2: Magnets is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

21.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1564821.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
Magnitude of the Magnetic Force
How does one magnet attracts another? The answer relie s on the fact that all magnetism relies on current, the flow of charge.
Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges, and so they exert forces on other magnets, all of which h ave moving charges.
The magnetic force on a moving charge is one of the most fundamental known. The magnetic force is as imp ortant as the
electrostatic or Coulomb force. Yet the magnetic for ce is more complex, in both the number of factors th at affects it and in its
direction, than the relatively simple Coulomb force. The magnitude of the magnetic force on a charge moving at a speed in a
magnetic field of strength is given by:
where θ is the angle between the directions of and. This f ormula is used to define the magnetic strength in t erms of the force
on a charged particle moving in a magnetic field. Th e SI unit for magnitude of the magnetic field streng th is called the tesla (T) in
honor of the brilliant and eccentric inventor Nikola Tesla (1856–1943), who made great contributions to our understanding of
magnetic fields and their practical applications. To dete rmine how the tesla relates to other SI units, we solve for:
Because sin θ is unitless, the tesla is
Another smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where 1 G=10 T, is sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets ha ve fields
near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth’s magnetic field on its surfac e is only about 5×10
T, or 0.5 G.
The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plan e formed by and as determined by the right hand ru le, which
is illustrated in Figure 1. It states that, to determin e the direction of the magnetic force on a positive moving charge, you point the
thumb of the right hand in the direction of, the f ingers in the direction of, and a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction
of. One way to remember this is that there is one vel ocity, and so the thumb represents it. There are many f ield lines, and so the
fingers represent them. The force is in the direction you would push with your palm. The force on a negativ e charge is in exactly
the opposite direction to that on a positive charge.
−4
−5

21.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15648Right Hand Rule: Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. This force is one of the most basic known. The direction of the
magnetic force on a moving charge is perpendicular to t he plane formed by v and B and follows right hand rule–1 (RHR- 1) as
shown. The magnitude of the force is proportional to q, v, B, and the sine of the angle between v and B.
Direction of the Magnetic Force: The Right Hand Rule
The right hand rule is used to determine the direction of the magnetic force on a positive charge.
Apply the right hand rule to determine the direction of the m agnetic force on a charge
Direction of the Magnetic Force: The Right Hand Rule
So far we have described the magnitude of the magneti c force on a moving electric charge, but not the di rection. The magnetic field
is a vector field, thus the force applied will be orie nted in a particular direction. There is a clever way to determine this direction
using nothing more than your right hand. The directi on of the magnetic force F is perpendicular to the plane formed by v and B, as
determined by the right hand rule, which is illustra ted in the figure above. The right hand rule states that: to determine the direction
of the magnetic force on a positive moving charge, ƒ, point the thumb of the right hand in the directio n of v, the fingers in the
direction of B, and a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction o f F.
Right Hand Rule: Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. This force is one of the most basic known. The direction of the
magnetic force on a moving charge is perpendicular to t he plane formed by v and B and follows right hand rule–1 (RHR- 1) as
shown. The magnitude of the force is proportional to q, v, B, and the sine of the angle between v and B.
One way to remember this is that there is one velocit y, represented accordingly by the thumb. There are ma ny field lines,
represented accordingly by the fingers. The force is in the direction you would push with your palm. The fo rce on a negative charge
is in exactly the opposite direction to that on a p ositive charge. Because the force is always perpendicu lar to the velocity vector, a
pure magnetic field will not accelerate a charged pa rticle in a single direction, however will produce cir cular or helical motion (a
concept explored in more detail in future sections). I t is important to note that magnetic field will not exert a force on a static
electric charge. These two observations are in keeping with the rule that magnetic fields do no work.
Key Points
Magnetic fields exert forces on charged particles in motion.
The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane f ormed by and as determined by the right hand rule.
The SI unit for magnitude of the magnetic field strengt h is called the tesla (T), which is equivalent to one Newton per amperemeter. Sometimes the smaller unit gauss (10 T) is used instea d.learning objectives
-4

21.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15648When the expression for the magnetic force is combined with that for the electric force, the combined expressi on is known as
the Lorentz force.
When considering the motion of a charged particle in a mag netic field, the relevant vectors are the magnetic fiel d B, the
velocity of the particle v, and the magnetic force exert ed on the particle F. These vectors are all perpendicular to each other.
The right hand rule states that, to find the direction of the magnetic force on a positive moving charge, the thum b of the right
hand point in the direction of v, the fingers in the direct ion of B, and the force (F) is directed perpendicular to th e right hand
palm.
The direction of the force F on a negative charge is in the opposite sense to that above (so pointed away from th e back of your
hand).
Key Terms
Coulomb force: the electrostatic force between two charges, as described b y Coulomb’s law
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric c urrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
tesla: In the International System of Units, the derived unit of magnetic flux density or magnetic inductivity. Symbol: T
right hand rule: Direction of angular velocity ω and angular momentum L in which the thumb of your right hand points when
you curl your fingers in the direction of rotation.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
tesla. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tesla. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Coulomb force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Coulomb_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Right hand rule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_hand_rule. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/right-hand-rule.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

21.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1564921.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
Compare the effects of the electric and the magnetic fiel ds on the charged particle
Electric vs. Magnetic Forces
Force due to both electric and magnetic forces will i nfluence the motion of charged particles. However, the resulting change to the
trajectory of the particles will differ qualitatively between the two forces. Below we will quickly review the two types of force and
compare and contrast their effects on a charged particle.
Electrostatic Force and Magnetic Force on a Charged Particle
Recall that in a static, unchanging electric field E the force on a particle with charge q will be:
Where F is the force vector, q is the charge, and E is the electric field vector. Note that the direction of F is identical to E in the case
of a positivist charge q, and in the opposite direc tion in the case of a negatively charged particle. T his electric field may be
established by a larger charge, Q, acting on the smaller charge q over a distance r so that:
It should be emphasized that the electric force F acts parallel to the electric field E. The curl of the electric force is zero, i.e.:
A consequence of this is that the electric field ma y do work and a charge in a pure electric field will follow the tangent of an
electric field line.
In contrast, recall that the magnetic force on a charged particle is orthogonal to the magnetic field such that:
where B is the magnetic field vector, v is the velocity of the particle and θ is the angle between the magnetic field and the particle
velocity. The direction of F can be easily determined by th e use of the right hand rule.
Right Hand Rule: Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. This force is one of the most basic known. The direction of the
magnetic force on a moving charge is perpendicular to t he plane formed by v and B and follows right hand rule–1 (RHR- 1) aslearning objectives

21.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649shown. The magnitude of the force is proportional to q, v, B, and the sine of the angle between v and B.
If the particle velocity happens to be aligned para llel to the magnetic field, or is zero, the magnetic force will be zero. This differs
from the case of an electric field, where the particl e velocity has no bearing, on any given instant, on the magnitude or direction of
the electric force.
The angle dependence of the magnetic field also caus es charged particles to move perpendicular to the m agnetic field lines in a
circular or helical fashion, while a particle in an elect ric field will move in a straight line along an electric fiel d line.
A further difference between magnetic and electric f orces is that magnetic fields do not net work, since the particle motion is
circular and therefore ends up in the same place. We e xpress this mathematically as:
Lorentz Force
The Lorentz force is the combined force on a charge d particle due both electric and magnetic fields, wh ich are often considered
together for practical applications. If a particle of charge q moves with velocity v in the presence of an electric field E and a
magnetic field B, then it will experience a force:
Electric and Magnetic Field Lines
We mentioned briefly above that the motion of charg ed particles relative to the field lines differs de pending on whether one is
dealing with electric or magnetic fields. There are some notable differences between how electric and magne tic field lines are
conceptualized. The electric field lines from a posi tive isolated charge are simply a sequence of evenly-sp aced, radially directed
lines pointed outwards from the charge. In the case o f a negative charge, the direction of the field is r eversed. The electric field is
directed tangent to the field lines. Of course, we imagi ne the field lines are more densely packed the larg er the charges are. One can
see clearly that the curl of the electric force is zero.
Electric Field Generated by Point Charges: The electric field surrounding three different point c harges: (a) A positive charge; (b)
a negative charge of equal magnitude; (c) a larger nega tive charge.
If multiple charges are involved, field lines are gener ated on positive charges, and terminate on negative one s.
In the case of magnets, field lines are generated o n the north pole (+) and terminate on the south pole (-) – see the below figure.
Magnetic ‘charges’, however, always come in pairs – th ere are no magnetic monopoles (isolated north or so uth poles). The curl of a
magnetic field generated by a conventional magnet i s therefore always non zero. Charged particles will spi ral around these field
lines, as long as the particles have some non-zero com ponent of velocity directed perpendicular to the field lines.

21.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Magnetic Pole Model: The magnetic pole model: two opposing poles, North (+) and So uth (−), separated by a distance d produce
an H-field (lines).
A magnetic field may also be generated by a current with the field lines envisioned as concentric circl es around the current-carrying
wire.The magnetic force at any point in this case can be determined with the right hand rule, and will be pe rpendicular to both the
current and the magnetic field.
Constant Velocity Produces a Straight-Line
If a charged particle’s velocity is parallel to the magne tic field, there is no net force and the particle moves in a straight line.
Identify conditions required for the particle to move in a straight line in the magnetic field
Constant Velocity Produces Straight-Line Motion
Recall Newton’s first law of motion. If an object expe riences no net force, then its velocity is constant: the object is either at rest (if
its velocity is zero), or it moves in a straight line with const ant speed (if its velocity is nonzero).
There are many cases where a particle may experience n o net force. The particle could exist in a vacuum far away from any
massive bodies (that exert gravitational forces) and electromagnetic fields. Or there could be two or more forces on the particle that
are balanced such that the net force is zero. This i s the case for, say, a particle suspended in an electric field with the electric force
exactly counterbalancing gravity.
If the net force on a particle is zero, then the acc eleration is necessarily zero from Newton’s second law: F=ma. If the acceleration
is zero, any velocity the particle has will be mainta ined indefinitely (or until such time as the net fo rce is no longer zero). Because
velocity is a vector, the direction remains unchanged along with the speed, so the particle continues in a single direction, such as
with a straight line.
Charged Particles Moving Parallel to Magnetic Fields
The force a charged particle “feels” due to a magne tic field is dependent on the angle between the velo city vector and the magnetic
field vector B. Recall that the magnetic force is:learning objectives

21.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Zero Force When Velocity is Parallel to Magnetic Field: In the case above the magnetic force is zero because the velocity is
parallel to the magnetic field lines.
If the magnetic field and the velocity are parallel (or antiparallel), then sinθ equals zero and there i s no force. In this case a charged
particle can continue with straight-line motion even in a strong magnetic field. If is between 0 and 90 degrees, then the component
of v parallel to B remains unchanged.
Circular Motion
Since the magnetic force is always perpendicular to the velocity of a charged particle, the particle will undergo ci rcular motion.
Describe conditions that lead to the circular motion of a charged particle in the magnetic field
Circular Motion of a Charged particle in a Magnetic Field
Magnetic forces can cause charged particles to move in cir cular or spiral paths. Particle accelerators keep protons fo llowing circular
paths with magnetic force. Cosmic rays will follow spiral paths when encountering the magnetic field of astro physical objects or
planets (one example being Earth’s magnetic field). T he bubble chamber photograph in the figure below shows charged particles
moving in such curved paths. The curved paths of cha rged particles in magnetic fields are the basis of a number of phenomena and
can even be used analytically, such as in a mass spectrom eter. shows the path traced by particles in a bubble chamber.
Bubble Chamber: Trails of bubbles are produced by high-energy charged particles moving through the superheated liquid
hydrogen in this artist’s rendition of a bubble chamber. T here is a strong magnetic field perpendicular to the page that causes the
curved paths of the particles. The radius of the path ca n be used to find the mass, charge, and energy of the particle.
So, does the magnetic force cause circular motion? Ma gnetic force is always perpendicular to velocity, so t hat it does no work on
the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of moti on is affected, but not the
speed. This is typical of uniform circular motion. The simplest case occurs when a charged particle moves p erpendicular to a
uniform B-field, such as shown in. (If this takes plac e in a vacuum, the magnetic field is the dominant f actor determining the
motion.) Here, the magnetic force (Lorentz force) supplie s the centripetal forcelearning objectives

21.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Circular Motion of Charged Particle in Magnetic Field: A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the p age in a region
where the magnetic field is perpendicular into the page (re presented by the small circles with x’s—like the tails of arrows). The
magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity, and so velo city changes in direction but not magnitude. Uniform circ ular motion
results.
Noting that
we see that
The Lorentz magnetic force supplies the centripetal for ce, so these terms are equal:
solving for r yields
Here, r, called the gyroradius or cyclotron radius, is the r adius of curvature of the path of a charged particl e with mass m and charge
q, moving at a speed v perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength B. In other words, it is the radius of the circular m otion of a
charged particle in the presence of a uniform magne tic field. If the velocity is not perpendicular to t he magnetic field, then v is the
component of the velocity perpendicular to the fiel d. The component of the velocity parallel to the fi eld is unaffected, since the
magnetic force is zero for motion parallel to the f ield. We’ll explore the consequences of this case in a later section on spiral
motion.
A particle experiencing circular motion due to a un iform magnetic field is termed to be in a cyclotron resonance. The term comes
from the name of a cyclic particle accelerator call ed a cyclotron, showed in. The cyclotron frequency (o r, equivalently,
gyrofrequency) is the number of cycles a particle c ompletes around its circular circuit every second and can be found by solving for
v above and substituting in the circulation frequency so th at

21.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Cyclotron: A French cyclotron, produced in Zurich, Switzerland in 19 37
becomes
The cyclotron frequency is trivially given in radians p er second by
Helical Motion
Helical motion results when the velocity vector is not perpe ndicular to the magnetic field vector.
Describe conditions that lead to the helical motion of a ch arged particle in the magnetic field
Helical Motion
In the section on circular motion we described the mo tion of a charged particle with the magnetic field v ector aligned perpendicular
to the velocity of the particle. In this case, the magnetic force is also perpendicular to the velocity (and the magnetic field vector, of
course) at any given moment resulting in circular m otion. The speed and kinetic energy of the particle remain constant, but the
direction is altered at each instant by the perpendi cular magnetic force. quickly reviews this situation in the case of a negatively
charged particle in a magnetic field directed into the page.learning objectives

21.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Circular Motion of Charged Particle in Magnetic Field: A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the p age in a region
where the magnetic field is perpendicular into the page (re presented by the small circles with x’s—like the tails of arrows). The
magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity, and so velo city changes in direction but not magnitude. Uniform circ ular motion
results.
What if the velocity is not perpendicular to the ma gnetic field? Then we consider only the component of v that is perpendicular to
the field when making our calculations, so that the equatio ns of motion become:
The component of the velocity parallel to the field is unaffected, since the magnetic force is zero for motion parallel to the field.
This produces helical motion (i.e., spiral motion) rather than a circular motion.
shows how electrons not moving perpendicular to magnet ic field lines follow the field lines. The component of velocity parallel to
the lines is unaffected, and so the charges spiral alo ng the field lines. If field strength increases in th e direction of motion, the field
will exert a force to slow the charges (and even reverse the ir direction), forming a kind of magnetic mirror.
Helical Motion and Magnetic Mirrors: When a charged particle moves along a magnetic field line into a region where the field
becomes stronger, the particle experiences a force that r educes the component of velocity parallel to the field. This force slows the
motion along the field line and here reverses it, forming a “magnetic mirror. “

21.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649The motion of charged particles in magnetic fields are related to such different things as the Aurora Bore alis or Aurora Australis
(northern and southern lights) and particle accelera tors. Charged particles approaching magnetic field lines ma y get trapped in
spiral orbits about the lines rather than crossing the m, as seen above. Some cosmic rays, for example, follow the Earth’s magnetic
field lines, entering the atmosphere near the magne tic poles and causing the southern or northern ligh ts through their ionization of
molecules in the atmosphere. Those particles that ap proach middle latitudes must cross magnetic field li nes, and many are
prevented from penetrating the atmosphere. Cosmic ray s are a component of background radiation; conseque ntly, they give a
higher radiation dose at the poles than at the equator.
Charged Particles Spiral Along Earth’s Magnetic Field Lines: Energetic electrons and protons, components of cosmic r ays,
from the Sun and deep outer space often follow the Earth’s magnetic field lines rather than cross them. (Recall th at the Earth’s
north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of a b ar magnet.)
Examples and Applications
Cyclotrons, magnetrons, and mass spectrometers represen t practical technological applications of electromagn etic fields.
Discuss application of mass spectrometers, movement of char ged particles in a cyclotron, and how microwaves are
generated in the cavity magnetron
Examples and Applications – Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
Overview
Recall that the charged particles in a magnetic fiel d will follow a circular or spiral path depending on the alignment of their velocity
vector with the magnetic field vector. The consequenc es of such motion can have profoundly practical app lications. Many
technologies are based on the motion of charged part icles in electromagnetic fields. We will explore some of these, including the
cyclotron and synchrotron, cavity magnetron, and mass spec trometer.
Cyclotrons and Synchrotrons
A cyclotron is a type of particle accelerator in whi ch charged particles accelerate outwards from the cent er along a spiral path. The
particles are held to a spiral trajectory by a stati c magnetic field and accelerated by a rapidly varyi ng (radio frequency) electric
field.learning objectives

21.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649U~~B
Cyclotron Sketch: Sketch of a particle being accelerated in a cyclotron, an d being ejected through a beamline.
Cyclotrons accelerate charged particle beams using a high frequency alternating voltage which is applie d between two “D”-shaped
electrodes (also called “dees”). An additional static magnetic field is applied in perpendicular directi on to the electrode plane,
enabling particles to re-encounter the accelerating voltage many times at the same phase. To achieve thi s, the voltage frequency
must match the particle’s cyclotron resonance frequency,
with the relativistic mass m and its charge q. This frequency is given by equality of centripeta l force and magnetic Lorentz force.
The particles, injected near the center of the magnet ic field, increase their kinetic energy only when rec irculating through the gap
between the electrodes; thus they travel outwards alon g a spiral path. Their radius will increase until the particles hit a target at the
perimeter of the vacuum chamber, or leave the cyclot ron using a beam tube, enabling their use. The partic les accelerated by the
cyclotron can be used in particle therapy to treat some types of cancer. Additionally, cyclotrons are a good source of high-energy
beams for nuclear physics experiments.
A synchrotron is an improvement upon the cyclotron in which the guiding magnetic field (bending the par ticles into a closed path)
is time-dependent, being synchronized to a particle beam of increasing kinetic energy. Th e synchrotron is one of the first accelerator
concepts that enable the construction of large-scale facilities, since bending, beam focusing and accele ration can be separated into
different components.
Cavity Magnetron
The cavity magnetron is a high-powered vacuum tube th at generates microwaves using the interaction of a st ream of electrons with
a magnetic field. All cavity magnetrons consist of a hot cathode with a high (continuous or pulsed) nega tive potential created by a
high-voltage, direct-current power supply. The cathod e is built into the center of an evacuated, lobed, ci rcular chamber. A magnetic
field parallel to the filament is imposed by a perm anent magnet. The magnetic field causes the electrons, attracted to the (relatively)
positive outer part of the chamber, to spiral outwar d in a circular path, a consequence of the Lorentz f orce. Spaced around the rim
of the chamber are cylindrical cavities. The caviti es are open along their length and connect the comm on cavity space. As electrons
sweep past these openings, they induce a resonant, hig h-frequency radio field in the cavity, which in turn causes the electrons to
bunch into groups.

21.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Cavity Magnetron Diagram: A cross-sectional diagram of a resonant cavity magne tron. Magnetic lines of force are parallel to the
geometric axis of this structure.
The sizes of the cavities determine the resonant fre quency, and thereby the frequency of emitted microwav es. The magnetron is a
self-oscillating device requiring no external eleme nts other than a power supply. The magnetron has pract ical applications in radar,
heating (as the primary component of a microwave oven), and lighting.
Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry is an analytical technique that mea sures the mass-to-charge ratio of charged particles. It is used for determining
masses of particles and determining the elemental compo sition of a sample or molecule.
Mass analyzers separate the ions according to their ma ss-to-charge ratio. The following two laws govern the d ynamics of charged
particles in electric and magnetic fields in a vacuum:
Equating the above expressions for the force applied to the ion yields:
This differential equation along with initial conditi ons completely determines the motion of a charged pa rticle in terms of m/Q.
There are many types of mass analyzers, using either s tatic or dynamic fields, and magnetic or electric f ields, but all operate
according to the above differential equation.
The following figure illustrates one type of mass spec trometer. The deflections of the particles are depen dent on the mass-to-charge
ratio. In the case of isotopic carbon dioxide, each molecule has the same charge, but different masses. The mass spectrometer will
segregate the particles spatially allowing a detector to measure the mass-to-charge ratio of each partic le. Since the charge is known,
the absolute mass can be determined trivially. The r elative abundances can be inferred from counting th e number of particles of
each given mass.

21.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649
Mass Spectrometry: Schematics of a simple mass spectrometer with sector typ e mass analyzer. This one is for the measurement of
carbon dioxide isotope ratios (IRMS) as in the carbon-13 ur ea breath test.
Key Points
The force on a charged particle due to an electric field is directed parallel to the electric field vector in t he case of a positive
charge, and anti-parallel in the case of a negative char ge. It does not depend on the velocity of the particle.
In contrast, the magnetic force on a charge particle is o rthogonal to the magnetic field vector, and depends on the velocity of the
particle. The right hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the force.
An electric field may do work on a charged particle, while a magnetic field does no work.
The Lorentz force is the combination of the electric a nd magnetic force, which are often considered together f or practical
applications.
Electric field lines are generated on positive charges and terminate on negative ones. The field lines of an isola ted charge are
directly radially outward. The electric field is tang ent to these lines.
Magnetic field lines, in the case of a magnet, are generat ed at the north pole and terminate on a south pole. Magnet ic poles do
not exist in isolation. Like in the case of electric field li nes, the magnetic field is tangent to the field lines. Ch arged particles will
spiral around these field lines.
Newton’s first law of motion states that if an object exper iences no net force, then its velocity is constant.
A particle with constant velocity will move along a straig ht line through space.
If a charged particle’s velocity is completely parallel to the magnetic field, the magnetic field will exert no fo rce on the particle
and thus the velocity will remain constant.
In the case that the velocity vector is neither parallel nor perpendicular to the magnetic field, the component o f the velocity
parallel to the field will remain constant.
The magnetic field does no work, so the kinetic energy and speed of a charged particle in a magnetic field remain con stant.
The magnetic force, acting perpendicular to the veloci ty of the particle, will cause circular motion.
The centripetal force of the particle is provided by ma gnetic Lorentzian force so that.
Solving for r above yields the gryoradius, or the radius of curvature of the path of a particle with charge q and mas s m moving
in a magnetic field of strength B. The gryoradius is then given by.
The cyclotron frequency (or, equivalently, gyrofrequen cy) is the number of cycles a particle completes around its circular circuit
every second and is given by.
Previously, we have seen that circular motion results when t he velocity of a charged particle is perpendicular to the magnetic
field. The speed and kinetic energy of the particle rema in constant, but the direction is altered at each instant b y the
perpendicular magnetic force.
If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic fiel d, we consider only the component of v that is perpendi cular to the field
when making our calculations.

21.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649The component of the velocity parallel to the field is un affected, since the magnetic force is zero for motion para llel to the field.
This produces helical motion.
Charges may spiral along field lines. If the strength of the magnetic field increases in the direction of motion, the field will exert
a force to slow the charges and even reverse their direct ion. This is known as a magnetic mirror.
A cyclotron is a type of particle accelerator in which ch arged particles accelerate outwards from the center along a spiral path.
The particles are held to a spiral trajectory by a static mag netic field and accelerated by a rapidly varying electr ic field.
The cavity magnetron is a high-powered vacuum tube that generates microwaves using the interaction of a stream of e lectrons
with a magnetic field. The magnetron has applications in radar, heating, and lighting.
Mass spectrometers measure the mass-to-charge ratio of char ged particles through the use of electromagnetic fields to s egregate
particles with different masses and/or charges. It can be used to determine the elemental composition of a molecu le or sample.
Key Terms
orthogonal: Of two objects, at right angles; perpendicular to each ot her.
straight-line motion: motion that proceeds in a single direction.
gyroradius: The radius of the circular motion of a charged particle in the presence of a uniform magnetic field.
cyclotron frequency: The frequency of a charged particle moving perpendi cular to the direction of a uniform magnetic field B
(constant magnitude and direction). Given by the equality of the centripetal force and magnetic Lorentz force.
helical motion: The motion that is produced when one component of the v elocity is constant in magnitude and direction (i.e.,
straight-line motion) while the other component is consta nt in speed but uniformly varies in direction (i.e., cir cular motion). It is
the superposition of straight-line and circular motion.
magnetic mirror: A magnetic field configuration where the field stren gth changes when moving along a field line. The mirror
effect results in a tendency for charged particles to bounce back from the high field region.
cyclotron: An early particle accelerator in which charged partic les were generated at a central source and accelerated s pirally
outward through a fixed magnetic and alternating electri c fields.
mass spectrometer: A device used in mass spectrometry to discover the mas s composition of a given substance.
magnetron: A device in which electrons are made to resonate in a spe cially shaped chamber and thus produce microwave
radiation; used in radar, and in microwave ovens.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42308/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42310/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

21.4.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42370/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_force%23History. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
orthogonal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/orthogonal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's laws. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_laws. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/straight-line-motion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Cyclotron resonance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron_resonance. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Gyroradius. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyroradius. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
gyroradius. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gyroradius. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cyclotron frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/cyclotron%20frequency. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

21.4.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Magnetic mirror. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_mirror. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/helical-motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic mirror. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/magnetic%20mirror. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 27, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 27, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass spectrometers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometers. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Synchrotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Synchrotron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cyclotron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cyclotron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
magnetron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
mass spectrometer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mass_spectrometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42312/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field lines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field_lines%23Magnetic_field_line s. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

21.4.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15649OpenStax College, College Physics. November 14, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 28, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42372/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 27, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 26, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 27, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42375/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass spectrometers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometers. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Magnetron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetron. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Cyclotron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclotron. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Fie ld is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

21.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565021.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and Conductors
Express Hall voltage for a a metal containing only one ty pe of charge carriers
The Hall effect is the phenomenon in which a voltage difference (called the Hall voltage) is produced acro ss an electrical
conductor, transverse to the conductor’s electric curren t when a magnetic field perpendicular to the conductor’ s current is applied.
When a magnetic field is present that is not paralle l to the motion of moving charges within a conductor, the charges experience the
Lorentz force. In the absence of such a field, the charges follow a roughly straight path, occasionally colliding with impurities.
In the presence of a magnetic field with a perpendic ular component, the paths charges take becomes curved such that they
accumulate on one face of the material. On the other face, there is an excess of opposite charge remainin g. Thus, an electric
potential is created so long as the charge flows. This opposes the magnetic force, eventually to the point of cancelation, resulting in
electron flow in a straight path.
Hall Effect for Electrons: Initially, the electrons are attracted by the magneti c force and follow the curved arrow. Eventually, when
electrons accumulate in excess on the left side and are i n deficit on the right, an electric field ξy is created. T his force becomes
strong enough to cancel out the magnetic force, so fut ure electrons follow a straight (rather than curved) p ath.
For a metal containing only one type of charge carri er (electrons), the Hall voltage (V) can be calculated as a factor of current (I),
magnetic field (B), thickness of the conductor plate (t), and charge carrier density (n) of the carrier electrons:
In this formula, e represents the elementary charge.
The Hall coefficient (R) is a characteristic of a co nductor’s material, and is defined as the ratio of in duced electric field (E) to the
product of current density (j) and applied magnetic fi eld (B):
The Hall effect is a rather ubiquitous phenomenon in physics, and appears not only in conductors, but sem iconductors, ionized
gases, and in quantum spin among other applications.
Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
When an electrical wire is exposed to a magnet, the curren t in that wire will experience a force—the result of a magn et field.
Express equation used to calculate the magnetic force fo r an electrical wire exposed to a magnetic field
When an electrical wire is exposed to a magnet, the c urrent in that wire will be affected by a magnetic fi eld. The effect comes in the
form of a force. The expression for magnetic force on current can be found by summing the magnetic force on each of the many
individual charges that comprise the current. Since the y all run in the same direction, the forces can be added.learning objectives
H
H y
x
learning objectives

21.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650
Right Hand Rule: Used to determine direction of magnetic force.
The force (F) a magnetic field (B) exerts on an individu al charge (q) traveling at drift velocity v is:
In this instance, θ represents the angle between the m agnetic field and the wire (magnetic force is typica lly calculated as a cross
product). If B is constant throughout a wire, and is 0 elsewhere, then for a wire with N charge carriers in it s total length l, the total
magnetic force on the wire is:
Given that N=nV, where n is the number of charge carrie rs per unit volume and V is volume of the wire, and t hat this volume is
calculated as the product of the circular cross-sectiona l area A and length (V=Al), yields the equation:
The terms in parentheses are equal to current (I), and th us the equation can be rewritten as:
The direction of the magnetic force can be determin ed using the right hand rule, demonstrated in. The thumb is pointing in the
direction of the current, with the four other fingers p arallel to the magnetic field. Curling the fingers r eveals the direction of
magnetic force.
Torque on a Current Loop: Rectangular and General
A current-carrying loop exposed to a magnetic field exp eriences a torque, which can be used to power a motor.
Identify the general quation for the torque on a loop of a ny shape
When a current travels in a loop that is exposed to a magnetic field, that field exerts torque on the loo p. This principle is commonly
used in motors, in which the loop is connected to a s haft that rotates as a result of the torque. Thus, t he electrical energy from the
current is converted to mechanical energy as the loo p and shaft rotate, and this mechanical energy is the n used to power another
device.d
learning objectives

21.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650
Torque on a Current Loop: Electrical energy from the current is converted to mechan ical energy as the loop and shaft rotate, and
this mechanical energy is then used to power another devic e.
In this model, the north and south poles of magnets ar e denoted by N and S, respectively. In the center is a rectangular wire loop of
length l and width w, carrying current I. The effect of m agnetic field B on the current-carrying wire exerts torq ue τ.
To understand the torque, we must analyze the forces acting on each segment of the loop. Assuming a consta nt magnetic field, we
can conclude that the forces on the top and bottom p arts of the loop are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, and thus
produce no net force. Incidentally, those forces are verti cal and thus parallel to the shaft.
However, as illustrated by (a) in the figure below, the equal but opposite forces produce a torque that acts clockwise.
Varying torque on a charged loop in a magnetic field: Maximum torque occurs in (b), when is 90 degrees. Minimum torque is 0,
and occurs in (c) when θ is 0 degrees. When loop rotates past =0, the torque reverses (d).
Given that torque is calculated from the equation:
where F is force on the rotating object, r is the dista nce from the pivot point that the force is applied, and θ is the angle between r
and F, we can use the sum of two torques (the forces act on e ither side of the loop) to find the total torque:
Note that r is equal to w/2, as illustrated.
To find torque we still must solve for F from the mag netic field B on the current I. The rectangle has len gth l, so F=IlB. Replacing
F with IlB in the torque equation gives:

21.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650Note that the product of w and l is included in this eq uation; those terms can be replaced with area (A) of the rectangle. If another
shape of wire is used, its area can be inserted in the equation regardless of shape (whether circular, square, or otherwise).
Also note that this equation of torque is for a single turn. Torque increases proportionally according to number of turns (N). Thus,
the general equation for torque on a loop of any sh ape, of N turns, each of A area, carrying I current a nd exposed to a magnetic
field B is a value that fluctuates as the loop rotates, and can be calculated by:
Ampere’s Law: Magnetic Field Due to a Long Straight Wire
Current running through a wire will produce a magnetic fiel d that can be calculated using the Biot-Savart Law.
Express the relationship between the strength of a magnetic field and a current running through a wire in a form of equation
Current running through a wire will produce both an e lectric field and a magnetic field. For a closed cur ve of length C, magnetic
field (B) is related to current (I) as in Ampere’s Law, sta ted mathematically as:
Direction of magnetic field: The direction of the magnetic field can be determine d by the right hand rule.
In this equation, dl represents the differential of l ength of wire in the curved wire, and μ is the permeab ility of free space. This can
be related to the Biot-Savart law. For a short, straight length of conductor (typically a wire) this law gener ally calculates partial
magnetic field (dB) as a function of current for an infinitesimally small segment of wire (dl) at a poin t r distance away from the
conductor:
In this equation, the r vector can be written as r ̂ (the unit vector in direction of r), if the r term in the denominator is reduced to r
(this is simply reducing like terms in a fraction). Integrat ing the previous differential equation, we find:
This relationship holds for constant current in a str aight wire, in which magnetic field at a point due to all current elements
comprising the straight wire is the same. As illustra ted in the direction of the magnetic field can be d etermined using the right hand
rule—pointing one’s thumb in the direction of current, t he curl of one’s fingers indicates the direction of the magnetic field around
the straight wire.
Magnetic Force Between Two Parallel Conductors
Parallel wires carrying current produce significant magn etic fields, which in turn produce significant forces on cu rrents.learning objectives
C
3 2

21.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650Express the magnetic force felt by a pair of wires in a form o f an equation
Parallel wires carrying current produce significant ma gnetic fields, which in turn produce significant force s on currents. The force
felt between the wires is used to define the the standard unit of current, know as an amphere.
In, the field (B) that I creates can be calculated as a function of current and wire separation (r):
Magnetic fields and force exerted by parallel current-carrying wire s.: Currents I1 and I2 flow in the same direction, separated
by a distance of r.
The field B exerts a force on the wire containing I. In the f igure, this force is denoted as F.
The force F exerts on wire 2 can be calculated as:
Given that the field is uniform along and perpendicular to wire 2, sin θ = sin 90 derees = 1. Thus the force simplifie s to: F =I lB
According to Newton’s Third Law (F =-F), the forces on the two wires will be equal in magnitude and opposite in d irection, so to
simply we can use F instead of F. Given that wires are o ften very long, it’s often convenient to solve for f orce per unit length.
Rearranging the previous equation and using the definitio n of B gives:
If the currents are in the same direction, the force attracts the wires. If the currents are in opposite dir ections, the force repels the
wires.
The force between current-carrying wires is used as part of the operational definition of the ampere. For pa rallel wires placed one
meter away from one another, each carrying one ampere, the force per meter is:
The final units come from replacing T with 1N/(A×m).
Incidentally, this value is the basis of the operatio nal definition of the ampere. This means that one am pere of current through two
infinitely long parallel conductors (separated by o ne meter in empty space and free of any other magne tic fields) causes a force of
2×10 N/m on each conductor.
Key Points
The Hall effect is the phenomenon in which a voltage dif ference (called the Hall voltage) is produced across an e lectrical
conductor that is transverse to the conductor’s electric current when a magnetic field perpendicular to the condu ctor’s current is
applied.learning objectives
1 1
1 2 2
2 2 1
1 2
-7

21.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650Moving charges in a wire will change trajectory in the presenc e of a magnetic field, “bending” toward it. Thus, those ch arges
accumulate on one face of the material. On the other face, th ere is left an excess of opposite charge. Thus, an electri c potential is
created.
is the formula for Hall voltage (V). It is a factor of current (I), magnetic field (B), thickness of the conduct or plate
(t), and charge carrier density (n) of the carrier electr ons.
Magnetic force on current can be found by summing the ma gnetic force on each of the individual charges that make this
current.
For a wire exposed to a magnetic field, describes the relat ionship between magnetic force (F), current (I), length
of wire (l), magnetic field (B), and angle between field a nd wire (θ).
The direction of the magnetic force can be determined u sing the right hand rule, as in fig.
can be used to calculate torque (ττ) a loop of N turns an d A area, carrying I current feels in the presence of a
magnetic field B.
Although the forces acting upon the loop are equal and opp osite, they both act to rotate the loop in the same dir ection.
Torque experienced is independent of the loop’s shape. Wh at matters is the area of the loop.
Ampere ‘s Law states that for a closed curve of length C, m agnetic field (B) is related to current (I):. In this
equation, dl represents the differential of length of wir e in the curved wire, and μ is the permeability of free spa ce.
Ampere’s Law can be related to the Biot-Savart law, which hold s for a short, straight length of conductor:. In this
equation, partial magnetic field (dB) is expressed as a fu nction of current for an infinitesimally small segment of wire (dl) at a
point r distance away from the conductor.
After integrating, the direction of the magnetic field a ccording to the Biot-Savart Law can be determined using the right hand
rule.
The field (B) that that current (I) from a wire creates can be calculated as a function of current and wire sep aration (r):
μ is a constant.
describes the magnetic force felt by a pair of wires. If they are parallel the equation is simplified as the sine
function is 1.
The force felt between two parallel conductive wires is used to define the ampere —the standard unit of current.
Key Terms
elementary charge: The electric charge on a single proton.
transverse: Not tangent, so that a nondegenerate angle is formed be tween the two things intersecting.
drift velocity: The average velocity of the free charges in a conduc tor.
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric c urrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
ampere: A unit of electrical current; the standard base unit in the International System of Units. Abbreviation: amp. Symbol: A.
current: The time rate of flow of electric charge.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Hall effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hall_effect. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transverse. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
elementary charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elementary_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlikeH
C
1 1

21.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650Hall Effect Measurement Setup for Electrons. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Effect_Measurement_Setup_for_Ele ctrons.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Cond uctor. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42398/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/drift-velocity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Hall Effect Measurement Setup for Electrons. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Effect_Measurement_Setup_for_Ele ctrons.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Cond uctor. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42398/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hall Effect Measurement Setup for Electrons. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Effect_Measurement_Setup_for_Ele ctrons.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Cond uctor. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42398/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Magnetic Field Due to Current in Straight Wi re. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m31103/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Ampere's Law. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m31895/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Biotu2013Savart law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biot%E2%80%93Savart_law. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ampu00e8re's circuital law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Amp%C3%A8re's_circuital_law.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hall Effect Measurement Setup for Electrons. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Effect_Measurement_Setup_for_Ele ctrons.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Cond uctor. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42398/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Magnetic Field Due to Current in Straight Wi re. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m31103/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

21.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15650OpenStax College, Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conduc tors. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42386/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
ampere. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ampere. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
current. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/current. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Hall Effect Measurement Setup for Electrons. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Effect_Measurement_Setup_for _Electrons.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Cond uctor. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42398/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Mete rs. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42380/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Magnetic Field Due to Current in Straight Wi re. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m31103/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conduc tors. January 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42386/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and Conductors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

21.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565121.6: Applications of Magnetism
Explain why magnetic field is utilized in mass spectrometer s
Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry (MS) is the art of displaying the spec tra (singular spectrum) of the masses of a sample of mat erial. It is used for
determining the elemental composition of a sample, and properties of the particles and molecules (the chemical structures of
molecules, such as peptides and other chemical compound s).
Schematic of Mass Spectrometer: Schematics of a simple mass spectrometer with sector typ e mass analyzer. This one is for the
measurement of carbon dioxide isotope ratios as in the ca rbon-13urea breath test.
Mass spectrometers, as diagramed in, separate compounds b ased on a property known as the mass-to-charge ratio. The sample to
be identified is first ionized, and then passed through some form of magnetic field. Based on parameters, such as how long it takes
the molecule to travel a certain distance or the amount o f deflection caused by the field, a mass can be calculated f or the ion.
How it Works
First, the sample undergoes vaporization by intense he at. The gaseous components of the sample are each i onized (turned into ions)
with the same quantity of charge. The ions are then g rouped by applying a similar magnetic force to each. Since the acceleration of
a charge is dependent on the mass and strength of th e charge, a lighter mass-to-charge ratio will not tra vel as far as a high mass-tocharge ratio, allowing for comparison of the physical properties of different particles. The groupings ar e detected by some
quantitative signal from of ongoing probing. The det ector differentiates the ions based on how far they curve in the magnetic field.
The signal is processed into the spectra (singular of spectrum) of the masses of the particles of that sa mple. The elements or
molecules are uniquely identified by correlating known masses by the identified masses.
Ferromagnetism
Ferromagnetism is the property of certain materials that e nables them to form magnets and be attracted to magnets.
Relate ferromagnetism with the electron configuration
Ferromagnetism is the basic mechanism by which certain materials (such as iron) form permanent magnets, or are attracted to
magnets. In physics, several different types of magnet ism are distinguished. Ferromagnetism is the strongest type—it is the only
type that creates forces strong enough to be felt, a nd is responsible for the common phenomena of magneti sm encountered in
everyday life.
When a magnet comes into close proximity with a previ ously unmagnetized ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetization
of the material with closest unlike poles. Regions with in the material (called domains) act like small bar m agnets. Within domains,
the poles of individual atoms are aligned. Each ato m acts like a tiny bar magnet. Domains are small and ra ndomly oriented in anlearning objectives
learning objectives

21.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651unmagnetized ferromagnetic object. In response to an external magnetic field, the domains may grow to mill imeter size, aligning
themselves. This induced magnetization can be made pe rmanent if the material is heated and then cooled, o r simply tapped in the
presence of other magnets, as shown in. Permanent magne ts (materials that can be magnetized by an external magnetic field and
remain magnetized after the external field is removed) are ferromagnetic, as are other materials that are noticeably attracted to
them.
Unmagnetized to Magnetized Iron: (a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented
domains. (b) When magnetized by an external field, the d omains show greater alignment, and some grow at the exp ense of others.
Individual atoms are aligned within domains; each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet.
Ferromagnetism arises from the fundamental property o f an electron; it also carries charge to have a dip ole moment. Thus, an
electron itself behaves as a tiny magnet. This dipole moment comes from the more fundamental property of the electron—its
quantum mechanical spin. The quantum mechanical natu re of this spin limits the electron to only two stat es: with the magnetic
field pointing either “up” or “down” (for any choice of up and down). When these tiny magnetic dipoles are a ligned in the same
direction, their individual magnetic fields combine t o create a measurable macroscopic field.
However, in materials with a filled electron shell, the t otal dipole moment of the electrons is zero, as the sp ins are in up/down pairs.
Only atoms with partially filled shells (i.e., unpaired spins) can have a net magnetic moment. Thus ferromag netism only occurs in
materials with partially filled shells. (According to Hund’s rules, the first few electrons in a shell tend to have the same spin,
thereby increasing the total dipole moment.)
Accordingly, only certain materials (such as iron, cobal t, nickel, and gadolinium) exhibit strong magnetic e ffects. Such materials
are called ferromagnetic, after the Latin word for ir on, ferrum. A group of materials made from the alloy s of the rare earth elements
are also used as strong and permanent magnets (a popu lar one is neodymium). Other materials exhibit weak ma gnetic effects,
detectable only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic materials respond strongly to magnet s (the way iron is
attracted to magnets), they can also be magnetized themselves—that is, they can be induced to be magnetic or made into permanent
magnets.
Ferromagnetism is very important in industry and modern technology, and is the basis for many electrical and electromechanical
devices such as: electromagnets, electric motors, gen erators, transformers, and magnetic storage (e.g., tape recorders and hard
disks).

21.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651
Refrigerator Magnets: Different magnets attached to the doors of a refrigerator.
Paramagnetism and Diamagnetism
Paramagnetism is the attraction of material while in a magn etic field, and diamagnetism is the repulsion of magnetic f ields.
Describe properties of diamagnetic and paramagnetic mate rials
Paramagnetism
Paramagnetism is a form of magnetism whereby the param agnetic material is only attracted when in the prese nce of an externally
applied magnetic field. Paramagnetic materials have a relative magnetic permeability greater or equal to unity (i.e., a positive
magnetic susceptibility) and hence are attracted to magnetic fields. The magnetic moment induced by the applied field is linear in
the field strength; it is also rather weak.
Constituent atoms or molecules of paramagnetic mate rials have permanent magnetic moments (dipoles), ev en in the absence of an
applied field. Generally, the permanent moment is cau sed by the spin of unpaired electrons in atomic or m olecular electron orbitals.
In pure paramagnetism, the dipoles do not interact wit h each other and are randomly oriented in the absen ce of an external field due
to thermal agitation; this results in a zero net magn etic moment. When a magnetic field is applied, the di poles will tend to align
with the applied field, resulting in a net magnetic mome nt in the direction of the applied field.
Paramagnetic materials have a small, positive suscept ibility to magnetic fields. These materials are slig htly attracted by a magnetic
field and the material does not retain the magnetic properties when the external field is removed, as ill ustrated in. Paramagnetic
properties are due to the presence of some unpaired e lectrons, and from the realignment of the electron paths caused by the external
magnetic field.learning objectives

21.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651
Paramagnetic Materials and Electric Fields: Orientation in paramagnetic material when electric field is applied (right image)
and removed (left image).
Paramagnetic materials include magnesium, molybdenum, lithium and tantalum. Unlike ferromagnets, paramagnet s do not retain
any magnetization in the absence of an externally a pplied magnetic field, because thermal motion random izes the spin orientations
responsible for magnetism. Some paramagnetic material s retain spin disorder at absolute zero (meaning the y are paramagnetic in
the ground state). Thus the total magnetization drop s to zero when the applied field is removed. Even in the presence of the field
there is only a small induced magnetization because only a s mall fraction of the spins will be oriented by the fiel d.
Diamagnetism
Diamagnetism is the property of an object or material that causes it to create a magnetic field in oppos ition to an externally applied
magnetic field. Thus, unlike paramagnets, diamagnets are repelled by magnetic fields, which can lead to its unusual effects, such as
levitation of diamagnetic material when located above po werful magnet (as shown in).
Levitating Carbon: Pyrolytic carbon levitating over permanent magnets
Diamagnetism, to a greater or lesser degree, is a prope rty of all materials and it always makes a weak contri bution to the material’s
response to a magnetic field. However, for materials t hat display some other form of magnetism (such as f erromagnetism or
paramagnetism), the diamagnetic contribution becomes negligible. In addition, all conductors exhibit an e ffective diamagnetism
when they experience a changing magnetic field. For exa mple, the Lorentz force on electrons causes them to ci rculate around

21.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651forming eddy currents. The eddy currents then produce an induced magnetic field opposite the applied fiel d, resisting the
conductor’s motion.
Solenoids, Current Loops, and Electromagnets
Solenoids are loops of wire around a metallic core, and can b e used to create controlled magnetic fields.
Explain why solenoids are important and their structure
Solenoids
A solenoid is a coil wound into a tightly packed heli x. In physics, the term solenoid refers to a long, th in loop of wire, often
wrapped around a metallic core; it produces a magnet ic field when an electric current is passed through i t. Solenoids are important
because they can create controlled magnetic fields and can be used as electromagnets. The term solenoid refers specifically to a coil
designed to produce a uniform magnetic field in a vo lume of space (in which some experiment might be perfor med).
Electromagnets and Current Loops
Early in the 19 century, it was discovered that electr ical currents cause magnetic effects. The first signif icant observation was
made by the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (17 77–1851), who found that a compass needle was deflected by a currentcarrying wire. This was the first significant evidenc e that the movement of charges had any connection wit h magnets.
Electromagnetism is the use of electric current to make magnets. These temporarily induced magnets are called electromagnets.
Electromagnets are employed for many uses: from a wre cking yard crane that lifts scrapped cars, to controll ing the beam of a 90km-circumference particle accelerator, to the magnets in medical imaging machines (for other examples see).
Uses of Electromagnets: An electromagnet induces regions of permanent magnetism o n a floppy disk coated with a ferromagnetic
material. The information stored here is digital (a region i s either magnetic or not); in other applications, it can be analog (with a
varying strength), such as on audiotapes.learning objectives
th

21.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can pr oduce particularly strong magnetic effects. Whenever strong magnetic
effects are needed (such as lifting scrap metal, or in particle accelerators) electromagnets are enhanced by fe rromagnetic materials.
An electromagnet creates magnetism with an electric cu rrent. In later sections we explore this more quantitat ively, finding the
strength and direction of magnetic fields created by various currents. Currents, including those associate d with other
submicroscopic particles like protons, allow us to ex plain ferromagnetism and all other magnetic effects. Ferromagnetism, for
example, results from an internal cooperative alignment of electron spins, possible in some materials but not in others.
Key Points
By vaporizing a material into ions, mass spectrometers can tell what elements make up that material.
When a magnetic field is applied to ions, they deflect or a ccelerate various amounts depending on their electric ch arge to mass
ratio.
By observing how much the ions deflect, the mass spectrome ter can identify the charge to mass ratio of each ion and thus which
element it is.
Ferromagnetism is the basic mechanism by which certain mat erials (such as iron) form permanent magnets, or are attracte d to
magnets.
When a ferromagnetic material is brought close to a m agnet, the poles of the individual atoms of the material ali gn along the
magnetic field lines. If made permanent, this alignment can create a permanent magnet.
Ferromagnetism only occurs in materials with partially fi lled electron shells.
Paramagnets act like magnets while in the presence of an exter nally applied magnetic field.
Diamagnets create a magnetic field in opposition to an e xternally applied magnetic field. Thus, they repulse mag nets.
Diamagnetism is a property of all materials and always make s a weak contribution to the material’s response to a magnetic
field. However, for materials that show ferromagnetism or para magnetism, the diamagnetic contribution becomes negligi ble.
Loops of wire in a magnetic field create current.
Electromagnetism is the use of electric current to make m agnets. Electromagnets are temporary magnets which keep their
magnetic properties only when current is passing through them.
Solenoids and electromagnets have many uses in physics and e ngineering because they allow the control of magnetic fie lds.
Key Terms
electric charge: A quantum number that determines the electromagnetic interactions of some subatomic particles; by
convention, the electron has an electric charge of -1 an d the proton +1, and quarks have fractional charge.
mass: The quantity of matter which a body contains, irrespecti ve of its bulk or volume. It is one of four fundamental pr operties
of matter. It is measured in kilograms in the SI system of m easurement.
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric c urrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
spin: A quantum angular momentum associated with subatomic particles; it also creates a magnetic moment.
dipole moment: The vector product of the charge on either pole of a di pole and the distance separating them.
electron shell: The collective states of all electrons in an atom hav ing the same principal quantum number (visualized as an
orbit in which the electrons move).
ferromagnetism: The phenomenon whereby certain substances can become perm anent magnets when subjected to a magnetic
field.
paramagnetism: The tendency of magnetic dipoles to align with an ext ernal magnetic field; materials that exhibit this tenden cy
become temporary magnets.
diamagnetism: A weak form of magnetism that is only observed in the presence of an external magnetic field; due to an
induced magnetic field in an opposite direction.
ferromagnetic: Of a material, such as iron or nickel, that is easily magn etized.
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric c urrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY

21.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Justin Law and Andrew R. Barron, Principles of Mass Spectrometry and Modern Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38353/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass spectrometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
mass. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electric charge. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric_charge. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass spectrometry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometry. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
electron shell. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electron_shell. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ferromagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferromagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. September 1 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ferromagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferromagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
spin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dipole moment. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dipole_moment. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass spectrometry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometry. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/Figure_23_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/FridgeMagnetPlethor a5734.jpg/450pxFridgeMagnetPlethora5734.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Diamagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diamagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Paramagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Paramagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Diamagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diamagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Paramagnetism. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Paramagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
ferromagnetism. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ferromagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
paramagnetism. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/paramagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diamagnetism. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diamagnetism. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass spectrometry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometry. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/Figure_23_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution

21.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15651Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/FridgeMagnetP lethora5734.jpg/450pxFridgeMagnetPlethora5734.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0d/Paramagnetism_with_a nd_without_field.svg/800pxParamagnetism_with_and_without_field.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c9/Diamagnetic_graphite _levitation.jpg/471pxDiamagnetic_graphite_levitation.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. September 1 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Solenoid. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
ferromagnetic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ferromagnetic. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass spectrometry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_spectrometry. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. November 18, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/Figure_23_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/FridgeMagnetP lethora5734.jpg/450pxFridgeMagnetPlethora5734.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0d/Paramagnetism_with_a nd_without_field.svg/800pxParamagnetism_with_and_without_field.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c9/Diamagnetic_graphite _levitation.jpg/471pxDiamagnetic_graphite_levitation.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Ferromagnets and Electromagnets. February 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42368/latest/Figure_23_02_06a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
21.6: Applications of Magnetism is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
22: Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
22: Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technolog ies is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.2: AC Circuits
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell RevisitedTopic hierarchy

22.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565422.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
Explain the relationship between the magnetic field and th e electromotive force
Induced EMF
The apparatus used by Faraday to demonstrate that mag netic fields can create currents is illustrated in th e following figure. When the
switch is closed, a magnetic field is produced in the coil on the top part of the iron ring and transmitte d (or guided) to the coil on the
bottom part of the ring. The galvanometer is used to detect a ny current induced in a separate coil on the bottom.
Faraday’s Apparatus: This is Faraday’s apparatus for demonstrating that a magn etic field can produce a current. A change in the field
produced by the top coil induces an EMF and, hence, a current i n the bottom coil. When the switch is opened and closed, the
galvanometer registers currents in opposite directions. No c urrent flows through the galvanometer when the switch rema ins closed or
open.
It was found that each time the switch is closed, the galvanometer detects a current in one direction in t he coil on the bottom. Each
time the switch is opened, the galvanometer detects a current in the opposite direction. Interestingly, if the switch remains closed or
open for any length of time, there is no current thr ough the galvanometer. Closing and opening the switch induces the current. It is the
change in magnetic field that creates the current. Mor e basic than the current that flows is the electromoti ve force (EMF) that causes it.
The current is a result of an EMF induced by a changing magne tic field, whether or not there is a path for current to flow.
Magnetic Flux
The magnetic flux (often denoted Φ or Φ) through a surface is the component of the magnetic field passi ng through that surface. The
magnetic flux through some surface is proportional t o the number of field lines passing through that sur face. The magnetic flux passing
through a surface of vector area A is
where B is the magnitude of the magnetic field (havin g the unit of Tesla, T), A is the area of the surface, and θ is the angle between the
magnetic field lines and the normal (perpendicular) to A.
For a varying magnetic field, we first consider the ma gnetic flux dΦBdΦB through an infinitesimal area ele ment dA, where we may
consider the field to be constant:
Varying Magnetic Field: Each point on a surface is associated with a direction, calle d the surface normal; the magnetic flux through a
point is then the component of the magnetic field along t his normal direction.learning objectives
B

22.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654\mathrm { d } \Phi _ { \mathrm { B } } = \mathbf { B } \cdo t \mathrm { d } \mathbf { A }
A generic surface, A, can then be broken into infinite simal elements and the total magnetic flux through t he surface is then the surface
integral
Faraday’s Law of Induction and Lenz’ Law
Faraday’s law of induction states that the EMF induced b y a change in magnetic flux is, when flux changes by Δ in a
time Δt.
Express the Faraday’s law of induction in a form of equation
Faraday’s Law of Induction
Faraday’s law of induction is a basic law of electromagn etism that predicts how a magnetic field will interact with an electric circuit to
produce an electromotive force (EMF). It is the fund amental operating principle of transformers, inductor s, and many types of
electrical motors, generators, and solenoids.
Faraday’s experiments showed that the EMF induced by a ch ange in magnetic flux depends on only a few factors. Fir st, EMF is
directly proportional to the change in flux Δ. Secon d, EMF is greatest when the change in time Δt is smallest— that is, EMF is
inversely proportional to Δt. Finally, if a coil has N turns, an EMF will be produced that is N times greater than for a single coil, so that
EMF is directly proportional to N. The equation for the EMF in duced by a change in magnetic flux is
This relationship is known as Faraday’s law of induction. The u nits for EMF are volts, as is usual.
Lenz’ Law
The minus sign in Faraday’s law of induction is very imp ortant. The minus means that the EMF creates a current I and magnetic field
B that oppose the change in flux Δthis is known as Len z’ law. The direction (given by the minus sign) of t he EMF is so important that
it is called Lenz’ law after the Russian Heinrich Lenz (1804–1865), who, like Faraday and Henry, independently investigated aspects
of induction. Faraday was aware of the direction, but Lenz s tated it, so he is credited for its discovery.
Lenz’ Law: (a) When this bar magnet is thrust into the coil, the stre ngth of the magnetic field increases in the coil. The curre nt induced
in the coil creates another field, in the opposite directio n of the bar magnet’s to oppose the increase. This is one a spect of Lenz’s law—learning objectives

22.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654induction opposes any change in flux. (b) and (c) are t wo other situations. Verify for yourself that the directio n of the induced Bcoil
shown indeed opposes the change in flux and that the current d irection shown is consistent with the right hand rule.
Energy Conservation
Lenz’ law is a manifestation of the conservation of e nergy. The induced EMF produces a current that opposes t he change in flux,
because a change in flux means a change in energy. E nergy can enter or leave, but not instantaneously. Len z’ law is a consequence. As
the change begins, the law says induction opposes and, thus, slows the change. In fact, if the induced EMF were i n the same direction
as the change in flux, there would be a positive feed back that would give us free energy from no apparent source—conservation of
energy would be violated.
Motional EMF
Motion in a magnetic field that is stationary relative to the Earth induces motional EMF (electromotive force).
Identify process that induces motional electromotive f orce
As seen in previous Atoms, any change in magnetic flux i nduces an electromotive force (EMF) opposing that cha nge—a process
known as induction. Motion is one of the major causes o f induction. For example, a magnet moved toward a coil induces an EMF, and
a coil moved toward a magnet produces a similar EMF. In this Atom, we concentrate on motion in a magnetic fiel d that is stationary
relative to the Earth, producing what is loosely called motion al EMF.
Motional EMF
Consider the situation shown in. A rod is moved at a s peed v along a pair of conducting rails separated b y a distance ℓ in a uniform
magnetic field B. The rails are stationary relative to B, and are connected to a stationary resistor R (th e resistor could be anything from
a light bulb to a voltmeter). Consider the area encl osed by the moving rod, rails and resistor. B is perp endicular to this area, and the
area is increasing as the rod moves. Thus the magnetic f lux enclosed by the rails, rod and resistor is incr easing. When flux changes, an
EMF is induced according to Faraday’s law of induction.
learning objectives

22.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Motional EMF: (a) A motional emf=Bℓv is induced between the rails when this rod moves to the right in the uniform magnetic field.
The magnetic field B is into the page, perpendicular to th e moving rod and rails and, hence, to the area enclosed by t hem. (b) Lenz’s
law gives the directions of the induced field and current, and the polarity of the induced emf. Since the flux is increa sing, the induced
field is in the opposite direction, or out of the page. Rig ht hand rule gives the current direction shown, and the pola rity of the rod will
drive such a current.
To find the magnitude of EMF induced along the moving rod, we use Faraday’s law of induction without the sign:
In this equation, N=1 and the flux Φ=BAcosθ. We have θ =0º and cosθ=1, since B is perpendicular to A. Now,
since B is uniform. Note that the area swept out by the rod is. Entering these quantities into the expression for EMF yi elds:
To find the direction of the induced field, the dire ction of the current, and the polarity of the induc ed EMF we apply Lenz’ law, as
explained in Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’ Law. As se en in Fig 1 (b), F lux is increasing, since the area encl osed is increasing.
Thus the induced field must oppose the existing one an d be out of the page. (The right hand rule requires that I be counterclockwise,
which in turn means the top of the rod is positive, as shown.)
Electric Field vs. Magnetic Field
There are many connections between the electric forc e and the magnetic force. That a moving magnetic fie ld produces an electric field
(and conversely that a moving electric field produc es a magnetic field) is part of the reason electric and magnetic forces are now
considered as different manifestations of the same force (first noticed by Albert Einstein). This classic unifica tion of electric and
magnetic forces into what is called the electromagnetic force is the inspiration for contemporary efforts to unify othe r basic forces.
Back EMF, Eddy Currents, and Magnetic Damping
Back EMF, eddy currents, and magnetic damping are all due to ind uced EMF and can be explained by Faraday’s law of induction.
Explain the relationship between the motional electromoti ve force, eddy currents, and magnetic damping
Back EMF
Motors and generators are very similar. (Read our Atoms on “Electric Generators” and “Electric Motors. “) Genera tors convert
mechanical energy into electrical energy, whereas moto rs convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. Furthermore, motors and
generators have the same construction. When the coil of a motor is turned, magnetic flux changes, and an e lectromotive force (EMF),
consistent with Faraday’s law of induction, is induced. T he motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil r otates. This will happen
whether the shaft is turned by an external input, li ke a belt drive, or by the action of the motor itse lf. That is, when a motor is doing
work and its shaft is turning, an EMF is generated. Lenz’ law tells us the induced EMF opposes any change, so that t he input EMF that
powers the motor will be opposed by the motor’s self-genera ted EMF, called the back EMF of the motor.
Eddy Current
As discussed in “Motional EMF,” motional EMF is induced wh en a conductor moves in a magnetic field or when a ma gnetic field
moves relative to a conductor. If motional EMF can caus e a current loop in the conductor, we refer to that c urrent as an eddy current.
Eddy currents can produce significant drag, called magneti c damping, on the motion involved.
Consider the apparatus shown in, which swings a pendulum bob between the poles of a strong magnet. If the bob is metal, there is
significant drag on the bob as it enters and leaves th e field, quickly damping the motion. If, however, the b ob is a slotted metal plate, as
shown in (b), there is a much smaller effect due to the magne t. There is no discernible effect on a bob made of an insul ator.learning objectives

22.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654
Device for Exploring Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping: A common physics demonstration device for exploring ed dy currents
and magnetic damping. (a) The motion of a metal pendulum b ob swinging between the poles of a magnet is quickly damped by the
action of eddy currents. (b) There is little effect on the m otion of a slotted metal bob, implying that eddy currents are made less
effective. (c) There is also no magnetic damping on a nonc onducting bob, since the eddy currents are extremely small.
shows what happens to the metal plate as it enters and leaves the magnetic field. In both cases, it experien ces a force opposing its
motion. As it enters from the left, flux increases, and so an eddy current is set up (Faraday’s law) in the c ounterclockwise direction
(Lenz’ law), as shown. Only the right-hand side of the cu rrent loop is in the field, so that there is an unopp osed force on it to the left
(right hand rule). When the metal plate is complete ly inside the field, there is no eddy current if the field is uniform, since the flux
remains constant in this region. But when the plate lea ves the field on the right, flux decreases, causing an eddy current in the
clockwise direction that, again, experiences a force to the left, further slowing the motion. A similar analys is of what happens when the
plate swings from the right toward the left shows that it s motion is also damped when entering and leaving the field.
Conducting Plate Passing Between the Poles of a Magnet: A more detailed look at the conducting plate passing bet ween the poles of
a magnet. As it enters and leaves the field, the change in flu x produces an eddy current. Magnetic force on the current lo op opposes the
motion. There is no current and no magnetic drag when the plate is completely inside the uniform field.
When a slotted metal plate enters the field, as shown i n, an EMF is induced by the change in flux, but it is less effective because the
slots limit the size of the current loops. Moreover, adjacent loops have currents in opposite directions, and their effects cancel. When
an insulating material is used, the eddy current is ex tremely small, and so magnetic damping on insulators is negligible. If eddy
currents are to be avoided in conductors, then they can be slotted or constructed of thin layers of cond ucting material separated by
insulating sheets.

22.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654
Eddy Currents Induced in a Slotted Metal Plate: Eddy currents induced in a slotted metal plate entering a ma gnetic field form small
loops, and the forces on them tend to cancel, thereby making magnetic drag almost zero.
Changing Magnetic Flux Produces an Electric Field
Faraday’s law of induction states that changing magnetic field produces an electric field:.
Describe the relationship between the changing magnetic field and an electric field
We have studied Faraday’s law of induction in previou s atoms. We learned the relationship between induced el ectromotive force
(EMF) and magnetic flux. In a nutshell, the law states that changing magnetic field() produces an electric field (), Faraday’s law
of induction is expressed as, where is induced EMF and is magnetic flux. (“N” is dropped from our previous
expression. The number of turns of coil is included c an be incorporated in the magnetic flux, so the fac tor is optional.) Faraday’s law
of induction is a basic law of electromagnetism that predicts how a magnetic field will interact with an e lectric circuit to produce an
electromotive force (EMF). In this Atom, we will learn about an alternative mathematical expression of the law.
Faraday’s Experiment: Faraday’s experiment showing induction between coils of wire: The liquid battery (right) provides a current
which flows through the small coil (A), creating a magnetic fi eld. When the coils are stationary, no current is induced. But when the
small coil is moved in or out of the large coil (B), the magn etic flux through the large coil changes, inducing a current which is
detected by the galvanometer (G).
Differential form of Faraday’s law
The magnetic flux is where is a vector area over a closed surface S. A device that can maintain a potenti al difference,
despite the flow of current is a source of electromoti ve force. (EMF) The definition is mathematically, where the integrallearning objectives

22.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654is evaluated over a closed loop C.
Faraday’s law now can be rewritten. Using the Stokes’ theor em in vector calculus, the left hand side is
. Also, note that in the right hand side. Therefore, we get an alternative form of the
Faraday’s law of induction:.This is also called a diff erential form of the Faraday’s law. It is one of the f our equations in
Maxwell’s equations, governing all electromagnetic phenom ena.
Electric Generators
Electric generators convert mechanical energy to electr ical energy; they induce an EMF by rotating a coil in a magnet ic field.
Explain how an electromotive force is induced in electri c generators
Electric generators are devices that convert mechan ical energy to electrical energy. They induce an el ectromotive force (EMF) by
rotating a coil in a magnetic field. It is a device that converts mechanical energy to electrical energ y. A generator forces electric charge
(usually carried by electrons) to flow through an ext ernal electrical circuit. Possible sources of mechanica l energy include: a
reciprocating or turbine steam engine, water falling through a turbine or waterwheel, an internal combustio n engine, a wind turbine, a
hand crank, compressed air, or any other source of mechanical energy. Generators supply almost all of the power for the electric power
grids which provide most of the world’s electric power.
Steam Turbine Generator: A modern steam turbine generator.
Basic Setup
Consider the setup shown in. Charges in the wires of th e loop experience the magnetic force because they ar e moving in a magnetic
field. Charges in the vertical wires experience forces parallel to the wire, causing currents. However, those in the top and bottom
segments feel a force perpendicular to the wire; thi s force does not cause a current. We can thus find the induced EMF by considering
only the side wires. Motional EMF is given to be EMF=Bℓv, wh ere the velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field B (see our
Atom on “Motional EMF”). Here, the velocity is at an angle θ wit h B, so that its component perpendicular to B is vsinθ.
learning objectives

22.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Diagram of an Electric Generator: A generator with a single rectangular coil rotated at constant angular velocity in a uniform
magnetic field produces an emf that varies sinusoidally in time. Note the generator is similar to a motor, except the sh aft is rotated to
produce a current rather than the other way around.
Thus in this case the EMF induced on each side is EMF=Bℓ vsinθ, and they are in the same direction. The total EMF εε around the loop
is then:
This expression is valid, but it does not give EMF as a function of time. To find the time dependence of EMF, we assume the coil
rotates at a constant angular velocity ω. The angle θ is related to angular velocity by, so that:
Now, linear velocity v is related to angular velocity by. Her e, so that, and:
Noting that the area of the loop is, and allowing for N loops, we f ind that:
is the EMF induced in a generator coil of N turns an d area A rotating at a constant angular velocity in a uniform
magnetic field B.
Generators illustrated in this Atom look very much lik e the motors illustrated previously. This is not co incidental. In fact, a motor
becomes a generator when its shaft rotates.
Electric Motors
Explain how force is generated into electric motors
An electric motor is a device that converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.
The basic principles of operation for a motor are t he same as those for a generator, except that a motor converts electrical energy into
mechanical energy (motion). (Read our atom on elect ric generators first.) Most electric motors use the interaction of magnetic fields
and current-carrying conductors to generate force. E lectric motors are found in applications as diverse as industrial fans, blowers and
pumps, machine tools, household appliances, power tools, and d isk drives.
Lorentz Force
If you were to place a moving charged particle in a magne tic field, it would experience a force called the Lorent z force:
Right-Hand Rule: Right-hand rule showing the direction of the Lorentz force
where v is the speed of the moving charge, q is the charge, and B is the magnetic field. Current in a conductor consi sts of moving
charges. Therefore, a current-carrying coil in a magne tic field will also feel the Lorentz force. For a strai ght current carrying wire that
is not moving, the Lorentz force is:
where F is the force (in newtons, N), I is the current in the wire (in amperes, A), L is the length of the wire that is in the magnetic f ield
(in m), and B is the magnetic field strength (in teslas, T). The dir ection of the Lorentz force is perpendicular to both the direction of thelearning objectives

22.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654flow of current and the magnetic field and can be fo und using the right-hand rule, shown in. Using your rig ht hand, point your thumb
in the direction of the current, and point your firs t finger in the direction of the magnetic field. You r third finger will now be pointing in
the direction of the force.
Torque: The force on opposite sides of the coil will be in opposite d irections because the charges are moving in opposite direc tions.
This means the coil will rotate.
Mechanics of a Motor
Both motors and generators can be explained in terms of a coil that rotates in a magnetic field. In a ge nerator the coil is attached to an
external circuit that is then turned. This results in a changing flux, which induces an electromagnetic fi eld. In a motor, a currentcarrying coil in a magnetic field experiences a for ce on both sides of the coil, which creates a twisting force (called a torque) that
makes it turn. Any coil carrying current can feel a fo rce in a magnetic field. This force is the Lorentz f orce on the moving charges in
the conductor. The force on opposite sides of the co il will be in opposite directions because the charge s are moving in opposite
directions. This means the coil will rotate.
Inductance
Inductance is the property of a device that tells how effec tively it induces an emf in another device or on itself.
Describe properties of an inductor, distinguishing mutual i nductance and self-inductance
Induction is the process in which an emf is induced by changing magnetic flux. Transformers, for example, a re designed to be
particularly effective at inducing a desired voltage and current with very little loss of energy to other forms (see our Atom on
“Transformers. “) Is there a useful physical quantity re lated to how “effective” a given device is? The answer is yes, and that physical
quantity is called inductance.
Mutual Inductance
Mutual inductance is the effect of Faraday’s law of in duction for one device upon another, such as the pri mary coil in transmitting
energy to the secondary in a transformer. See, where simple c oils induce emfs in one another.
Mutual Inductance in Coils: These coils can induce emfs in one another like an ineffi cient transformer. Their mutual inductance M
indicates the effectiveness of the coupling between them. Here a change in current in coil 1 is seen to induce an emf in c oil 2. (Note
that “E2 induced” represents the induced emf in coil 2.)
In the many cases where the geometry of the devices is fixed, flux is changed by varying current. We therefo re concentrate on the rate
of change of current, ΔI/Δt, as the cause of inductio n. A change in the current I in one device, coil 1, in duces an EMF in the other.learning objectives
1 2

22.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654We express this in equation form as
where M is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices. The minus sign is an expression of Len z’s law. The larger the
mutual inductance M, the more effective the coupling.
Nature is symmetric here. If we change the current I2 in coil 2, we induce an emf1 in coil 1, which is given by
where M is the same as for the reverse process. Transformers run ba ckward with the same effectiveness, or mutual inductance M.
Self-Inductance
Self-inductance, the effect of Faraday’s law of induct ion of a device on itself, also exists. When, for exampl e, current through a coil is
increased, the magnetic field and flux also increase, i nducing a counter emf, as required by Lenz’s law. Con versely, if the current is
decreased, an emf is induced that opposes the decrease. Most devices have a fixed geometry, and so the chang e in flux is due entirely
to the change in current ΔI through the device. The induced emf is related to the physical geometry of t he device and the rate of change
of current. It is given by
where L is the self-inductance of the device. A devic e that exhibits significant self-inductance is called a n inductor. Again, the minus
sign is an expression of Lenz’s law, indicating that emf oppo ses the change in current.
A Quantitative Interpretation of Motional EMF
A a motional EMF is an electromotive force (EMF) induced by m otion relative to a magnetic field B.
Formulate two views that are applied to calculate the electrom otive force
An electromotive force (EMF) induced by motion relati ve to a magnetic field B is called a motional EMF. Y ou might have noticed that
motional EMF is very similar to the induced EMF caused by a changing magnetic field. In this Atom we see th at they are indeed the
same phenomenon, shown in different frame of reference.
Motional EMF
In the case where a conductor loop is moving into mag net shown in (a), magnetic force on a moving charge i n the loop is given by
evBevB (Lorentz force, e: electron charge).
Conductor Loop Moving Into a Magnet: (a) Motional EMF. The current loop is moving into a stati onary magnet. The direction of
the magnetic field is into the screen. (b) Induced EMF. Curre nt loop is stationary, and the magnet is moving.learning objectives

22.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Due to the force, electrons will keep building up on o ne side (bottom end in the figure) until enough of an electric field opposing the
motion of electrons is established across the rod, which is. Equating the two forces, we get.
Therefore, the motional EMF over the length L of the side of the loop is given by (Eq. 1), where L is the length of the
object moving at speed v relative to the magnet.
Induced EMF
Since the rate of change of the magnetic flux passing through the loop is (A: area of the loop that magne tic field pass through), the
induced EMF (Eq. 2).
Equivalence of the Motional and Induced EMF
From Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 we can confirm that motional and induced EMF yield the same result. In fact, the equival ence of the two
phenomena is what triggered Albert Einstein to examin e special relativity. In his seminal paper on special relativity published in 1905,
Einstein begins by mentioning the equivalence of the two phen omena:
“…… for example, the reciprocal electrodynamic action of a magnet and a conductor. The observable phenomenon here depends only
on the relative motion of the conductor and the magne t, whereas the customary view draws a sharp distinction between the two cases
in which either the one or the other of these bodies i s in motion. For if the magnet is in motion and the condu ctor at rest, there arises
in the neighbourhood of the magnet an electric field with a certain definite energy, producing a current at the places where parts of the
conductor are situated. But if the magnet is stationar y and the conductor in motion, no electric field arise s in the neighbourhood of the
magnet. In the conductor, however, we find an electromot ive force, to which in itself there is no corresponding energy, but which gives
rise—assuming equality of relative motion in the two ca ses discussed—to electric currents of the same path and i ntensity as those
produced by the electric forces in the former case. “
Mechanical Work and Electrical Energy
Mechanical work done by an external force to produce motio nal EMF is converted to heat energy; energy is conserved in th e process.
Apply the law of conservation of energy to describe the product ion motional electromotive force with mechanical work
We learned about motional EMF previously (see our Atom on “Motional EMF”). For the simple setup shown below, moti onal EMF (ε)
(ε) produced by a moving conductor (in a uniform field) i s given as follows:
where B is the magnetic field, l is the length of the conducting rod, and v is the (constant) speed of its motion. (B, l, and v are all
perpendicular to each other as shown in the image below.)learning objectives

22.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654
Motional EMF: (a) A motional emf=Bℓv is induced between the rails when this rod moves to the right in the uniform magnetic field.
The magnetic field B is into the page, perpendicular to th e moving rod and rails and, hence, to the area enclosed by t hem. (b) Lenz’s
law gives the directions of the induced field and current, and the polarity of the induced emf. Since the flux is increa sing, the induced
field is in the opposite direction, or out of the page. Rig ht hand rule gives the current direction shown, and the pola rity of the rod will
drive such a current.
Conservation of Energy
In this atom, we will consider the system from the energy perspective. As the rod moves and carries current i, it will feel the Lorentz
force
To keep the rod moving at a constant speed v, we must constantly apply an external force F(equal to magnitude of F and opposite in
its direction) to the rod along its motion. Since the rod is moving at v, the power P delivered by the external force would be:
In the final step, we used the first equation we talk ed about. Note that this is exactly the power dissipate d in the loop (
). Therefore, we conclude that the mechanical work done by an external force to keep the rod moving at a c onstant
speed is converted to heat energy in the loop. More g enerally, mechanical work done by an external force t o produce motional EMF is
converted to heat energy. Energy is conserved in the proc ess.
Lenz’ Law
We learned in the Atom “Faraday’s Law of Induction and Lenz’ Law” that Lenz’ law is a manifestation of the conservation of energy.
As we see in the example in this Atom, Lenz’ law guarante es that the motion of the rod is opposed because of na ture’s tendency to
oppose a change in magnetic field. If the induced EMF were in the same direction as the change in flux, th ere would be a positive
feedback causing the rod to fly away from the slightest pertur bation.
Energy in a Magnetic Field
Magnetic field stores energy. The energy density is given as.ext L

22.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Express the energy density of a magnetic field in a form of equation
Energy is needed to generate a magnetic field both t o work against the electric field that a changing ma gnetic field creates and to
change the magnetization of any material within the magnetic field. For non-dispersive materials this same energy is released when the
magnetic field is destroyed. Therefore, this energy can be modeled as being “stored” in the magnetic field.
Magnetic Field Created By A Solenoid: Magnetic field created by a solenoid (cross-sectional vi ew) described using field lines.
Energy is “stored” in the magnetic field.
Energy Stored in a Magnetic Field
For linear, non-dispersive, materials (such that B = μH where μ, called the permeability, is frequency-independent), the energy density
is:
Energy density is the amount of energy stored in a gi ven system or region of space per unit volume. If ther e are no magnetic materials
around, μ can be replaced by μ. The above equation cannot be used for nonlinear ma terials, though; a more general expression (given
below) must be used.
In general, the incremental amount of work per unit volu me δW needed to cause a small change of magnetic field δB is:
Once the relationship between H and B is known this equa tion is used to determine the work needed to reach a given magnetic state.
For hysteretic materials such as ferromagnets and sup erconductors, the work needed also depends on how the m agnetic field is created.
For linear non-dispersive materials, though, the general equ ation leads directly to the simpler energy density equat ion given above.
Energy Stored in the Field of a Solenoid
The energy stored by an inductor is equal to the amou nt of work required to establish the current through the inductor, and therefore
the magnetic field. This is given by:
Proof: Power that should be supplied to an inductor with induc tance L to run current I through it it given as
Therefore
Transformers
Transformers transform voltages from one value to anoth er; its function is governed by the transformer equation.learning objectives

22.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Apply the transformer equation to compare the secondary an d primary voltages
Transformers change voltages from one value to another. For examp le, devices such as cell phones, laptops, video games, po wer tools
and small appliances have a transformer (built into t heir plug-in unit) that changes 120 V into the prop er voltage for the device.
Transformers are also used at several points in power distribution systems, as shown in. Power is sent long dist ances at high voltages,
as less current is required for a given amount of po wer (this means less line loss). Because high voltages pose greater hazards,
transformers are employed to produce lower voltage at the us er’s location.
Transformer Setup: Transformers change voltages at several points in a power distribution system. Electric power is usually
generated at greater than 10 kV, and transmitted long dist ances at voltages over 200 kV—sometimes as great as 700 kV—to li mit
energy losses. Local power distribution to neighborhoods or i ndustries goes through a substation and is sent short dist ances at voltages
ranging from 5 to 13 kV. This is reduced to 120, 240, or 480 V for safety at the individual user site.
The type of transformer considered here is based on Fa raday’s law of induction, and is very similar in const ruction to the apparatus
Faraday used to demonstrate that magnetic fields can create currents (illustrated in). The two coils are c alled the primary and
secondary coils. In normal use, the input voltage is p laced on the primary, and the secondary produces the transformed output voltage.
Not only does the iron core trap the magnetic field created by the primary coil, its magnetization incr eases the field strength. Since the
input voltage is AC, a time-varying magnetic flux is sent t o the secondary, inducing its AC output voltage.
Simple Transformer: A typical construction of a simple transformer has two coil s wound on a ferromagnetic core that is laminated to
minimize eddy currents. The magnetic field created by th e primary is mostly confined to and increased by the core, wh ich transmits it
to the secondary coil. Any change in current in the primary in duces a current in the secondary.The figure shows a simple tra nsformerlearning objectives

22.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654with two coils wound on either sides of a laminated ferromagnet ic core. The set of coil on left side of the core is marked as the primary
and there number is given as N p. The voltage across the prima ry is given by V p. The set of coil on right side of the cor e is marked as
the secondary and there number is represented as N s. The v oltage across the secondary is given by V s. A symbol of the transformer is
also shown below the diagram. It consists of two inductor coils se parated by two equal parallel lines representing the core.
Transformer Equation
For the simple transformer shown in, the output voltage V depends almost entirely on the input voltage V an d the ratio of the number
of loops in the primary and secondary coils. Faraday’s law of ind uction for the secondary coil gives its induced output vol tage V as:
where N is the number of loops in the secondary coil a nd Δ/Δt is the rate of change of magnetic flux. Note that the output voltage
equals the induced EMF (V =EMF), provided coil resistanc e is small. The cross-sectional area of the coils is th e same on either side,
as is the magnetic field strength, so /Δt is the same on eith er side. The input primary voltage V is also related to c hanging flux by:
Taking the ratio of these last two equations yields a usefu l relationship:
This is known as the transformer equation, which simply states that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer
equals the ratio of the number of loops in their coi ls. The output voltage of a transformer can be less than, greater than or equal to the
input voltage, depending on the ratio of the number of loops in their coils. Some transformers even provid e a variable output by
allowing connection to be made at different points o n the secondary coil. A step-up transformer is one th at increases voltage, whereas a
step-down transformer decreases voltage.
Assuming, as we have, that resistance is negligible, the el ectrical power output of a transformer equals its in put. Equating the power
input and output,
Combining this results with the transformer equation, we fin d:
So if voltage increases, current decreases. Conversely, if vol tage decreases, current increases.
Key Points
It is a change in the magnetic field flux that results in an electromotive force (or voltage).
The magnetic flux (often denoted Φ or Φ) through a surface is the component of the magnetic field passing through t hat surface.
In the most general form, magnetic flux is defined as. It i s the integral (sum) of all of the magnetic field passing
through infinitesimal area elements dA.
The minus in the Faraday’s law means that the EMF creates a current I and magnetic field B that oppose the change in flux Δth is is
known as Lenz’ law.
Faraday’s law of induction is the fundamental operating pri nciple of transformers, inductors, and many types of elec trical motors,
generators, and solenoids.
Faraday’s law states that the EMF induced by a change in mag netic flux depends on the change in flux Δ, time Δt, and numb er of
turns of coils.
Faraday’s law of induction can be used to calculate the moti onal EMF when a change in magnetic flux is caused by a moving
element in a system.
That a moving magnetic field produces an electric field (an d conversely that a moving electric field produces a magnet ic field) is
part of the reason electric and magnetic forces are now c onsidered as different manifestations of the same force.
Any change in magnetic flux induces an electromotive force (EMF) opposing that change—a process known as induction. Moti on
is one of the major causes of induction.s p
s
s
s s
p
B

22.1.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Input EMF that powers a motor can be opposed by the motor’s sel f-generated EMF, called the back EMF of the motor.
If motional EMF can cause a current loop in the conductor, the current is called an eddy current.
Eddy currents can produce significant drag, called magn etic damping, on the motion involved.
Faraday’s law of induction is a basic law of electromagnetis m that predicts how a magnetic field will interact with an e lectric
circuit to produce an electromotive force.
An alternative, differential form of Faraday’s law of inducti on is express in the equation.
Faraday’s law of induction is one of the four equations in Max well’s equations, governing all electromagnetic phenomena.
An electric generator rotates a coil in a magnetic field, ind ucing an EMF given as a function of time by.
Generators supply almost all of the power for the electric po wer grids which provide most of the world’s electric power.
A motor becomes a generator when its shaft rotates.
Most electric motors use the interaction of magnetic field s and current -carrying conductors to generate force.
Current in a conductor consists of moving charges. Therefore, a current-carrying coil in a magnetic field will also feel the Lorentz
force.
In a motor, a current-carrying coil in a magnetic field e xperiences a force on both sides of the coil, which creates a twisting force
(called a torque) that makes it turn.
Mutual inductance is the effect of two devices in inducing e mfs in each other. A change in current ΔI /Δt in one induces a n emf
emf2 in the seccond: EMF = −M ΔI /Δt, where M is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices.
Self-inductance is the effect of the device inducing emf in itself.
A device that exhibits significant self-inductance is called an inductor, and the EMF induced in it by a change in current through it
is.
Motional and induced EMF are the same phenomenon, just observe d in different reference frames. Equivalence of the two
phenomena is what triggered Einstein to work on special rela tivity.
The EMF produced due to the relative motion of the loop and ma gnet is given as (Eq. 1), where L is the length of
the object moving at speed v relative to the magnet.
The EMF can be calculated from two different points of view: 1) in terms of the magnetic force on moving electrons in a mag netic
field, and 2) in terms of the rate of change in magnetic flux. Both yield the same result.
Motional EMF produced by a moving conductor in a uniform f ield is given as follows.
To keep the rod moving at a constant speed v, we have to apply an external force F constantly on the rod along its motion.
Lenz’ law guarantees that the motion of the rod is opposed, and therefore the law of energy conservation is not violat ed.
Energy is needed to generate a magnetic field both to work a gainst the electric field that a changing magnetic fiel d creates and to
change the magnetization of any material within the magnet ic field.
For linear, non-dispersive, materials (such that where μ, called the permeability, is frequency-independent), the en ergy
density is:
The energy stored by an inductor is.
Transformers are often used at several points in the power dis tribution systems and also in many household power adapt ers.
Assuming, as we have, that resistance is negligible, the electric al power output of a transformer equals its input. This leads us to
another useful eqaution:. If voltage increases, current decreases. Conversely, if voltage decreases, current increa ses.
Key Terms
vector area: A vector whose magnitude is the area under consideration, and whose direction is perpendicular to the surface area.
galvanometer: An analog measuring device, denoted by G, that measures curre nt flow using a needle deflection caused by a
magnetic field force acting upon a current-carrying wi re.
electromotive force: (EMF)—The voltage generated by a battery or by the magn etic force according to Faraday’s Law. It is
measured in units of volts, not newtons, and thus, is not actua lly a force.
solenoid: A coil of wire that acts as a magnet when an electric cur rent flows through it.
flux: The rate of transfer of energy (or another physical quan tity) through a given surface, specifically electric flux o r magnetic
flux.
magnetic flux: A measure of the strength of a magnetic field in a given a rea.
induction: The generation of an electric current by a varying magneti c field.1
2 1
ext

22.1.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Faraday’s law of induction: A basic law of electromagnetism that predicts how a magn etic field will interact with an electric
circuit to produce an electromotive force (EMF).
Maxwell’s equations: A set of equations describing how electric and magnetic fie lds are generated and altered by each other and
by charges and currents.
Stokes’ theorem: a statement about the integration of differential for ms on manifolds, which both simplifies and generalizes
several theorems from vector calculus.
turbine: Any of various rotary machines that use the kinetic energ y of a continuous stream of fluid (a liquid or a gas) to turn a
shaft.
Lorentz force: The force exerted on a charged particle in an electromag netic field.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit newton -meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
transformer: A static device that transfers electric energy from on e circuit to another by magnetic coupling. Their main us e is to
transfer energy between different voltage levels, which al lows choosing most appropriate voltage for power generati on,
transmission and distribution separately.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) reco nciles the principle of relativity with the observation tha t the
speed of light is constant in all frames of reference.
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric cu rrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
frame of reference: A coordinate system or set of axes within which to measur e the position, orientation, and other properties of
objects in it.
motional EMF: An EMF (electromotive force) induced by motion relativ e to a magnetic field.
permeability: A quantitative measure of the degree of magnetization of a material in the presence of an applied magnetic field
(measured in newtons per ampere squared in SI units).
inductor: A passive device that introduces inductance into an e lectrical circuit.
ferromagnet: Materials that show a permanent magnetic property.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
vector area. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/vector%20area. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/galvanometer. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
solenoid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/solenoid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
flux. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/flux. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
induction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/induction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic flux. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_flux. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Back Emf. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42411/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/faraday-s-law-of-induction-3. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Faraday's Law. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12869/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Maxwell's equations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell's%20equations. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector area. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/vector%20area. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Stokes' theorem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stokes'%20theorem. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
turbine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/turbine. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Inductance. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
transformer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transformer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/faraday-s-law-of-induction-3. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/ 1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/?collection=col11406/ latest. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654OpenStax College, The Hall Effect. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42377/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frame of reference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frame_of_reference. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/ 1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51154f34e4b0c14bf464da40/1.j pg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/?collection=col11406/ latest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/faraday-s-law-of-induction-3. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/motional-emf. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/ 1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51154f34e4b0c14bf464da40/1.j pg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional EMF. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magnetic field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_field%23Energy_stored_in_magnetic_ fields. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Inductance. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
inductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inductor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ferromagnet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/ferromagnet. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
permeability. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/permeability. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.1.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15654Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/ 1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51154f34e4b0c14bf464da40/1.j pg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional EMF. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Solenoid. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Transformers. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42414/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/faraday-s-law-of-induction-3. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic flux. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic_flux. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnetic flux. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_flux. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42390/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Faradayu2019s Law of Induction: Lenzu2019s La w. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42392/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional Emf. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42404/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Faraday's law of induction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday's_law_of_induction.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Electric generator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_generator. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Electric Generators. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42408/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electrodynamics: Generat ors and Motors. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/ 1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51154f34e4b0c14bf464da40/1.j pg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motional EMF. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42400/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Solenoid. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Transformers. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42414/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Transformers. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42414/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by L ibreTexts.

22.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565622.2: AC Circuits
Describe properties of an inductor
Inductance
OVERVIEW
Induction is the process in which an emf is induced by changing magnetic flux. Specifically in the case of e lectronics, inductance is
the property of a conductor by which a change in cur rent in the conductor creates a voltage in both the conductor itself (selfinductance) and any nearby conductors (mutual induct ance). This effect derives from two fundamental observa tions of physics:
First, that a steady current creates a steady magneti c field and second, that a time-varying magnetic fiel d induces a voltage in a
nearby conductor (Faraday’s law of induction). From Len z’s law, a changing electric current through a circ uit that has inductance
induces a proportional voltage which opposes the cha nge in current (if this wasn’t true one can easily see how energy could not be
conserved, with a changing current reinforcing the chang e in a positive feedback loop).
MUTUAL INDUCTANCE
Mutual inductance is the effect of Faraday’s law of ind uction for one device upon another, such as the prima ry coil in transmitting
energy to the secondary in a transformer. See, where simp le coils induce emfs in one another.
Mutual Inductance in Coils: These coils can induce emfs in one another like an ineffi cient transformer. Their mutual inductance
M indicates the effectiveness of the coupling between them. Here a change in current in coil 1 is seen to induce an em f in coil 2.
(Note that “E2 induced” represents the induced emf in coil 2.)
In the many cases where the geometry of the devices is f ixed, flux is changed by varying current. We therefore concentrate on the
rate of change of current, Δ I/Δt, as the cause of induction. A change in the current I in one device, coil 1 in the figure, induces an
emf in the other. We express this in equation form as
where M is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices. The minus sign is an expression of Lenz ’s law. The larger
the mutual inductance M, the more effective the coupling. Units for M are (V ⋅s)/A=Ωs, which is named a henry (H), after Joseph
Henry (discovered of self-inductance). That is, 1 H=1Ωs.
Nature is symmetric here. If we change the current I in coil 2, we induce an emf in coil 1, which is given by
where M is the same as for the reverse process. Transformers run backward with the same effectiveness, or mutual inductance M.learning objectives
2 1

22.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656A large mutual inductance M may or may not be desirable. We want a transformer t o have a large mutual inductance. But an
appliance, such as an electric clothes dryer, can in duce a dangerous emf on its case if the mutual induct ance between its coils and
the case is large. One way to reduce mutual inductance M is to counterwind coils to cancel the magnetic field produ ced. (See).
Counterwinding: The heating coils of an electric clothes dryer can be co unter-wound so that their magnetic fields cancel one
another, greatly reducing the mutual inductance with the case of the dryer.
SELF-INDUCTANCE
Self-inductance, the effect of Faraday’s law of inducti on of a device on itself, also exists. When, for example, current through a coil
is increased, the magnetic field and flux also increa se, inducing a counter emf, as required by Lenz’s law. Conversely, if the current
is decreased, an emf is induced that opposes the decre ase. Most devices have a fixed geometry, and so the cha nge in flux is due
entirely to the change in current ΔI through the device. The induced emf is related to t he physical geometry of the device and the
rate of change of current. It is given by
where L is the self-inductance of the device. A device that exhibits significant self-inductance is called an i nductor, and given the
symbol in.
Inductor Symbol
The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law, indi cating that emf opposes the change in current. Units of self-inductance are
henries (H) just as for mutual inductance. The larger t he self-inductance L of a device, the greater its opposition to any change in
current through it. For example, a large coil with many turns and an iron core has a large L and will not allow current to change
quickly. To avoid this effect, a small L must be achieved, s uch as by counterwinding coils as in.
SOLENOIDS
It is possible to calculate L for an inductor given its geometry (size and shape) and knowing the magnetic field that it produces.
This is difficult in most cases, because of the complexi ty of the field created. The inductance L is usually a given quantity. One
exception is the solenoid, because it has a very unif orm field inside, a nearly zero field outside, and a si mple shape. The selfinductance of a solenoid of cross-sectional area A and l ength ℓ is

22.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656It is instructive to derive this equation, but this is left as an exercise to the reader. (Hint: start by noting that the induced emf is
given by Faraday’s law of induction as emf=−N(Δ/Δt) an d, by the definition of self-inductance is given as as emf=−L(ΔI//Δt) and
equate these two expressions). Note that the inductan ce depends only on the physical characteristics of th e solenoid, consistent with
its definition.
RL Circuits
An RL circuit consists of an inductor and a resistor, in serie s or parallel with each other, with current driven by a vol tage source.
Describe current-voltage relationship in the RL circu it and calculate energy that can be stored in an inductor
RL Circuits
A resistor-inductor circuit (RL circuit) consists of a resistor and an inductor (either in series or in pa rallel) driven by a voltage
source.
Review
Recall that induction is the process in which an emf is induced by changing magnetic flux. Mutual inductanc e is the effect of
Faraday’s law of induction for one device upon another, while self-inductance is the the effect of Faraday’s law of induction of a
device on itself. An inductor is a device or circuit compon ent that exhibits self-inductance.
Energy of an Inductor
We know from Lenz’s law that inductors oppose changes in current. We can think of this situation in terms of energy. Energy is
stored in a magnetic field. It takes time to build u p energy, and it also takes time to deplete energy; hence, there is an opposition to
rapid change. In an inductor, the magnetic field is directly proportional to current and to the inductan ce of the device. It can be
shown that the energy stored in an inductor E is given by:
Inductors in Circuits
We know that the current through an inductor L canno t be turned on or off instantaneously. The change in current changes the
magnetic flux, inducing an emf opposing the change (Lenz’s law). How long does the opposition last? Current will flow and can be
turned off, but how long does it take? The following figure shows a switching circuit that can be used to e xamine current through
an inductor as a function of time.
Current in an RL Circuit: (a) An RL circuit with a switch to turn current on and off. Wh en in position 1, the battery, resistor, and
inductor are in series and a current is established. In posi tion 2, the battery is removed and the current eventuall y stops because of
energy loss in the resistor. (b) A graph of current growt h versus time when the switch is moved to position 1. (c) A graph of current
decay when the switch is moved to position 2.
When the switch is first moved to position 1 (at t=0), the current is zero and it eventually rises to I = V/R, where R is the total
resistance of the circuitand V is the battery ‘s vol tage. The opposition of the inductor L is greatest at the beginning, because thelearning objectives
ind

22.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656change in current is greatest at that time. The oppo sition it poses is in the form of an induced emf, whic h decreases to zero as the
current approaches its final value. This is the hallm ark of an exponential behavior, and it can be shown (with ca lculus) that
is the current in an RL circuit when switched on. (Note the similarity to the exponential behavior of the voltage on a charging
capacitor.) The initial current is zero and approaches I =V/R with a characteristic time constant for an RL circuit, given by:
where ττ has units of seconds, since 1H=1Ω ⋅s1H=1Ω ⋅s. In the first period of time ττ, the current rises from zero to 0.632I, since
I=I (1−e)=I (1−0.368)=0.632I. The current will be 0.63 2 of the remainder in the next time. A well-known prop erty of the
exponential function is that the final value is neve r exactly reached, but 0.632 of the remainder to that value is achieved in every
characteristic time ττ. In just a few multiples of the time ττ, the final value is very nearly achieved (see part (b) of above figure).
The characteristic time ττ depends on only two factors, the inductance L and the resistance R. The greater the inductance L, the
greater it is, which makes sense since a large inducta nce is very effective in opposing change. The small er the resistance R, the
greater ττ is. Again this makes sense, since a small resi stance means a large final current and a greater cha nge to get there. In both
cases (large Land small R) more energy is stored in the inductor and more time is r equired to get it in and out.
When the switch in (a) is moved to position 2 and cuts the battery out of the circuit, the current drops b ecause of energy dissipation
by the resistor. However, this is also not instantaneous, since the inductor opposes the decrease in current by inducing an emf in the
same direction as the battery that drove the curren t. Furthermore, there is a certain amount of energy, (1/2)LI, stored in the
inductor, and it is dissipated at a finite rate. As the current approaches zero, the rate of decrease slows, since the energy dissipation
rate is I R. Once again the behavior is exponential, and I is found to be
In (c), in the first period of time τ=L/Rτ=L/R after the switch is closed, the current falls to 0.368 of it s initial value, since
I=I e =0.368I. In each successive time ττ, the current falls to 0.368 of the preceding value, and in a few m ultiples of ττ, the
current becomes very close to zero.
RLC Series Circuit: At Large and Small Frequencies; Phasor Diagram
Response of an RLC circuit depends on the driving frequency —at large enough frequencies, inductive (capacitive) te rm dominates.
Distinguish behavior of RLC series circuits as large and small frequencies
In previous Atoms we learned how an RLC series circuit, as shown in, responds to an AC voltage source. By comb ining Ohm’s law
(I =V /Z; I and V are rms current and voltage) and the expr ession for impedance Z, from:
Series RLC Circuit: A series RLC circuit: a resistor, inductor and capacito r (from left).0
0−10 0
0−10
learning objectives
rms rms rms rms

22.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656we arrived at:.
From the equation, we studied resonance conditions for the circuit. We also learned the phase relationships among the voltages
across resistor, capacitor and inductor: when a sinusoi dal voltage is applied, the current lags the voltage by a 90º phase in a circuit
with an inductor, while the current leads the voltage by 90 in a circuit with a capacitor. Now, we will examin e the system’s
response at limits of large and small frequencies.
At Large Frequencies
At large enough frequencies (), X is much greater th an X. If the frequency is high enough that X is muc h larger than
R as well, the impedance Z is dominated by the inducti ve term. When, the circuit is almost equivalent to an AC circuit with
just an inductor. Therefore, the rms current will be V /X, and the current lags the voltage by almost 90. This response makes
sense because, at high frequencies, Lenz’s law suggests th at the impedance due to the inductor will be large.
At Small Frequencies
The impedance Z at small frequencies () is dominated b y the capacitive term, assuming that the frequency i s high
enough so that X is much larger than R. When, the circuit is almost equivalent to an AC circuit with just a capacitor.
Therefore, the rms current will be given as V /X and the cur rent leads the voltage by almost 90.
Resistors in AC Circuits
In a circuit with a resistor and an AC power source, Ohm’s la w still applies (V = IR).
Apply Ohm’s law to determine current and voltage in an AC ci rcuit
Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric charge in only one direction. It is the steady state of a cons tant-voltage circuit. Most well
known applications, however, use a time-varying voltage source. Alternating current (AC) is the flow of electric charge that
periodically reverses direction. If the source varies periodically, particularly sinusoidally, the circuit is known as an alternatingcurrent circuit. Examples include the commercial an d residential power that serves so many of our needs. shows graphs of voltage
and current versus time for typical DC and AC power. The AC voltages and frequencies commonly used in homes and businesses
vary around the world.∘
L C L
rms L∘
C
rms C,∘
learning objectives

22.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656
Sinusoidal Voltage and Current: (a) DC voltage and current are constant in time, once the cu rrent is established. (b) A graph of
voltage and current versus time for 60-Hz AC power. The volta ge and current are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistance
circuit. The frequencies and peak voltages of AC sources di ffer greatly.
We have studied Ohm’s law:
where I is the current, V is the voltage, and R is the resistance of the circuit. Ohm’s law applies to AC circuits as well as to DC
circuits. Therefore, with an AC voltage given by:
where V is the peak voltage and νν is the frequency in hertz, th e current in the circuit is given as:
In this example, in which we have a resistor and the v oltage source in the circuit, the voltage and curren t are said to be in phase, as
seen in (b). Current in the resistor alternates back and fort h without any phase difference, just like the driving volt age.
Consider a perfect resistor that brightens and dims 12 0 times per second as the current repeatedly goes t hrough zero. (A 120-Hz
flicker is too rapid for your eyes to detect.) The fact that the light output fluctuates means that the power is fluctuating. Since the
power supplied is P = IV, if we use the above expressions for I and V, we see that the time dependence of power is:
To find the average power consumed by this circuit, we need to take the time average of the function. Since:
we see that:0

22.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656Capacitors in AC Circuits: Capacitive Reactance and Phasor Diagrams
The voltage across a capacitor lags the current. Due to the phase difference, it is useful to introduce phas ors to describe these
circuits.
Explain the benefits of using a phasor representation
In the previous Atom on “Resistors in AC Circuits”, we introduced an AC power source and studied how resistors behave in AC
circuits. There, we used the Ohm’s law (V=IR) to derive t he relationship between voltage and current in AC circ uits. In this and
following Atoms, we will generalize the Ohm’s law so that we can use it even when we have capacitors and inductors in the circuit.
To get there, we will first introduce a very general, pictor ial way of representing a sinusoidal wave, using phasor.
Capacitors in AC Circuits w ith Phasors | Doc Phy sic s Capacitors in AC Circuits w ith Phasors | Doc Phy sic s
Capacitors in AC Circuits with Phasors
Phasor
The key idea in the phasor representation is that a complex, time-varying signal may be represented as th e product of a complex
number (that is independent of time) and a complex signal (that is dependent on time). Phasors separate the dependencies on A
(amplitude), νν (frequency), and θ (phase) into th ree independent factors. This can be particularly u seful because the frequency
factor (which includes the time-dependence of the si nusoid) is often common to all the components of a linear combination oflearning objectives

22.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656sinusoids. In those situations, phasors allow this comm on feature to be factored out, leaving just the A an d θ features. For example,
we can represent simply as a complex constant,. Sin ce phasors are represented by a magnitude (or modulu s)
and an angle, it is pictorially represented by a rotating arrow (or a vector) in x-y plane.
Fig 3: A phasor can be seen as a vector rotating about the orig in in a complex plane. The cosine function is the projecti on of the
vector onto the real axis. Its amplitude is the modulus of the vector, and its argument is the total phase \omega t+\theta. The phase
constant \theta represents the angle that the vector for ms with the real axis at t = 0.
Capacitors in AC circuits
Earlier in a previous Atom, we studied how the voltage a nd the current varied with time. If the AC supply is co nnected to a resistor,
then the current and voltage will be proportional to each other. This means that the current and voltage will “peak” at the same
time. We say that the current and voltage are in phase.
When a capacitor is connected to an alternating volt age, the maximum voltage is proportional to the max imum current, but the
maximum voltage does not occur at the same time as t he maximum current. The current has its maximum (it p eaks) one quarter of
a cycle before the voltage peaks. Engineers say that the “current leads the voltage by 90 “. This is shown in.
Fig 2: The current peaks (has its maximum) one quarter of a wa ve before the voltage when a capacitor is connected to an
alternating voltage.
For a circuit with a capacitor, the instantaneous valu e of V/I is not constant. However, the value of V /I is us eful, and is called
the capacitive reactance (X) of the component. Beca use it is still a voltage divided by a current (lik e resistance), its unit is the
ohm. The value of X (C standing for capacitor) depen ds on its capacitance (C) and the frequency (f) of t he alternating current.
The capacitor is affecting the current, having the ability to stop it altogether when fully charged. Sinc e an AC voltage is applied,
there is an rms current, but it is limited by the cap acitor. This is considered to be an effective resista nce of the capacitor to AC, and
so the rms current I in the circuit containing only a capacitor C is given by another version of Ohm’s la w to be, where
V is the rms voltage. Note that X replaces R in the DC versi on of the Ohm’s law.∘
max max
C
C
rms
rms C

22.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656Phase representation
Since the voltage across a capacitor lags the current, the phasor representing the current and voltage woul d be give as in. In the
diagram, the arrows rotate in counter-clockwise directio n at a frequency νν. (Therefore, current leads voltage.) In the following
Atoms, we will see how these phasors can be used to analyze RC, RL, LC, and RLC circuits.
Fig 4: Phasor diagram for an AC circuit with a capacitor
Inductors in AC Circuits: Inductive Reactive and Phasor Diagrams
In an AC circuit with an inductor, the voltage across an in ductor “leads” the current because of the Lenz’ law.
Explain why the voltage across an inductor “leads” the cu rrent in an AC circuit with an inductor
Suppose an inductor is connected directly to an AC vol tage source, as shown in. It is reasonable to assume ne gligible resistance
because in practice we can make the resistance of an inductor so small that it has a negligible effect o n the circuit. The graph shows
voltage and current as functions of time. (b) starts with voltage at a maximum. Note that the current sta rts at zero, then rises to its
peak after the voltage driving it (as seen in the preceding se ction when DC voltage was switched on).
AC Voltage Source in Series with an Inductor: (a) An AC voltage source in series with an inductor having negligible resistance.
(b) Graph of current and voltage across the inductor as f unctions of time.
When the voltage becomes negative at point a, the cu rrent begins to decrease; it becomes zero at point b, where voltage is its most
negative. The current then becomes negative, again fo llowing the voltage. The voltage becomes positive at p oint c where it begins
to make the current less negative. At point d, the cu rrent goes through zero just as the voltage reaches i ts positive peak to start
another cycle. Hence, when a sinusoidal voltage is appl ied to an inductor, the voltage leads the current by one-fourth of a cycle, or
by a 90º phase angle.
Current lags behind voltage, since inductors oppose change in current. Changing current induces an emf. This is considered an
effective resistance of the inductor to AC. The rms current I through an inductor L is given by a versi on of Ohm’s law:
where V is the rms voltage across the inductor and wit h the frequency of the AC voltage source in hertz. X
is called the inductive reactance. Because the induc tor reacts to impede the current, X has units of ohms (1 H=1 Ωs, so that
frequency times inductance has units of (cycles/s)(Ωs)= Ω), consistent with its role as an effective resistance.learning objectives
rms
rms L
L

22.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656Phasor Representation
The voltage across an inductor “leads” the current b ecause of the Lenz’s law. Therefore, the phasor repr esenting the current and
voltage would be given as in. Again, the phasors are vec tors rotating in counter-clockwise direction at a fr equency (you can see
that the voltage leads the current). Subsequent Atoms will discuss how these phasors can be used to analyze RC, RL, LC, and RLC
circuits.
Phasor Diagram: Phasor diagram for an AC circuit with an inductor.
Phasors for Inductors in AC Circuits | Doc Phy sicsPhasors for Inductors in AC Circuits | Doc Phy sics
Phasors for Inductors in AC Circuits

22.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656Resonance in RLC Circuits
Resonance is the tendency of a system to oscillate wi th greater amplitude at some frequencies—in an RLC se ries circuit, it occurs
at \(\nu _ { 0 } = \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi \sqrt { \mathrm{L C} }\) }.
Compare resonance characteristics of higher- and lower- resistance circuits
Resonance is the tendency of a system to oscillate wi th greater amplitude at some frequencies than at othe rs. Frequencies at which
the response amplitude is a relative maximum are known as the system’s resonance frequencies. To study the re sonance in an RLC
circuit, as illustrated below, we can see how the circuit be haves as a function of the frequency of the driving volt age source.
RLC Series Circuit: An RLC series circuit with an AC voltage source. f is the freq uency of the source.
Combining Ohm ‘s law, I =V /Z, and the expression for impeda nce Z from
gives
where I and V are rms current and voltage, respective ly. The reactances vary with frequency νν, with X large at high
frequencies and X large at low frequencies given as:
At some intermediate frequency, the reactances will be equal and cancel, giving Z=R —this is a minimum v alue for impedance,
and a maximum value for I results. We can get an expr ession for ν0ν0 by taking X =X. Substituting the defini tions of X and
X yields:
is the resonant frequency of an RLC series circuit. This is also the natural frequency at which the cir cuit would oscillate if not
driven by the voltage source. At, the effects of the inductor and capacitor cancel, so that Z=R, and I is a maximum. Resonance
in AC circuits is analogous to mechanical resonance, where resonance is defined as a forced oscillation (in this case, forced by the
voltage source) at the natural frequency of the system.
The receiver in a radio is an RLC circuit that oscil lates best at its. A variable capacitor is often use d to adjust the resonance
frequency to receive a desired frequency and to rej ect others. is a graph of current as a function of frequency, illustrating a resonant
peak in I at. The two curves are for two different ci rcuits, which differ only in the amount of resistance i n them. The peaklearning objectives
rms rms
rms rms L
C
rms L C L
C
rms
rms

22.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656is lower and broader for the higher-resistance circu it. Thus higher-resistance circuits do not resonate as strongly, nor would they be
as selective in, for example, a radio receiver.
Current vs. Frequency: A graph of current versus frequency for two RLC series c ircuits differing only in the amount of resistance.
Both have a resonance at f0, but that for the higher resist ance is lower and broader. The driving AC voltage source h as a fixed
amplitude V0.
Power
Power delivered to an RLC series AC circuit is dissipate d by the resistance in the circuit, and is given as. Here,
is called the phase angle.
Calculate the power delivered to an RLC-series AC circuit gi ven the current and the voltage
If current varies with frequency in an RLC circuit, th en the power delivered to it also varies with frequenc y. However, the average
power is not simply current times voltage, as is the case in purely resistive circuits. As seen in previous Atoms, voltage and current
are out of phase in an RLC circuit. There is a phase angl e ϕ between the source voltage V and the current I, given as
, as diagramed in.
Phasor Diagram for an RLC Series Circuit: Phasor diagram for an RLC series circuit. \phi is the p hase angle, equal to the phase
difference between the voltage and current.
For example, at the resonant frequency () or in a pur ely resistive circuit, Z=R, so that cos ϕ=1. This implies that ϕ=0º
and that voltage and current are in phase, as expect ed for resistors. At other frequencies, average power i s less than at resonance,
because voltage and current are out of phase and I is l ower.learning objectives
rms

22.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656The fact that source voltage and current are out of phase affects the power delivered to the circuit. It can be shown that the average
power is
(an equation derived by taking a time average of po wer, P(t) = I(t)V(t), over a period. I(t) and V(t) are c urrent and voltage at time
t). Thus cos ϕ is called the power factor, which can range from 0 to 1. Power factors near 1 are desirable when designing an
efficient motor, for example. At the resonant frequency, c osϕ=1.
Power delivered to an RLC series AC circuit is dissipate d by the resistance alone. The inductor and capacitor have energy input and
output, but do not dissipate energy out of the circu it. Rather, they transfer energy back and forth to one another, with the resistor
dissipating the exact amount that the voltage source gives the circuit. This assumes no significant elec tromagnetic radiation from
the inductor and capacitor (such as radio waves).
The circuit is analogous to the wheel of a car driven over a corrugated road, as seen in. The regularly s paced bumps in the road are
analogous to the voltage source, driving the wheel u p and down. The shock absorber is analogous to the res istance damping and
limiting the amplitude of the oscillation. Energy wi thin the system goes back and forth between kinetic (analogous to maximum
current, and energy stored in an inductor) and poten tial energy stored in the car spring (analogous to no current, and energy stored
in the electric field of a capacitor). The amplitud e of the wheels’ motion is a maximum if the bumps in the road are hit at the
resonant frequency.
Forced Damped Motion of a Wheel on a Car Spring: The forced but damped motion of the wheel on the car sp ring is analogous
to an RLC series AC circuit. The shock absorber damps the moti on and dissipates energy, analogous to the resistance in an RL C
circuit. The mass and spring determine the resonant freq uency.
Key Points
In the case of electronics, inductance is the property of a conductor by which a change in current in the conduct or creates a
voltage in both the conductor itself, called self-inductan ce, and any nearby conductors, called mutual inductance.
From Lenz’s law, a changing electric current through a circu it that has inductance induces a proportional voltage which o pposes
the change in current.
Mutual inductance is illustrated by. A change in the curr ent I in one device, coil 1 in the figure, induces an emf in the other.
We express this in equation form as. M is the same for the re verse process.
Self-inductance is the effect of Faraday’s law of induction of a device on itself. The induced emf is related to the phy sical
geometry of the device and the rate of change of current given by.
A device that exhibits significant self-inductance i s called an inductor, and given the symbol in.
The energy stored in an inductor is. It takes time to bu ild up stored energy in a conductor and time to deplete it.
When a resistor and an inductor in series are connected to a voltage source, the time-dependent current is gi ven by
. The final current after a long time is.
The characteristic time constant is given by, where R is res istance and L is inductance. This represents the time nec essary
for the current in a circuit just closed to go from zero to.
When the voltage source is disconnected from the induct or, the current will decay according to. In the first time
interval τ the current falls by a factor of to.1 2

22.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656RLC circuits can be described by the (generalized) Ohm ‘s law. As for the phase, when a sinusoidal voltage is applied, the
current lags the voltage by a 90º phase in a circuit with an inductor, while the current leads the voltage by 90 ∘ in a circuit with a
capacitor.
At large enough frequencies (), the circuit is almost equiv alent to an AC circuit with just an inductor. Therefore, th e
rms current will be Vrms/XL, and the current lags the volta ge by almost 90 ∘.
At small enough frequencies (), the circuit is almost equiva lent to an AC circuit with just a capacitor. Therefore, the
rms current will be given as V /X and the current leads the voltage by almost 90.
With an AC voltage given by: the current in the circuit is given as: This expression comes from
Ohm ‘s law:.
Most common applications use a time-varying voltage sour ce instead of a DC source. Examples include the commercia l and
residential power that serves so many of our needs.
Power dissipated by the AC circuit with a resistor in the examp le is: Therefore, average AC power is:.
When a capacitor is connected to an alternating volt age, the maximum voltage is proportional to the maximum current, but the
maximum voltage does not occur at the same time as the max imum current.
If the AC supply is connected to a resistor, then the curr ent and voltage will be proportional to each other. This m eans that the
current and voltage will “peak” at the same time.
The rms current in the circuit containing only a capacito r C is given by another version of Ohm ‘s law to be, where
is the capacitive reactance.
With an inductor in an AC circuit, the voltage leads the curr ent by one-fourth of a cycle, or by a 90º phase angle.
The rms current I through an inductor L is given by a ver sion of Ohm ‘s law:. X is called the inductive reactance,
given as.
Phasors are vectors rotating in counter-clockwise direct ion. A phasor for an inductor shows that the voltage lead th e current by a
90º phase.
Resonance condition of an RLC series circuit can be obtaine d by equating X and X, so that the two opposing phasors c ancel
each other.
At resonance, the effects of the inductor and capacitor ca ncel, so that Z=R, and I is a maximum.
Higher- resistance circuits do not resonate as strongly c ompared to lower-resistance circuits, nor would they be as s elective in,
for example, a radio receiver.
Phase angle ϕ is the phase difference between the source voltage V and the current I. See the phasor diagram in.
At the resonant frequency or in a purely resistive circuit Z =R, so that cos ϕ=1. This implies that ϕ=0º and that voltage and
current are in phase.
Average power dissipated in an RLC circuit can be calcu lated by taking a time average of power, P(t) = I(t)V(t), ove r a period.
Key Terms
mutual inductance: The ratio of the voltage in a circuit to the change in current in a neighboring circuit.
self-inductance: The ratio of the voltage to the change in current in the same circuit.
inductor: A passive device that introduces inductance into an elec trical circuit.
characteristic time constant: Denoted by, in RL circuits it is given by where R is resist ance and L is inductance.
When a switch is closed, it is the time it takes for the current to decay by a factor of 1/e.
inductor: A device or circuit component that exhibits significan t self-inductance; a device which stores energy in a magn etic
field.
Lenz’s law: A law of electromagnetic induction that states that an electromotive force, induced in a conductor, is always in such
a direction that the current produced would oppose the cha nge that caused it; this law is a form of the law of conservat ion of
energy.
resonance: The increase in the amplitude of an oscillation of a sy stem under the influence of a periodic force whose frequency
is close to that of the system’s natural frequency.
rms: Root mean square: a statistical measure of the magnit ude of a varying quantity.
phasor: A representation of a complex number in terms of a compl ex exponential.
reactance: The opposition to the change in flow of current in an alternating current circuit, due to inductance and capa citance;
the imaginary part of the impedance.rms C,∘
rms L
L C
rms

22.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656impedance: A measure of the opposition to the flow of an alternat ing current in a circuit; the aggregation of its resista nce,
inductive and capacitive reactance. Represented by the symbol Z.
Ohm’s law: Ohm’s observation is that the direct current flowing in a n electrical circuit consisting only of resistances is dire ctly
proportional to the voltage applied.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Inductance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inductance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/self-inductance--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
mutual inductance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mutual_inductance. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Rl circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rl_circuit. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
inductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/characteristic-timeconstant. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Lenz's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lenz's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
resonance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resonance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

22.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ohm's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Ohm's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42427/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electronics: Capac itive and Inductive Circuits. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39523/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510acb88e4b0f11e4bcb056e/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electronics: Capac itive and Inductive Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39523/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656Capacitors in AC Circuits with Phasors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9xSEhPENqM. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42427/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
phasor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phasor. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lenz's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lenz's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510acb88e4b0f11e4bcb056e/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electronics: Capac itive and Inductive Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39523/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capacitors in AC Circuits with Phasors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9xSEhPENqM. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Phasors for Inductors in AC Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-veJf_JX3g. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510ad330e4b0c14bf464a066/ 2.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42427/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Resonance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
reactance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reactance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
impedance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/impedance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.2.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510acb88e4b0f11e4bcb056e/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electronics: Capac itive and Inductive Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39523/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capacitors in AC Circuits with Phasors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9xSEhPENqM. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Phasors for Inductors in AC Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-veJf_JX3g. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510ad330e4b0c14bf464a066/ 2.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42427/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
rms. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/rms. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42420/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42425/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
RLC circuit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit%23Laplace_domain. License: CC
BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42348/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Phasor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phasor. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510acb88e4b0f11e4bcb056e/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Electronics: Capac itive and Inductive Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39523/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capacitors in AC Circuits with Phasors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9xSEhPENqM. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Phasors for Inductors in AC Circuits. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-veJf_JX3g. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510ad330e4b0c14bf464a066/ 2.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42427/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

22.2.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15656OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, RLC Series AC Circuits. February 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42431/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510b06ffe4b0c14bf464a30e/ 4.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
22.2: AC Circuits is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

22.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565722.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
Discuss the use of inductance in modern devices
Inductors have many uses in modern electronics. In a sound system, sound can be transmitted from a microp hone to a speaker
(shown in). The microphone works by induction, as the vibrating membrane induces an emf in a coil. That “ signal” is then
transmitted to an amplifier and then to a speaker. The speaker is then driven by modulated electrical curre nts (produced by an
amplifier) that pass through and magnetize (by indu ctance) a speaker coil of copper wire, creating a magn etic field. Thus, the
electrical current variations that pass through the speaker are converted to varying magnetic forces, wh ich move the speaker
diaphragm, forcing the driver to produce air motion that is similar to the original signal from the amplifier.
image
A simple, modern speaker.: A speaker with magnet and coils that is used to produce so und.
Inductance in modern electronics is also used in compu ter memory. Magnetic storage uses different patterns of magnetization on a
magnetically coated surface to store information. Di fferently magnetized areas on tape (or disk) induce signals on “read-write”
heads, from which the information is later accessed.
Another application is the seismograph—an instrument fo r detecting and recording the intensity, direction an d duration of ground
movement. It contains a fixed coil and a magnet hun g on a spring (or vice versa). These “record” the cu rrent induced when the
Earth shakes.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) provides ad ditional safety (that circuit breakers cannot) by sto pping the current in a
shorted-out circuit. This is done by inductance. If a GFCI detects that there is a leakage of current, it produces an EMF and a
current in the opposite direction of the original current.
Antennae
An antenna is a device that converts electric power into radio waves, and vice versa.
Describe functions and uses of antennae
Maxwell’s equations predicted that all light waves have the same structure, regardless of wavelength and frequ ency. As a
consequence, visible light and radio waves should share common characteristics. Maxwell’s 1865 prediction passe d an important
test in 1888, when Heinrich Hertz published the results o f experiments in which he showed that radio waves coul d be manipulated
in the same ways as visible light waves. To aid in his exp eriment, Hertz built the first antenna.learning objectives
learning objectives

22.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15657
Car Antenna: A common car antenna that converts electric power in th e air into electromagnetic waves.
An antenna (or aerial) is an electrical device that converts electric power into radio waves, and vice versa. Usually, it is used with a
radio transmitter or radio receiver. In transmission, a radio transmitter supplies an oscillating radio fr equency electric current to the
antenna’s terminals, and the antenna radiates the ene rgy from the current as electromagnetic waves (radio wa ves). In reception, an
antenna intercepts some of the power of an electroma gnetic wave in order to produce a tiny voltage at it s terminals. This voltage is
applied to a receiver to be amplified.
Antennas are essential components of all types of equip ment that utilize radio. These include: radio broadc asting, broadcast
television, two-way radio, communications receivers, ra dar, cell phones, and satellite communications; as well as other devices
such as garage door openers, wireless microphones, blue tooth enabled devices, wireless computer networks, baby m onitors, and
RFID tags on merchandise.
Antennas may also include reflective or directive ele ments or surfaces not connected to the transmitter o r receiver, such as parasitic
elements, parabolic reflectors, or horns. These serve to direct the radio waves into a beam or other desi red radiation pattern.
Antennas can be designed to transmit or receive radio waves in all directions equally (omnidirectional an tennas), or transmit them
in a beam in a particular direction and receive from that o ne direction only (directional or high gain antennas).
Key Points
The microphone works by induction, as the vibrating membr ane induces an emf in a coil.
A speaker produces sound by induction as varying magne tic forces move a speaker diaphragm, producing air mot ion that
produces sound.
Computer memory is stored by inducing signals on read/write heads.
GFCIs induce a current to oppose sudden increases in current in a circuit, thus preventing possible electrocutio n.
The first antennas were built in 1888 by German physicist Heinrich Hertz.
Antennas are essential components of all equipment that u ses radio.
Antennas transmit or receive radio waves in all directions equ ally, or transmit them in a beam in a particular directio n.
Key Terms
amplifier: An appliance or circuit that increases the strength of a weak electrical signal without changing the other
characteristics of the signal.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs: f = n / t.
transmitter: An electronic device that generates and amplifies a carrier wave, modulates it with a meaningful signal derived
from speech, music, TV or other sources, and broadcasts the re sulting signal from an antenna.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS

22.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15657CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Primary memory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_memory%23Primary_storage. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GFCI. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/GFCI. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Seismograph. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Seismograph. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Loudspeaker. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Loudspeaker. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Microphone. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphone. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
amplifier. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplifier. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Fields. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at:
http://www.lightandmatter.com/html_books/7cp/ch06/ch06.html#Section6.2. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Antenna (radio). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Antenna_(radio). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transmitter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transmitter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Antenna (radio). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Antenna_(radio). License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

22.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1565822.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
Describe behavior of an inductor when the current is cha nged, and express energy stored in a magnetic field in a form of
equation
When a conductor carries a current, a magnetic fiel d surrounding the conductor is produced. The resulti ng magnetic flux is
proportional to the current. If the current changes, the change in magnetic flux is proportional to the time-rate of change in current
by a factor called inductance (L). Since nature abhor s rapid change, a voltage (electromotive force, EMF) produced in the
conductor opposes the change in current, which is als o proportional to the change in magnetic flux. Thus, inductors oppose change
in current by producing a voltage that,in turn, crea tes a current to oppose the change in magnetic flux; the voltage is proportional to
the change in current.
Energy Stored in Inductor
Due to energy conservation, the energy needed to driv e the original current must have an outlet. For an ind uctor, that outlet is the
magnetic field—the energy stored by an inductor is eq ual to the work needed to produce a current through the inductor. The
formula for this energy is given as:
(Eq. 1), where L is the inductance in units of Henry and I is the current in units of Ampere.
Energy Stored in Magnetic Field
Let’s consider Fig 1, an example of a solenoid (ℓ: len gth, N: number of turns, I: current, A: cross-section area) that works as an
inductor. From Eq. 1, the energy stored in the magnetic f ield created by the solenoid is:
Magnetic Field Created By A Solenoid: Magnetic field created by a solenoid (cross-sectional view) described using field lines.
Energy is “stored” in the magnetic field.
(We used the relation and B=μNI/LB=μNI/L.)
Therefore, the energy density of a magnetic field B is writ ten as
Maxwell’s Predictions and Hertz’ Confirmation
Maxwell’s prediction of the electromagnetic force was confi rmed by Hertz who generated and detected electromagnetic waves.
Explain how Maxwell’s prediction of the electromagnetic f orce was confirmed by Hertz
Maxwell’s Predictions and Hertz’ Confirmation
Combining the work of physicists including Oersted, Co ulomb, Gauss, and Faraday, and adding his own insights, James Clerk
Maxwell developed a complete and overarching theory sh owing electric and magnetic forces are not separate, but different formslearning objectives
learning objectives

22.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15658of the same thing: the electromagnetic force. In 1865, he did this in the form of four equatio ns that state the following:
1. Electric field lines originate on positive charges an d terminate on negative charges, and the electric field i s defined as the force
per unit charge on a test charge. The strength of the for ce is related to the electric constant ε, also known as the permitivity of
free space.
2. Magnetic field lines are continuous, having no beginning or end. No magnetic monopoles are known to exist.
3. A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive fo rce (emf) and, hence, an electric field. The direction o f the emf opposes
the change.
4. Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields.
Maxwell’s equations predict that regardless of wavelength and frequency, every light wave has the same structu re. This means
Maxwell’s equations predicted that radio and x-ray waves exist ed, even though they hadn’t actually been discovered ye t.
Proving Maxwell’s Equations
Simple and brilliant in their insight, Maxwell’s famou s equations would still be hard to prove. Since changi ng electric fields create
relatively weak magnetic fields, they could not be easil y detected at the time of Maxwell’s hypothesis.
It was not until 1888 that Maxwell’s prediction passed an important test when Heinrich Hertz generated and dete cted certain types
of electromagnetic waves in the laboratory. He performe d a series of experiments that not only confirmed the existence of
electromagnetic waves, but also verified that they trave l at the speed of light.
Hertz used an AC RLC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) ci rcuit that resonates at a known frequency and connecte d it to a loop of wire
as shown in. High voltages induced across the gap in th e loop produced sparks that were visible evidence of t he current in the
circuit and that helped generate electromagnetic wav es. Across the laboratory, Hertz had another loop attache d to another RLC
circuit, which could be tuned (as the dial on a radi o) to the same resonant frequency as the first and cou ld, thus, be made to receive
electromagnetic waves. This loop also had a gap acro ss which sparks were generated, giving solid evidence t hat electromagnetic
waves had been received.
Apparatus Used by Hertz: The apparatus used by Hertz in 1887 to generate and det ect electromagnetic waves. An RLC circuit
connected to the first loop caused sparks across a gap in the wire loop and generated electromagnetic waves. Sparks across a gap in
the second loop located across the laboratory gave evide nce that the waves had been received.0

22.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15658
EM Wave: The propogation of an electromagnetic wave as predict ed by Maxwell and confirmed by Hertz.
Key Points
The formula for the energy stored in a magnetic field is E = 1/2 LI.
The energy stored in a magnetic field is equal to the work needed to produce a current through the inductor.
Energy is stored in a magnetic field. Energy density can be written as.
Maxwell predicted that electric and magnetic forces are l inked.
Maxwell’s equations predict that regardless of wavelength an d frequency, every light wave has the same structure.
Hertz was able to confirm Maxwell’s equation experimental ly by generating and detecting certain types of electr omagnetic
waves in the laboratory.
Key Terms
inductor: A device or circuit component that exhibits significan t self-inductance; a device which stores energy in a magn etic
field.
electric field: A region of space around a charged particle, or between t wo voltages; it exerts a force on charged objects in its
vicinity.
magnetic field: A condition in the space around a magnet or electric c urrent in which there is a detectable magnetic force, and
where two magnetic poles are present.
electromotive force: (EMF)—The voltage generated by a battery or by the magne tic force according to Faraday’s Law. It is
measured in units of volts, not newtons, and thus, is not a ctually a force.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Fields. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at:
http://www.lightandmatter.com/html_books/7cp/ch06/ch06.html#Section6.2. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Inductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Inductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
inductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike2

22.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15658Solenoid. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid. License: CC BY: Attribution
magnetic field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnetic+field. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
electric field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electric+field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42437/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42437/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
electromotive force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromotive%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Solenoid. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://www.lightandmatter.com/html_books/7cp/ch06/figs/emspectrum.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Maxwellu2019s Equations: Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observed. March 1, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42437/latest/Figure%2025_01_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
23: Electromagnetic Waves
23: Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
23.3: Applications of EM WavesTopic hierarchy

23.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1566023.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Compare properties of AM and FM radio waves
Radio Waves
Radio waves are a type of electromagnetic (EM) radiat ion with wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum longer than infrared
light. They have have frequencies from 300 GHz to as l ow as 3 kHz, and corresponding wavelengths from 1 millim eter to 100
kilometers. Like all other electromagnetic waves, ra dio waves travel at the speed of light. Naturally occu rring radio waves are made
by lightning or by astronomical objects. Artificially generated radio waves are used for fixed and mobile r adio communication,
broadcasting, radar and other navigation systems, comm unications satellites, computer networks and innumerab le other
applications. Different frequencies of radio waves hav e different propagation characteristics in the Earth’ s atmosphere—long waves
may cover a part of the Earth very consistently, sh orter waves can reflect off the ionosphere and travel around the world, and much
shorter wavelengths bend or reflect very little and trav el on a line of sight.
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves encompass the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
Types of Radio Waves and Applications
Radio waves have many uses—the category is divided in to many subcategories, including microwaves and elect romagnetic waves
used for AM and FM radio, cellular telephones and TV.
The lowest commonly encountered radio frequencies are produced by high-voltage AC power transmission lines at frequencies of
50 or 60 Hz. These extremely long wavelength electrom agnetic waves (about 6000 km) are one means of energ y loss in longdistance power transmission.
Extremely low frequency (ELF) radio waves of about 1 kHz are used to communicate with submerged submarines. The ability of
radio waves to penetrate salt water is related to the ir wavelength (much like ultrasound penetrating tissue)—the longer the
wavelength, the farther they penetrate. Since salt water is a good conductor, radio waves are strongly absorb ed by it; very long
wavelengths are needed to reach a submarine under the sur face.
AM Radio Waves
AM radio waves are used to carry commercial radio sign als in the frequency range from 540 to 1600 kHz. The abbreviation AM
stands for amplitude modulation—the method for plac ing information on these waves. A carrier wave having the basic frequency of
the radio station (for instance, 1530 kHz) is varied or modulated in amplitude by an audio signal. The resu lting wave has a constant
frequency, but a varying amplitude.learning objectives

23.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660
AM Radio: Amplitude modulation for AM radio. (a) A carrier wave at the station’s basic frequency. (b) An audio signal at much
lower audible frequencies. (c) The amplitude of the carrie r is modulated by the audio signal without changing its b asic frequency.
FM Radio Waves
FM radio waves are also used for commercial radio transm ission, but in the frequency range of 88 to 108 MHz. FM stands for
frequency modulation, another method of carrying in formation. In this case, a carrier wave having the basi c frequency of the radio
station (perhaps 105.1 MHz) is modulated in frequency by the audio signal, producing a wave of constant ampl itude but varying
frequency.
FM Radio: Frequency modulation for FM radio. (a) A carrier wave at the station’s basic frequency. (b) An audio signal at muc h
lower audible frequencies. (c) The frequency of the carrie r is modulated by the audio signal without changing its amplitude.
Since audible frequencies range up to 20 kHz (or 0.02 0 MHz) at most, the frequency of the FM radio wave can va ry from the
carrier by as much as 0.020 MHz. For this reason, the car rier frequencies of two different radio stations canno t be closer than 0.020
MHz. An FM receiver is tuned to resonate at the carrier frequency and has circuitry that responds to variat ions in frequency,
reproducing the audio information.
FM radio is inherently less subject to noise from stra y radio sources than AM radio because amplitudes of wave s add noise. Thus,
an AM receiver would interpret noise added onto the a mplitude of its carrier wave as part of the informatio n. An FM receiver can
be fashioned to reject amplitudes other than that of the basic carrier wave and only look for variations i n frequency. Thus, since
noise produces a variation in amplitude, it is easier to reje ct noise from FM.
TV
Electromagnetic waves also broadcast television trans mission. However, as the waves must carry a great deal o f visual as well as
audio information, each channel requires a larger r ange of frequencies than simple radio transmission. TV channels utilize

23.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660frequencies in the range of 54 to 88 MHz and 174 to 22 2 MHz (the entire FM radio band lies between channels 88 MHz and 174
MHz). These TV channels are called VHF (very high frequen cy). Other channels called UHF (ultra high frequency) ut ilize an even
higher frequency range of 470 to 1000 MHz.
The TV video signal is AM, while the TV audio is FM. Note t hat these frequencies are those of free transmission with the user
utilizing an old-fashioned roof antenna. Satellite di shes and cable transmission of TV occurs at signific antly higher frequencies, and
is rapidly evolving with the use of the high-definition or HD format.
Microwaves
Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths ran ging from one meter to one millimeter (frequencies between 300 MHz
and 300 GHz).
Distinguish three ranges of the microwave portion of the el ectromagnetic spectrum
Microwaves
Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths rang ing from as long as one meter to as short as one mil limeter, or
equivalently with frequencies between 300 MHz (0.3 GHz) an d 300 GHz. The microwave region of the electromagnetic (EM)
spectrum is generally considered to overlap with the highest frequency (shortest wavelength) radio waves. As is the case for all EM
waves, microwaves travel in a vacuum at the speed of li ght. The prefix “micro-” in “microwave” is not meant t o suggest a
wavelength in the micrometer range. It indicates that microwaves are “small” because have shorter wavelengt hs as compared to
waves used in typical radio broadcasting. The boundarie s between far infrared light, terahertz radiation, micro waves, and ultrahigh-frequency radio waves are fairly arbitrary. They a re used variously between different fields of study (see fi gure).
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves overlap with the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
Subcategories of Microwaves
The microwave portion of the radio spectrum can be subd ivided into three ranges, listed below from high to low fre quencies.
Extremely high frequency (EHF) is the highest microwave freq uency band. EHF runs the range of frequencies from 30 to 30 0
gigahertz, above which electromagnetic radiation is consi dered as far infrared light, also referred to as teraher tz radiation. This
frequency range corresponds to a wavelength range of 10 to 1 millimeter, so it is sometimes called the millimeter ba nd. This
band is commonly used in radio astronomy and remote sensi ng.
Super high frequency (SHF) is the designation for electromagn etic wave frequencies in the range of 3 GHz to 30 GHz. This
band of frequencies is known also as the centimeter band beca use the wavelengths range from ten to one centimeters. This
frequency range is used for most radar transmitters, micr owave ovens, wireless LANs, cell phones, satellite communicati on,
microwave radio relay links, and numerous short range terre strial data links.
Ultra-high frequency (UHF) designates the microwave freque ncy range of electromagnetic waves between 300 MHz and 3
GHz, also known as the decimeter band because the wavelengt hs range from one to ten decimeters, or 10 centimeters to 1
meter. They are used for television broadcasting, cordless phones, walkie-talkies, satellite communication, and numer ous other
applications.Learning objectives

23.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Sources of Microwaves
Microwaves are the highest-frequency electromagnetic wa ves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic circuits and devices.
Microwaves can also be produced by atoms and molecules—e. g., they are a component of electromagnetic radiatio n generated by
thermal agitation. The thermal motion of atoms and molecules in any object at a temperature above absolute zero causes t hem to
emit and absorb radiation.
Since it is possible to carry more information per uni t time on high frequencies, microwaves are quite suita ble for communications
devices. Most satellite-transmitted information is carried o n microwaves, as are land-based long-distance transmissions. A clear line
of sight between transmitter and receiver is needed becau se of the short wavelengths involved.
The sun also emits microwave radiation, although most of it is blocked by Earth’s atmosphere. The Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation (CMBR) is microwave radiation t hat permeates all of space, and its discovery supports the Big Bang theory
of the origin of the universe.
Cosmic Microwave Background: Cosmic background radiation of the Big Bang mapped wit h increasing resolution.
Devices Employing Microwaves
High-power microwave sources use specialized vacuum tub es to generate microwaves. These devices operate on di fferent
principles from low-frequency vacuum tubes, using the ballistic motion of electrons in a vacuum under the influence of controlling
electric or magnetic fields, and include the magnetro n (used in microwave ovens), klystron, traveling-wave t ube (TWT), and
gyrotron.
Cavity Magnetron: Cutaway view inside a cavity magnetron as used in a microwav e oven.

23.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Microwaves are used by microwave ovens to heat food. Mic rowaves at a frequency of 2.45 GHz are produced by acce lerating
electrons. The microwaves then induce an alternating e lectric field in the oven. Water and some other con stituents of food have a
slightly negative charge at one end and a slightly positive charge at one end (called polar molecules). The range of microwave
frequencies is specially selected so that the polar molecules, in trying to maintain their orientation with the electric field, absorb
these energies and increase their temperatures—a process ca lled dielectric heating.
Radar, first developed in World War II, is a common application of microwaves. By detecting and timing mi crowave echoes, radar
systems can determine the distance to objects as diver se as clouds and aircraft. A Doppler shift in the rada r echo can determine the
speed of a car or the intensity of a rainstorm. Sophis ticated radar systems can map the Earth and other pl anets, with a resolution
limited by wavelength. The shorter the wavelength of any pr obe, the smaller the detail it is possible to observe.
A maser is a device similar to a laser, which amplifies light energy by stimulating photons. The maser, rather th an amplifying
visible light energy, amplifies the lower-frequency, lo nger-wavelength microwaves and radio frequency emissions.
Infrared Waves
Infrared (IR) light is EM radiation with wavelengths longe r than those of visible light from 0.74 µm to 1 mm (300 GHz to 1 THz).
Distinguish three ranges of the infrared portion of the spe ctrum, and describe processes of absorption and emission of
infrared light by molecules
Infrared Waves
Infrared (IR) light is electromagnetic radiation with longer wavelengths than those of visible light, ext ending from the nominal red
edge of the visible spectrum at 0.74 micrometers (µm) to 1 mm. This range of wavelengths corresponds to a fr equency range of
approximately 300 GHz to 400 THz, and includes most of the thermal radiation emitted by objects near room temperature. Infrared
light is emitted or absorbed by molecules when they change their rotational-vibrational movements.
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves encompass the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
Subcategories of IR Waves
The infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum c overs the range from roughly 300 GHz (1 mm) to 400 THz (750 nm). It can be
divided into three parts: It can be divided into three pa rts:Skills to Develop

23.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660
Atmospheric Transmittance: This is a plot of Earth’s atmospheric transmittance (o r opacity) to various wavelengths of
electromagnetic radiation. Most UV wavelengths are absorbed by oxygen and ozone in Earth’s atmosphere. Observations of
astronomical UV sources must be done from space.
Far-infrared, from 300 GHz (1 mm) to 30 THz (10 μm) – The lowe r part of this range may also be called microwaves. This
radiation is typically absorbed by so-called rotational m odes in gas-phase molecules, by molecular motions in li quids, and by
phonons in solids. The water in Earth’s atmosphere absor bs so strongly in this range that it renders the atmosphere i n effect
opaque. However, there are certain wavelength ranges (“windows”) within the opaque range that allow partial transmission, a nd
can be used for astronomy. The wavelength range from a pproximately 200 μm up to a few mm is often referred to as “ submillimeter” in astronomy, reserving far infrared for wavel engths below 200 μm.
Mid-infrared, from 30 to 120 THz (10 to 2.5 μm) – Hot objects (black-body radiators) can radiate strongly in this range, and
human skin at normal body temperature radiates strongly at the lower end of this region. This radiation is absorbed b y
molecular vibrations, where the different atoms in a molecule vibrate around their equilibrium positions. This rang e is
sometimes called the fingerprint region, since the mid -infrared absorption spectrum of a compound is very specif ic for that
compound.
Near-infrared, from 120 to 400 THz (2,500 to 750 nm) – Physi cal processes that are relevant for this range are simila r to those
for visible light. The highest frequences in this region can be detected directly by some types of photographic film, and by many
types of solid state image sensors for infrared photography and videography.
Note that in some fields the boundaries of these cate gories differ slightly; for example, in astronomy “ne ar-infrared” is considered
to extend to 5 μm rather than 2.5 μm.
Heat and Thermal Radiation
Infrared radiation is popularly known as “heat radiat ion,” but light and electromagnetic waves of any freq uency will heat surfaces
that absorb them. Infrared light from the Sun only ac counts for 49% of the heating of the Earth, with the rest being caused by
visible light that is absorbed then re-radiated at longer wavelengths. Visible light or ultraviolet-emitt ing lasers can char paper and
incandescently hot objects emit visible radiation. Objects at room temperature will emit radiation mostly concentrated in the 8 to 25
µm band, but this is not distinct from the emission of visible light by incandescent objects and ultraviole t by even hotter objects
(see sections on black body radiation and Wien’s displa cement law).
Heat is energy in transient form that flows due to tem perature difference. Unlike heat transmitted by therma l conduction or thermal
convection, radiation can propagate through a vacuum.
The concept of emissivity is important in understandi ng the infrared emissions of objects. This is a prope rty of a surface which
describes how its thermal emissions deviate from the ideal of a black body. To further explain, two objects at the same physical
temperature will not “appear” the same temperature in an infrared image if they have differing emissivities.
Sources of IR Waves
As stated above, while infrared radiation is commonly re ferred to as heat radiation, only objects emitting with a certain range of
temperatures and emissivities will produce most of the ir electromagnetic emission in the infrared part of the spectrum. However,
this is the case for most objects and environments huma ns encounter in our daily lives. Humans, their surroun dings, and the Earth
itself emit most of their thermal radiation at wavelen gths near 10 microns, the boundary between mid and fa r infrared according to

23.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660the delineation above. The range of wavelengths most relevant to thermally emitting objects on earth is often called the thermal
infrared. Many astronomical objects emit detectable amount s of IR radiation at non-thermal wavelengths.
Infrared radiation can be used to remotely determine the temperature of objects (if the emissivity is kn own). This is termed
thermography, mainly used in military and industrial applications but the technology is reaching the pub lic market in the form of
infrared cameras on cars due to the massively reduced produ ction costs.
Thermography: A thermographic image of a dog
Applications of IR waves extend to heating, communicati on, meteorology, spectroscopy, astronomy, biological and medical
science, and even the analysis of works of art.
Visible Light
Visible light is the portion of the electromagnetic spec trum that is visible to the human eye, ranging from roug hly 390 to 750 nm.
Distinguish six ranges of the visible spectrum
Visible Light
Visible light, as called the visible spectrum, is th e portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is visi ble to (can be detected by) the
human eye. Electromagnetic radiation in this range of wavelengths is often simply referred to as “light ”. A typical human eye will
respond to wavelengths from about 390 to 750 nm (0.39 to 0.75 µm). In terms of frequency, this corresponds to a band in the
vicinity of 400–790 THz. A light-adapted eye generall y has its maximum sensitivity at around 555 nm (540 THz), in the green
region of the optical spectrum. The spectrum does no t, however, contain all the colors that the human ey es and brain can
distinguish. Unsaturated colors such as pink, or purpl e variations such as magenta, are absent, for example, because they can be
made only by a mix of multiple wavelengths.
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves encompass the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
Visible light is produced by vibrations and rotatio ns of atoms and molecules, as well as by electronic tr ansitions within atoms and
molecules. The receivers or detectors of light larg ely utilize electronic transitions. We say the atoms a nd molecules are excited
when they absorb and relax when they emit through electr onic transitions.Skills to Develop

23.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660
Visible Spectrum: A small part of the electromagnetic spectrum that inc ludes its visible components. The divisions between
infrared, visible, and ultraviolet are not perfectly dist inct, nor are those between the seven rainbow colors.
The figure above shows this part of the spectrum, toge ther with the colors associated with particular pure wa velengths. Red light
has the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths, whil e violet has the highest frequencies and shortest wave lengths. Blackbody
radiation from the Sun peaks in the visible part of the spectrum but is more intense in the red than in the violet, making the Sun
yellowish in appearance.
Colors that can be produced by visible light of a na rrow band of wavelengths (monochromaticlight) are cal led pure spectral colors.
Quantitatively, the regions of the visible spectrum encom passing each spectral color can be delineated roughly as:
red – 620 to 750 nm (400-484 THz)
Note that each color can come in many shades, since t he spectrum is continuous. The human eye is insensiti ve to electromagnetic
radiation outside this range. By definition any ima ges presented with data recorded from wavelengths othe r than those in the visible
part of the spectrum (such as IR images of humans or anim als or astronomical X-ray images) are necessarily in false color.
Visible Light and Earth’s Atmosphere
Visible wavelengths pass through the “optical window”, the region of the electromagnetic spectrum which all ows wavelengths to
pass largely unattenuated through the Earth’s atmosp here (see opacity plot in. An example of this phenome non is that clean air
scatters blue light more than red wavelengths, and so the midd ay sky appears blue.
Atmospheric Transmittance: This is a plot of Earth’s atmospheric transmittance (o r opacity) to various wavelengths of
electromagnetic radiation. Most UV wavelengths are absorbed by oxygen and ozone in Earth’s atmosphere. Observations of
astronomical UV sources must be done from space.
The optical window is also called the visible window bec ause it overlaps the human visible response spectrum. This is not
coincidental as humanity’s ancestors evolved vision that could make use of the most plentiful wavelengths of light.The near
infrared (NIR) window lies just out of the human vision, as well as the Medium Wavelength IR (MWIR) window and the Long
Wavelength or Far Infrared (LWIR or FIR) window though other an imals may experience them.
A consequence of the existence of the optical window in Earth’s atmosphere is the relatively balmy temper ature conditions on
Earth’s surface. The Sun’s luminosity function peaks in the visible range and light in that range is able t o travel to the surface of the
planet unattenuated due to the optical window. This a llows visible light to heat the surface. The surface o f the planet then emits
energy primarily in infrared wavelengths, which has mu ch greater difficulty escaping (and thus causing the planet to cool) due to
the opacity of the atmosphere in the infrared. Earth’s su rface would be much cooler without this effect.

23.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Photosynthesis
Plants, like animals, have evolved to utilize and respon d to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum they are em bedded in. Plants (and
many bacteria) convert the light energy captured fr om the Sun into chemical energy that can be used to fuel the organism’s
activities. In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, photosy nthesis uses carbon dioxide and water, releasing oxyge n as a waste product.
Photosynthesis is vital for all aerobic life on Eart h (such as humans and animals). The portion of the EM spe ctrum used by
photosynthesic organisms is called the photosyntheticall y active region (PAR) and corresponds to solar radia tion between 400 and
700 nm, substantially overlapping with the range of h uman vision. This is again not coincidental; the ligh t in this range is the most
plentiful to organisms on the surface of Earth becau se the Sun emits about half of its luminosity in this wav elength range and it is
allowed to pass freely through the optical windows in Ear th’s atmosphere.
Ultraviolet Light
Ultraviolet (UV) light is electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength shorter than that of visible light in th e range 10 nm to 400
nm.
Identify wavelength range characteristic for ultraviole t light and its biological effects
Ultraviolet Light
Ultraviolet (UV) light is electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength shorter than that of visible light, but longer than X-rays, that
is, in the range 10 nm to 400 nm, corresponding to pho ton energies from 3 eV to 124 eV (1 eV = 1.6e J; EM rad iation with
frequencies higher than those of visible light are of ten expressed in terms of energy rather than frequen cy). It is so-named because
the spectrum consists of electromagnetic waves with fre quencies higher than those that humans identify as th e color violet. These
frequencies are invisible to humans, but visible to a numb er of insects and birds.
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves encompass the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
UV light is found in sunlight (where it constitutes abo ut 10% of the energy in vacuum) and is emitted by e lectric arcs and
specialized lights such as black lights. It can caus e chemical reactions, and causes many substances to glo w or fluoresce. Most
ultraviolet is classified as non-ionizing radiation. T he higher energies of the ultraviolet spectrum from wavelengths about 10 nm to
120 nm (‘extreme’ ultraviolet) are ionizing, but thi s type of ultraviolet in sunlight is blocked by norma l molecular oxygen (O) in
air, and does not reach the ground. However, the enti re spectrum of ultraviolet radiation has some of the biological features of
ionizing radiation, in doing far more damage to many molecules in biological systems than is accounted f or by simple heating
effects (an example is sunburn). These properties deri ve from the ultraviolet photon’s power to alter chem ical bonds in molecules,
even without having enough energy to ionize atoms.
Although ultraviolet radiation is invisible to the hu man eye, most people are aware of the effects of UV on the skin, called suntan
and sunburn. In addition to short wave UV blocked by o xygen, a great deal (>97%) of mid-range ultraviolet (almost all UV above
280 nm and most up to 315 nm) is blocked by the ozo ne layer, and like ionizing short wave UV, would cause muc h damage to
living organisms if it penetrated the atmosphere. Afte r atmospheric filtering, only about 3% of the total e nergy of sunlight at the
zenith is ultraviolet, and this fraction decreases at other sun angles. Much of it is near-ultraviolet tha t does not cause sunburn, but is
still capable of causing long term skin damage and c ancer. An even smaller fraction of ultraviolet that re aches the ground isSkills to Develop
-19

23.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660responsible for sunburn and also the formation of vi tamin D (peak production occurring between 295 and 29 7 nm) in all organisms
that make this vitamin (including humans). The UV spe ctrum thus has many effects, both beneficial and dam aging, to human
health.
Atmospheric Transmittance: This is a plot of Earth’s atmospheric opacity (opposi te of transmittance) to various wavelengths of
electromagnetic radiation, including visible light. Vi sible light passes relatively unimpeded through the atmosph ere in the “optical
window.” Most UV wavelengths are absorbed by oxygen and ozone in Earth’s atmosphere. Observations of astronomical UV
sources must be done from space.
Subcategories of UV Light
Solar UV radiation is commonly subdivided into three r egions: UV-A (320–400 nm), UV-B (290–320 nm), and UV-C (220–290
nm), ranked from long to shorter wavelengths (from sma ller to larger energies). Most UV-B and all UV-C is absor bed by ozone
(O) molecules in the upper atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV radiation reaching the Earth’s surface is UV- A.
There are other schemes for dividing UV into differe nt categories, another common one is: near-ultravio let (NUV – 300-400 nm),
middle ultraviolet (MUV – 200-300 nm), far ultraviolet (FUV – 200-122 nm), and extreme ultraviolet (EUV- 121-10 nm).
Harmful Effects
An overexposure to UVB radiation can cause sunburn and some forms of skin cancer. In humans, prolonged exposu re to solar UV
radiation may result in acute and chronic health eff ects on the skin, eye, and immune system. Moreover, UVC c an cause adverse
effects that can variously be mutagenic or carcinogeni c.
DNA UV Mutation: Ultraviolet photons harm the DNA molecules of living orga nisms in different ways. In one common damage
event, adjacent thymine bases bond with each other, inste ad of across the “ladder. ” This “thymine dimer” makes a b ulge, and the
distorted DNA molecule does not function properly.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer of th e World Health Organization has classified all categor ies and wavelengths of
ultraviolet radiation as a Group 1 carcinogen. This is the highest level designation for carcinogens and means that “there is enough
evidence to conclude that it can cause cancer in humans. ”3

23.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Beneficial Effects
UVB exposure induces the production of vitamin D in th e skin. The majority of positive health effects are related to this vitamin. It
has regulatory roles in calcium metabolism (which is vi tal for normal functioning of the nervous system, as well as for bone growth
and maintenance of bone density), immunity, cell prolife ration, insulin secretion, and blood pressure.
X-Rays
X-rays are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths in the range of 0.01 to 10 nanometers and energies in the range of 100 eV to
100 keV.
Distinguish two categories of X-rays and their biological e ffects
X-Rays
X-rays are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths in th e range of 0.01 to 10 nanometers, corresponding to fre quencies in the
range 30 petahertz to 30 exahertz (3×10 Hz to 3×10 Hz) and energies in the range 100 eV to 100 keV. They a re shorter in
wavelength than UV rays and longer than gamma rays. In many languages, X-radiation is called Röntgen radiat ion, after Wilhelm
Röntgen, who is usually credited as its discoverer, and who had named it X-radiation to signify an unknown type of radiat ion.
Electromagnetic Spectrum: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categ ories of electromagnetic waves. The range of
frequencies and wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing lin e between some categories is distinct, whereas other catego ries
overlap. Microwaves encompass the high frequency portion of the radio section of the EM spectrum.
Properties and Applications
X-ray photons carry enough energy to ionize atoms an d disrupt molecular bonds. This makes it a type of ion izing radiation and
thereby harmful to living tissue. A very high radia tion dose over a short amount of time causes radiati on sickness, while lower
doses can give an increased risk of radiation-induce d cancer. In medical imaging this increased cancer ri sk is generally greatly
outweighed by the benefits of the examination. The i onizing capability of X-rays can be utilized in cance r treatment to kill
malignant cells using radiation therapy. It is also used for material characterization using X-ray spectroscopy.
X-Ray Spectrum and Applications: X-rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum, with wave lengths shorter than those of
visible light. Different applications use different part s of the X-ray spectrum.Skills to Develop
16 19

23.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660X-rays with photon energies above 5 to 10 keV (below 0.2-0.1 nm wavelength), are called hard X-rays, while th ose with lower
energy are called soft X-rays. Due to their penetratin g ability, hard X-rays are widely used to image the in side of objects (e.g., in
medical radiography and airport security). As a result, the term X-ray is metonymically used to refer to a radiographic image
produced using this method, in addition to the metho d itself. Since the wavelength of hard X-rays are simil ar to the size of atoms,
they are also useful for determining crystal struct ures by X-ray crystallography. By contrast, soft X-ray s are easily absorbed in air
and the attenuation length of 600 eV (~2 nm) X-rays in wa ter is less than 1 micrometer.
In medical diagnostic applications, the low energy (s oft) X-rays are unwanted, since they are totally absorb ed by the body,
increasing the radiation dose without contributing t o the image. Hence, a thin metal sheet, often of alu minum, called an X-ray filter,
is usually placed over the window of the X-ray tube, a bsorbing the low energy part in the spectrum. This is ca lled hardening the
beam since it shifts the center of the spectrum towards highe r energy (or harder) X-rays.
Distinction Between X-Rays and Gamma Rays
The distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is somewha t arbitrary. The most frequent method of distinguishi ng between Xand gamma radiation is the basis of wavelength, with rad iation shorter than some arbitrary wavelength, such as 10 m, defined as
gamma rays. The electromagnetic radiation emitted by X-ray tubes generally has a longer wavelength than the radiation emitted by
radioactive nuclei. Historically, therefore, an alter native means of distinguishing between the two types of radiation has been by
their origin: X-rays are emitted by electrons outsid e the nucleus, while gamma rays are emitted by the n ucleus. There is overlap
between the wavelength bands of photons emitted by el ectrons outside the nucleus, and photons emitted by t he nucleus. Like all
electromagnetic radiation, the properties of X-rays (or gamma rays) depend only on their wavelength and polarizati on.
Gamma Rays
Gamma rays are very high frequency electromagnetic wa ves usually emitted from radioactive decay with frequ encies greater than
10 Hz.
Identify wavelength range characteristic for gamma rays, noting their biological effects and distinguishing them f rom
gamma rays
Gamma Rays
Gamma radiation, also known as gamma rays or hyphenated as gamma-rays and denoted as γ, is electromagnetic rad iation of high
frequency and therefore high energy. Gamma rays typi cally have frequencies above 10 exahertz (or >10 Hz), a nd therefore have
energies above 100 keV and wavelengths less than 10 picometers (less than the diameter of an atom). However, this is not a hard
and fast definition, but rather only a rule-of-thumb description for natural processes. Gamma rays from rad ioactive decay are
defined as gamma rays no matter what their energy, so t hat there is no lower limit to gamma energy derived from radioactive decay.
Gamma decay commonly produces energies of a few hundred ke V, and almost always less than 10 MeV.
Gamma Decay: Illustration of an emission of a gamma ray (γ) from an at omic nucleus
Gamma rays are ionizing radiation and are thus biolo gically hazardous. They are classically produced by the decay from high
energy states of atomic nuclei, a process called gamm a decay, but are also created by other processes. Paul Villard, a French
chemist and physicist, discovered gamma radiation in 1 900, while studying radiation emitted from radium dur ing its gamma decay.
Villard’s radiation was named “gamma rays” by Ernest Ruth erford in 1903.−11
Skills to Develop

23.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Gamma Ray Sources
Natural sources of gamma rays on Earth include gamma decay from naturally occurring radioisotopes such as potassium-40, and
also as a secondary radiation from various atmospheric interactions with cosmic ray particles. Some rare terre strial natural sources
that produce gamma rays that are not of a nuclear o rigin, are lightning strikes and terrestrial gamma-r ay flashes, which produce
high energy emissions from natural high-energy volt ages. Gamma rays are produced by a number of astrono mical processes in
which very high-energy electrons are produced. Such el ectrons produce secondary gamma rays by the mechanis ms of
bremsstrahlung, inverse Compton scattering and synchrotr on radiation. A large fraction of such astronomical gamma rays are
screened by Earth’s atmosphere and must be detected by spacecraft. Notable artificial sources of gamma ra ys include fission such
as occurs in nuclear reactors, and high energy physics ex periments, such as neutral pion decay and nuclear fusion.
Gamma Rays vs. X-Rays
Gamma rays have characteristics identical to X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in source. At hig her frequencies, γ
rays are more penetrating and more damaging to livi ng tissue. They have many of the same uses as X-rays, inc luding cancer
therapy. Gamma radiation from radioactive materials is used in nuclear medicine.
The distinction between X-rays and gamma rays has cha nged in recent decades. Originally, the electromagne tic radiation emitted
by X-ray tubes almost invariably had a longer waveleng th than the radiation (gamma rays) emitted by radio active nuclei. Older
literature distinguished between X- and gamma radiati on on the basis of wavelength, with radiation shorter than some arbitrary
wavelength, such as 10 m, defined as gamma rays. However, with artificial sources now able to duplicate any ele ctromagnetic
radiation that originates in the nucleus, as well as far higher energies, the wavelengths characteristic of radioactive gamma ray
sources vs. other types, now completely overlap. Thu s, gamma rays are now usually distinguished by their ori gin: X-rays are
emitted by definition by electrons outside the nucleus, wh ile gamma rays are emitted by the nucleus.
Exceptions to this convention occur in astronomy, whe re gamma decay is seen in the afterglow of certain su pernovas, but other
high energy processes known to involve other than ra dioactive decay are still classed as sources of gamma r adiation. A notable
example is extremely powerful bursts of high-energy radiation normally referred to as long duration gam ma-ray bursts, which
produce gamma rays by a mechanism not compatible wit h radioactive decay. These bursts of gamma rays, thoug ht to be due to the
collapse of stars called hypernovas, are the most powe rful events so far discovered in the cosmos. Astrophysic al processes are the
only sources for very high energy gamma rays (~100 MeV).
Gamma Ray Sky Map: This is an image of the entire sky in 100 MeV or greater gam ma rays as seen by the EGRET instrument
aboard the CGRO spacecraft. Bright spots within the galac tic plane are pulsars (spinning neutron stars with strong ma gnetic fields),
while those above and below the plane are thought to be q uasars (galaxies with supermassive black holes activel y accreting matter).
Health Effects
All ionizing radiation causes similar damage at a cell ular level, but because rays of alpha particles and beta particles are relatively
non-penetrating, external exposure to them causes on ly localized damage (e.g., radiation burns to the ski n). Gamma rays and
neutrons are more penetrating, causing diffuse damage throughout the body (e.g., radiation sickness, cell’s DNA damage, cell death
due to damaged DNA, increasing incidence of cancer) rat her than burns. External radiation exposure should als o be distinguished−11

23.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660from internal exposure, due to ingested or inhaled r adioactive substances, which, depending on the substance ’s chemical nature,
can produce both diffuse and localized internal dama ge. The most biological damaging forms of gamma radi ation occur at energies
between 3 and 10 MeV.
Key Points
The lowest frequency portion of the electromagnetic spect rum is designated as “radio,” generally considered to h ave
wavelengths within 1 millimeter to 100 kilometers or freque ncies within 300 GHz to 3 kHz.
There is a wide range of subcategories contained within radi o including AM and FM radio. Radio waves can be generated by
natural sources such as lightning or astronomical phenom ena; or by artificial sources such as broadcast radio towers, cell
phones, satellites and radar.
AM radio waves are used to carry commercial radio signals in the frequency range from 540 to 1600 kHz. The abbreviation AM
stands for amplitude modulation—the method for placing i nformation on these waves. AM waves have constant frequency, but
a varying amplitude.
FM radio waves are also used for commercial radio transmissi on in the frequency range of 88 to 108 MHz. FM stands for
frequency modulation, which produces a wave of constant amp litude but varying frequency.
The microwave region of the electromagnetic (EM) spectr um is generally considered to overlap with the highest fre quency
(shortest wavelength) radio waves.
The prefix “micro-” in “microwave” is not meant to sugg est a wavelength in the micrometer range. It indicates that microwaves
are “small” compared to waves used in typical radio broad casting in that they have shorter wavelengths.
The microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum can be subdivided into three ranges listed below from high to low
frequencies: extremely high frequency (30 to 300 GHz), supe r high frequency (3 to 30 GHz), and ultra-high frequency (300
MHz to 3 GHz).
Microwave sources include artificial devices such as circui ts, transmission towers, radar, masers, and microwave ovens, as well
as natural sources such as the Sun and the Cosmic Microwav e Background.
Microwaves can also be produced by atoms and molecules. They ar e, for example, a component of electromagnetic radiation
generated by thermal agitation. The thermal motion of at oms and molecules in any object at a temperature above absolute zero
causes them to emit and absorb radiation.
Infrared light includes most of the thermal radiation e mitted by objects near room temperature. Infrared ligh t is emitted or
absorbed by molecules when they change their rotational -vibrational movements.
The infrared portion of the spectrum can be divided into three regions in wavelength: far-infrared, from 300 GHz (1 mm) to 30
THz (10 μm); mid-infrared, from 30 to 120 THz (10 to 2.5 μm); and near-infrared, from 120 to 400 THz (2,500 to 750 nm).
Infrared radiation is popularly known as ” heat radiation,” but light and electromagnetic waves of any frequency will heat
surfaces that absorb them.
The concept of emissivity is important in understanding the infrared emissions of objects. This is a property of a s urface which
describes how its thermal emissions deviate from the idea l of a black body.
Infrared radiation can be used to remotely determine the temperature of objects (if the emissivity is known). This is t ermed
thermography, mainly used in military and industrial ap plications.
Visible light is produced by vibrations and rotations of atoms and molecules, as well as by electronic transitions wit hin atoms
and molecules. We say the atoms and molecules are excited wh en they absorb and relax when they emit through electronic
transitions.
This figure shows the visible part of the spectrum, togeth er with the colors associated with particular pure wavele ngths. Red
light has the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths, wh ile violet has the highest frequencies and shortest wave lengths.
Colors that can be produced by visible light of a narr ow band of wavelengths are called pure spectral colors. T hey can be
delineated roughly in wavelength as: violet (380-450 nm), blue (450-495 nm), green (495-570 nm), yellow (570-590 nm),
orange (590-620 nm), and red (620 to 750 nm).
Visible wavelengths pass through the optical window, the Earth’s atmosphere allows this region of the electrom agnetic
spectrum to pass through largely unattenuated (see opa city plot in.
The portion of the EM spectrum used by photosynthesic orga nisms is called the photosynthetically active region (PAR) and
corresponds to solar radiation between 400 and 700 nm, sub stantially overlapping with the range of human vision.

23.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660Ultraviolet light gets its name because the spectrum cons ists of electromagnetic waves with frequencies higher than those that
humans identify as the color violet.
Most UV is non- ionizing radiation, though UV with higher ene rgies (10-120 nm) is ionizing. All UV can have harmful ef fects
on biological matter (such as causing cancers) with th e highest energies causing the most damage.
The danger posed by lower energy UV radiation is derived from the ultraviolet photon ‘s power to alter chemical bon ds in
molecules, even without having enough energy to ionize atoms.
Solar UV radiation is commonly subdivided into three region s: UV-A (320–400 nm), UV-B (290–320 nm), and UV-C (220–290
nm), ranked from long to shorter wavelengths (from smaller to larger energies).
Most UV-B and all UV-C is absorbed by ozone (O) molecules in th e upper atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV
radiation reaching the Earth’s surface is UV-A.
X-rays have shorter wavelengths (higher energy) than UV wa ves and, generally, longer wavelengths (lower energy) tha n
gamma rays. Sometimes X-rays are called Röntgen radiation, a fter Wilhelm Röntgen, who is usually credited as their
discoverer.
Because X-rays have very high energy they are known as ionizi ng radiation and can harm living tissue. A very high radi ation
dose over a short amount of time causes radiation sickness, while lower doses can give an increased risk of radiatio n-induced
cancer.
Lower doses of X-ray radiation can be very effectively u sed in medical radiography and X-ray spectroscopy. In the c ase of
medical radiography, the benefits of using X-rays for exa mination far outweighs the risk.
X-rays are broken up into broad two categories: hard X-rays with energies above 5-10 keV (below 0.2-0.1 nm wavelength) and
soft X-rays with energies 100 eV – 5 keV (10 – 0.1 nm wavelength). Hard X-rays are more useful for radiography because the y
pass through tissue.
The distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is somewha t arbitrary and there is substantial overlap at the hi gh energy
boundary. However, in general they are distinguished by th eir source, with gamma rays originating from the nucleu s and X-rays
from the electrons in the atom.
Gamma rays are the highest energy EM radiation and typicall y have energies greater than 100 keV, frequencies greater t han
10 Hz, and wavelengths less than 10 picometers.
Gamma rays from radioactive decay are defined as gamma rays no matter what their energy, so that there is no lower lim it to
gamma energy derived from radioactive decay. Gamma decay commonly produces energies of a few hundred keV, and almost
always less than 10 MeV.
Gamma rays have characteristics identical to X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in source. Gamma rays are usually
distinguished by their origin: X-rays are emitted by def inition by electrons outside the nucleus, while gamma rays are emitted
by the nucleus.
Natural sources of gamma rays include gamma decay from natu rally occurring radioisotopes such as potassium-40, and als o as
a secondary radiation from atmospheric interactions with cosmic ray particles. Exotic astrophysical processes will also produce
gamma rays.
Gamma rays are ionizing radiation and are thus biologi cally hazardous. The most biological damaging forms of g amma
radiation occur at energies between 3 and 10 MeV.
Key Terms
AM radio waves: Waves used to carry commercial radio signals between 5 40 and 1600 kHz. Information is carried by
amplitude variation, while the frequency remains constant.
FM radio waves: Waves used to carry commercial radio signals between 8 8 and 108 MHz. Information is carried by frequency
modulation, while the signal amplitude remains constant.
radio waves: Designates a portion of the electromagnetic spectrum ha ving frequencies ranging from 300 GHz to 3 kHz, or
equivalently, wavelengths from 1 millimeter to 100 kilo meters.
terahertz radiation: Electromagnetic waves with frequencies around one terahe rtz.
thermal agitation: The thermal motion of atoms and molecules in any objec t at a temperature above absolute zero, causing
them to emit and absorb radiation.
radar: A method of detecting distant objects and determining their position, velocity, or other characteristics by ana lysis of sent
radio waves (usually microwaves) reflected from their surfac es.3

23.1.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660emissivity: The energy-emitting propensity of a surface, usually me asured at a specific wavelength.
thermography: Any of several techniques for the remote measurement of t he temperature variations of a body, especially by
creating images produced by infrared radiation.
thermal radiation: The electromagnetic radiation emitted from a body a s a consequence of its temperature; increasing the
temperature of the body increases the amount of radiation produced, and shifts it to shorter wavelengths (higher fr equencies) in
a manner explained only by quantum mechanics.
spectral color: a color that is evoked by a single wavelength of light in the v isible spectrum, or by a relatively narrow band of
wavelengths. Every wavelength of light is perceived as a s pectral color, in a continuous spectrum; the colors of sufficiently
close wavelengths are indistinguishable.
optical window: the optical portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that passes through the atmosphere all the way to the
ground. The window runs from around 300 nanometers (ultr aviolet-C) at the short end up into the range the eye can use,
roughly 400-700 nm and continues up through the visual infrared to around 1100 nm, which is thermal infrared.
visible light: the part of the electromagnetic spectrum, between infra red and ultraviolet, that is visible to the human eye
ozone layer: A region of the stratosphere, between 15 and 30 kilometr es in altitude, containing a relatively high concentration
of ozone; it absorbs most solar ultraviolet radiation.
ionizing radiation: high-energy radiation that is capable of causing ioniza tion in substances through which it passes; also
includes high-energy particles
non-ionizing radiation: Radiation that does not cause atmospheric ionization; electrically neutral radiation.
X-ray spectroscopy: The use of an X-ray spectrometer for chemical analysis.
x-ray crystallography: A technique in which the patterns formed by the diffrac tion of X-rays on passing through a crystalline
substance yield information on the lattice structure of th e crystal, and the molecular structure of the substance.
radiograph: An image, often a photographic negative, produced by r adiation other than normal light; especially an X-ray
photograph.
gamma ray: A very high frequency (and therefore very high energy) electromagnetic radiation emitted as a consequence of
radioactivity.
gamma decay: A nuclear reaction with the emission of a gamma ray.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Radio waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_waves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Radio spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_spectrum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radio frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_frequency. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/radio-waves. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/fm-radio-waves.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/am-radio-waves.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

23.1.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
terahertz radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/terahertz_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Extremely high frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Extremely_high_frequency.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ultra high frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultra_high_frequency. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Super high frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_high_frequency. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thermal-agitation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
emissivity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/emissivity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
thermography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thermography. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
thermal radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thermal_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

23.1.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Visible spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Visible_spectrum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectral color. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectral_color. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
spectral color. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/spectral%20color. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
optical window. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/optical%20window. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
visible light. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/visible_light. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

23.1.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
ozone layer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ozone_layer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
non-ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/non-ionizing_radiation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ultraviolet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultraviolet. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radiograph. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radiograph. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

23.1.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660x-ray crystallography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/x-ray%20crystallography. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
X-ray spectroscopy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/X-ray_spectroscopy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ultraviolet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultraviolet. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
gamma ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Gamma rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_rays. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gamma decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

23.1.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15660OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microwaves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Infrared radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_radiation. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ultraviolet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultraviolet. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum%23Microwaves. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. April 28, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42444/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Gamma rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_rays. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Gamma rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_rays. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

23.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571223.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
Explain the meaning and importance of Maxwell’s equations
Maxwell’s Equations
Maxwell’s equations are a set of four partial different ial equations that, along with the Lorentz force law, form the foundation of
classical electrodynamics, classical optics, and elect ric circuits.
Named after esteemed physicist James Clerk Maxwell, the equations describe the creation and propagation of electric and magnetic
fields. Fundamentally, they describe how electric char ges and currents create electric and magnetic fields, and how they affect each
other.
Maxwell’s equations can be divided into two major subse ts. The first two, Gauss’s law and Gauss’s law for magnetism, describe
how fields emanate from charges and magnets respective ly. The other two, Faraday’s law and Ampere’s law with Maxwell ’s
correction, describe how induced electric and magnetic fields circulate around their respective sources.
Each of Maxwell’s equations can be looked at from the “microscopic” perspective, which deals with total char ge and total current,
and the “macroscopic” set, which defines two new auxili ary fields that allow one to perform calculations wit hout knowing
microscopic data like atomic-level charges.
Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law relates an electric field to the charge(s) that create(s) it. The field (E) points towards negati ve charges and away from
positive charges, and from the microscopic perspectiv e, is related to charge density (ρ) and vaccuum perm ittivity (ε, or
permittivity of free space) as:
Gauss’s Law basically says that a net amount of charge contained within a region of space will generate an e lectric field that
emanates through the surface that surrounds that region.
Example of Gauss’s Law: A positive charge contained within a region of space creates an electric field that emanates from the
surface of that region.
Gauss’s Law for Magnetism
Gauss’s law for magnetism states that there are no “magnetic charges (or monopoles)” analogous to electr ic charges, and that
magnetic fields are instead generated by magnetic dipoles. Such dipoles can be represented as loops of current, b ut in many ways
are similar in appearance to positive and negative “ magnetic charges” that are inseparable and thus have no formal net “magnetic
charge.”
Magnetic field lines form loops such that all field lines that go into an object leave it at some point. Thus, the total magnetic flux
through a surface surrounding a magnetic dipole is always z ero.learning objectives

23.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712
Field lines caused by a magnetic dipole: The field lines created by this magnetic dipole either form loops or extend infinitely.
The differential form of Gauss’s law for magnetic for mag netism is
Faraday’s Law
Faraday’s law describes how a time-varying magnetic fie ld (or flux) induces an electric field. The principl e behind this
phenomenon is used in many electric generators. Both macroscopic and microscopic differential equations a re the same, relating
electric field (E) to the time-partial derivative of magnetic field (B):
Ampere’s Circuital Law (with Maxwell’s correction)
Ampere’s law originally stated that magnetic field cou ld be created by electrical current. Maxwell added a second source of
magnetic fields in his correction: a changing electr ic field (or flux), which would induce a magnetic fiel d even in the absence of an
electrical current. He named the changing electric field “displacement current.”
Maxwell’s correction shows that self-sustaining electroma gnetic waves (light) can travel through empty space even in the absence
of moving charges or currents, with the electric fiel d component and magnetic field component each conti nually changing and each
perpetuating the other.

23.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712Electromagnetic Waves: Electric (red) and magnetic (blue) waves propagate in pha se sinusoidally, and perpendicularly to one
another.
The microscopic approach to the Maxwell-corrected Ampe re’s law relates magnetic field (B) to current densit y (J, or current per
unit cross sectional area) and the time-partial deriva tive of electric field (E):
The Production of Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic waves are the combination of electric a nd magnetic field waves produced by moving charges.
Explain the self-perpetuating behavior of an electroma gnetic wave
Electromagnetic waves
Electromagnetic radiation, is a form of energy emit ted by moving charged particles. As it travels through space it behaves like a
wave, and has an oscillating electric field component a nd an oscillating magnetic field. These waves oscill ate perpendicularly to
and in phase with one another.
Electromagnetic Wave: Electromagnetic waves are a self-propagating transvers e wave of oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
The direction of the electric field is indicated in blu e, the magnetic field in red, and the wave propagates in the positive x-direction.
Notice that the electric and magnetic field waves are in p hase.
The creation of all electromagnetic waves begins with a charged particle. This charged particle creates a n electric field (which can
exert a force on other nearby charged particles). Whe n it accelerates as part of an oscillatory motion, t he charged particle creates
ripples, or oscillations, in its electric field, and also p roduces a magnetic field (as predicted by Maxwell’s equati ons).
Once in motion, the electric and magnetic fields crea ted by a charged particle are self-perpetuating—tim e-dependent changes in
one field (electric or magnetic) produce the other. This means that an electric field that oscillates as a function of time will produce
a magnetic field, and a magnetic field that changes as a function of time will produce an electric field. Both electric and magnetic
fields in an electromagnetic wave will fluctuate in time, one causing the other to change.
Electromagnetic waves are ubiquitous in nature (i.e., l ight) and used in modern technology—AM and FM radio, c ordless and
cellular phones, garage door openers, wireless network s, radar, microwave ovens, etc. These and many more such d evices use
electromagnetic waves to transmit data and signals.
All the above sources of electromagnetic waves use the simple principle of moving charge, which can be easil y modeled. Placing a
coin in contact with both terminals of a 9-volt batte ry produces electromagnetic waves that can be detect ed by bringing the antenna
of a radio (tuned to a static-producing station) within a few inches of the point of contact.
Energy and Momentum
Electromagnetic waves have energy and momentum that are both associated with their wavelength and frequency.
Relate energy of an electromagnetic wave with the freque ncy and wavelengthlearning objectives
learning objectives

23.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712Electromagnetic radiation can essentially be describ ed as photon streams. These photons are strictly define d as massless, but have
both energy and surprisingly, given their lack of mass, m omentum, which can be calculated from their wave properties.
Waves were poorly understood until the 1900s, when Max Planck and Albert Einstein developed modern correctio ns to classical
theory.
Planck theorized that “black bodies” (thermal radiato rs) and other forms of electromagnetic radiation exist ed not as spectra, but in
discrete, “quantized” form. In other words, there were only certain energies an electromagnetic wave could have. In his work he
developed what is now known as “Planck’s constant,” which is a pproximately equal to 6.626×10 J·s.
Energy
The energy (E) of a photon can be related to its frequenc y (f) by Planck’s constant (h):
The ratio of speed of light (c) to wavelength (λ) ca n be substituted in place of f to give the same equ ation to energy in different
terms. Note that energy cannot take any value: it ca n only exist in increments of frequency times Planck’ s constant (or Planck’s
constant times c divided by wavelength). Energy of a wave is therefore “quantized. ”
Wavelength: Wavelength of the sinusoidal function is represente d by λ.
Momentum
Momentum is classically defined as the product of mas s and velocity and thus would intuitively seem irrele vant to a discussion of
electromagnetic radiation, which is both massless and comp osed of waves.
However, Einstein proved that light can act as particl es in some circumstances, and that a wave-particle dua lity exists. And, given
that he related energy and mass (E=mc), it becomes m ore conceivable that a wave (which has an energy value) not only has an
equation to mass but a momentum as well.
And indeed, Einstein proved that the momentum (p) of a phot on is the ratio of its energy to the speed of light.
Substituting E with hc/λ cancels the c terms, making momentum also equal to the simple ratio of Planck’s constant to wavelen gth.
The Speed of Light
The speed of light in a vacuum is one of the most fundame ntal constant in physics, playing a pivotal role in modern p hysics.
Relate speed of light with the index of refraction of t he medium
The Speed of Light
The speed of light is generally a point of compariso n to express that something is fast. shows a scale repres entation of the time it
takes a beam of light to reach the moon from Earth. But wh at exactly is the speed of light?-34
learning objectives

23.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712
Light Going from Earth to the Moon: A beam of light is depicted travelling between the Earth and the Moon in the time it takes a
light pulse to move between them: 1.255 seconds at their mean orbital (surface-to-surface) distance. The relative sizes and
separation of the Earth–Moon system are shown to scale.
It is just that: the speed of a photon or light part icle. The speed of light in a vacuum (commonly written as c) is 299,792,458 meters
per second. This is a universal physical constant used in many areas of physics. For example, you might be f amiliar with the
equation:
where E = Energy and m = mass. This is known as the mass- energy equivalence, and it uses the speed of light to interrelate space
and time. This not only explains the energy a body of mass contains, but also explains the hindrance mass has on spee d.
There are many uses for the speed of light in a vacu um, such as in special relativity, which says that c is the natural speed limit and
nothing can move faster than it. However, we know from our understanding of physics (and previous atoms) th at the speed at
which something travels also depends on the medium th rough which it is traveling. The speed at which light p ropagates through
transparent materials (air, glass, etc.,) is dependent on th e refractive index of that material, n:
where v = actual velocity of light moving through th e medium, c = speed of light in a vacuum, and n = r efractive index of medium.
The refractive index of air is about 1.0003, and fro m this equation we can find that the speed of visible light in air is about 90 km/s
slower than c.
As mentioned earlier, the speed of light (usually of light in a vacuum) is used in many areas of physics. Below is an example of an
application of the constant c.
The Lorentz Factor
Fast-moving objects exhibit some properties that are c ounterintuitive from the perspective of classical m echanics. For example,
length contracts and time dilates (runs slower) for o bjects in motion. The effects are typically minute, but are noticeable at
sufficiently high speeds. The Lorentz factor (γ) is the factor by which length shortens and time dilates as a fu nction of velocity (v):
At low velocities, the quotient of v /c is sufficientl y close to 0 such that γ is approximately 1. However, a s velocity approaches c, γ
increases rapidly towards infinity.
The Doppler Effect
The Doppler Effect is the change in a wave’s perceive d frequency that results from the source’s motion, t he observer, and the
medium.
Give examples of daily observations of the Doppler effect
The Doppler Effect
The Doppler effect is a periodic event’s change in f requency for an observer in motion relative to the event’s source. Typically, this
periodic event is a wave.
Most people have experienced the Doppler effect in act ion. Consider an emergency vehicle in motion, soundi ng its siren. As it
approaches an observer, the pitch of the sound (its frequency) sounds higher than it actually is. When the vehicle reaches the
observer, the pitch is perceived as it actually is. Wh en the vehicle continues away from the observer, the pitch is perceived as lower
than it actually is. From the perspective of an observer inside the vehicle, the pitch of the siren is constant.2 2
learning objectives

23.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712
The Doppler Effect and Sirens: Waves emitted by a siren in a moving vehicle
The difference in the perceived pitch depending on observer location can be explained by the fact that the siren’s position changes
as it emits waves. A wave of sound is emitted by a mov ing vehicle every millisecond. The vehicle ‘chases’ each wave in one
direction. By the time the next wave is emitted, it i s closer (relative to an onlooker ahead of the vehic le) to the previous wave than
the wave’s frequency would suggest. Relative to an onl ooker behind the vehicle, the second wave is further fr om the first wave
than one would expect, which suggests a lower frequency.
The Doppler effect can be caused by any kind of moti on. In the example above, the siren moved relative t o a stationary observer. If
the observer moves relative to the stationary siren, th e observer will notice the Doppler effect on the pitc h of the siren. Finally, if
the medium through which the waves propagate moves, t he Doppler effect will be noticed even for a stationar y observer. An
example of this phenomenon is wind.
Quantitatively, the Doppler effect can be characteriz ed by relating the frequency perceived (f) to the v elocity of waves in the
medium (c), the velocity of the receiver relative t o the medium (v), the velocity of the source relative to the medium (v), and the
actual emitted frequency (f):
The Doppler Effect: Wavelength change due to the motion of source
Momentum Transfer and Radiation Pressure Atom
Radiation pressure is the pressure exerted upon any surf ace exposed to electromagnetic (EM) radiation.
Explain formation of radiation pressure
Radiation pressure is the pressure exerted upon any s urface exposed to electromagnetic (EM) radiation. EM r adiation (or photon,
which is a quantum of light) carries momentum; this mo mentum is transferred to an object when the radiation is absorbed or
reflected. Perhaps one of the most well know examples of th e radiation pressure would be comet tails. Haley’s comet is shown in.r s
learning objectives

23.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712
Halley’s Comet: As a comet approaches the inner Solar System, solar radiat ion causes the volatile materials within the comet to
vaporize and stream out of the nucleus. The streams of dust and gas thus released form an atmosphere around the comet (called the
coma), and the force exerted on the coma by the Sun’s radia tion pressure and solar wind cause the formation of an enorm ous tail
that points away from the Sun.
Although radiation pressure can be understood using c lassical electrodynamics, here we will examine the quan tum mechanical
argument. From the perspective of quantum theory, ligh t is made of photons: particles with zero mass but whi ch carry energy and –
importantly in this argument – momentum. According t o special relativity, because photons are devoid of mass, their energy (E)
and momentum (p) are related by E=pc.
Now consider a beam of light perpendicularly incident on a surface, and let us assume the beam of light is t otally absorbed. The
momentum the photons carry is a conserved quantity (i.e., it cannot be destroyed) so it must be transferr ed to the surface; thus the
absorption of the light beam causes the surface to gain momentum. Newton’s Second Law tells us that force eq uals rate of change
of momentum; thus during each second, the surface exp eriences a force (or pressure, as pressure is force p er unit area) due to the
momentum the photons transfer to it.
This gives us: pressure = momentum transferred per se cond per unit area = energy deposited per second per unit area / c = I/c,
(where I is the intensity of the beam of light).
Laser Cooling
There are many variations of laser cooling, but they all use radiation pressure to remove energy from a tomic gases (and therefore
cool the sample). In laser cooling (sometimes called Doppler cooling), the frequency of light is tuned sl ightly below an electronic
transition in the atom. Because light is detuned to t he “red” (i.e., at lower frequency) of the transition, the atoms will absorb more
photons if they move towards the light source, due to t he Doppler effect. Thus if one applies light from two opposite directions, the
atoms will always scatter more photons from the laser bea m pointing opposite to their direction of motion (t ypical setups applies
three opposing pairs of laser beams as in).

23.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712The Magneto Optical Trap: Experimental setup of Magneto Optical Trap (MOT), which uses r adiation pressure to cool atomic
species. Atoms are slowed down by absorbing (and emitting) photons.
In each scattering event, the atom loses a momentum equal to the momentum of the photon. If the atom (which is now in the
excited state) then emits a photon spontaneously, it will be kicked by the same amount of momentum, only in a random direction.
Since the initial momentum loss was opposite to the dir ection of motion (while the subsequent momentum gain was in a random
direction), the overall result of the absorption and emission process is to reduce the speed of the atom. If the absorption and
emission are repeated many times, the average speed (and therefore the kinetic energy) of the atom will be reduced. Since the
temperature of a group of atoms is a measure of the a verage random internal kinetic energy, this is equiva lent to cooling the atoms.
Simple laser cooling setups can produce a cold sample o f atomic gases at around 1mK (=10 K) starting from a roo m temperature
gas.
Key Points
Maxwell’s four equations describe how electric charges and c urrents create electric and magnetic fields, and how the y affect
each other.
Gauss’s law relates an electric field to the charge(s) tha t create(s) it.
Gauss’s law for magnetism states that there are no “magneti c charges” analogous to electric charges, and that magne tic fields
are instead generated by magnetic dipoles.
Faraday’s law describes how a time-varying magnetic field (or flux) induces an electric field. The principle behi nd this
phenomenon is used in many electric generators.
Ampere ‘s law originally stated that a magnetic field is c reated by an electrical current. Maxwell added that a chan ging electric
flux can also generate a magnetic field.
Electromagnetic waves consist of both electric and magne tic field waves. These waves oscillate in perpendicular plan es with
respect to each other, and are in phase.
The creation of all electromagnetic waves begins with a n oscillating charged particle, which creates oscillat ing electric and
magnetic fields.
Once in motion, the electric and magnetic fields that a char ged particle creates are self-perpetuating: time-depend ent changes in
one field (electric or magnetic) produce the other.
Max Planck proved that energy of a photon (a stream of which is an electromagnetic wave) is quantized and can exist in
multiples of “Planck’s constant” (denoted as h, approxim ately equal to 6.626×10 J·s).
describes the energy (E) of a photon as a function of fr equency (f), or wavelength (λ).
describes the momentum (p) of a photon as a function of its energy, frequency, or wavelength.
The maximum possible value for the speed of light is th at of light in a vacuum, and this speed is used for a co nstant in many
area of physics.
c is the symbol used to represent the speed of light in a vac uum, and its value is 299,792,458 meters per second.
When light travels through medium, its speed is hindere d by the index of refraction of that medium. Its actual speed can be
found with:.
The Doppler effect is very commonly observed in action.
The Doppler effect can be observed in the apparent change in pitch of a siren on an emergency vehicle, according to a stationary
observer.
The observer will notice the Doppler effect on the pitc h of the stationary siren when moving relative to its p itch, or if the
medium moves when the observer is stationary.
Photons carry momentum (p = E/c). When photons are absor bed or reflected on a surface, the surface receives momentum
kicks. This momentum transfer leads to radiation pressure.
Electromagnetic radiation applies radiation pressure equal to the Intensity (of light beam) divided by c (speed of light).
Laser cooling uses radiation pressure to remove energy from atomic gases. The technique can produce cold samples o f gases at
1mK or so.-3
-34

23.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712Key Terms
differential equation: An equation involving the derivatives of a function.
flux: A quantitative description of the transfer of a given ve ctor quantity through a surface. In this context, we re fer to the
electric flux and magnetic flux.
electromagnetic wave: A wave of oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
phase: Waves are said to be “in phase” when they begin at t he same part (e.g., crest) of their respective cycles.
photon: The quantum of light and other electromagnetic energ y, regarded as a discrete particle having zero rest mass, n o
electric charge, and an indefinitely long lifetime.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs: f = n / t.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
refractive index: The ratio of the speed of light in air or vacuum to that in another medium.
doppler effect: Apparent change in frequency of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to each
other.
classical electrodynamics: A branch of theoretical physics that studies conseq uences of the electromagnetic forces between
electric charges and currents.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
flux. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/flux. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
differential equation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/differential_equation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Maxwell's equations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell's_equations. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromagnetic wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electromagnetic%20wave. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
phase. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phase. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Onde electromagnetique. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_electromagnetique.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

23.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Onde electromagnetique. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_electromagnetique.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_wavelength.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
refractive index. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/refractive_index. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of light. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Onde electromagnetique. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_electromagnetique.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_wavelength.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of light. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Onde electromagnetique. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_electromagnetique.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_wavelength.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of light. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright

23.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15712Dopplerfrequenz. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplerfrequenz.gif. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Doppler effect diagrammatic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Doppler_effect_diagrammatic.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiation pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation_pressure. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
classical electrodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/classical%20electrodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagneticwave3D. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3D.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
GaussLaw1. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/5/57/GaussLaw1.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
VFPt dipole magnetic1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_dipole_magnetic1.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Onde electromagnetique. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_electromagnetique.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_wavelength.svg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of light. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Dopplerfrequenz. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplerfrequenz.gif. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Doppler effect diagrammatic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Doppler_effect_diagrammatic.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Comet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Comet. License: CC BY: Attribution
Magneto-optical trap. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magneto-optical_trap. License: CC BY:
Attribution
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

23.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571323.3: Applications of EM Waves
Discuss wireless technologies and their applications
Wireless communication is the transfer of information between two or more points that are not connected by an electrical
conductor. The term is commonly used in the telecommun ications industry to refer to telecommunications sys tems (e.g., radio
transmitters and receivers, remote controls, etc.) that use some form of energy (e.g., radio waves, acoustic ener gy, etc.) to transfer
information without the use of wires. Information is tra nsferred in this manner over both short and long dist ances. Wireless
operations permit services, such as long-range commun ications, that are otherwise impossible (or impractical) to implement with
the use of wires.
The most common wireless technologies use electromagnet ic wireless telecommunications, such as radio or infra -red signals. With
infra-red waves, distances are short (such as a few mete rs for television remote control) while radio waves ca n reach as far as
thousands or even millions of kilometers for deep-spa ce radio communications. It encompasses various types of fixed, mobile, and
portable applications, including two-way radios, cellular telephones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and wirele ss networking.
Other examples of applications of radio wireless tech nology include GPS units, garage door openers, wireless computer mice,
keyboards and headsets, headphones, radio receivers, sat ellite television, broadcast television, and cordless telephones. Less
common methods of achieving wireless communications inclu de the use of light, sound, magnetic, or electric fields.
Two cellular phones: The Qualcomm QCP-2700, a mid-1990s candybar style phone, a nd an iPhone 4S, a current production
smartphone.
One of the best-known examples of wireless technology is the mobile (or cellular) phone, with more than 4.6 billion mob ile cellular
subscriptions worldwide as of the end of 2010 (examples of such phones are shown in). These wireless devices use radio waves to
enable their users to make phone calls from many lo cations worldwide. They can be used within range of the mobile telephone sites
that house the necessary equipment to transmit and r eceive the radio signals these devices emit. Wireless da ta communications are
also an essential component of mobile computing. The various available technologies differ in local avai lability, coverage range,
and performance. In some circumstances, users must be ab le to employ multiple connection types and switch between the m.
To simplify the experience for the user, connection manager software is available, or a mobile VPN can be u tilized to handle the
multiple connections as a secure, single virtual net work. One popular supporting technology is Wi-Fi, a wire less local area network
that enables portable computing devices to connect easily to the Internet. Standardized as IEEE 802.11 a,b, g,n, Wi-Fi approaches
speeds of some types of wired Ethernet. Wi-Fi has bec ome the de facto standard for access in private home s, within offices, and at
public hotspots. Some businesses charge customers a monthly fee for the service, while others offer it for free in an effort to
increase sales of their goods.learning objectives

23.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15713Cellular data service offers coverage within a range o f 10-15 miles from the nearest cell site. Speeds have increased as technologies
have evolved, from earlier technologies such as GSM, CDMA and GPRS, to 3G networks such as W-CDMA, EDGE or
CDMA2000. Mobile Satellite Communications may be used whe re other wireless connections are unavailable, such a s in largely
rural areas or remote locations. Satellite communicatio ns are especially important for transportation, aviat ion, maritime, and
military use.
Key Points
Wireless operations permit services, such as long-range communications, that are impossible or impractical to im plement with
the use of wires.
The most common wireless technologies use electromagnetic wi reless telecommunications, such as radio.
Less common methods of achieving wireless communication s include the use of light, sound, magnetic, or electric fie lds.
Key Terms
radio wave: Electromagnetic radiation having a wavelength between about.5 centimeters and 30,000 meters; used for the
broadcasting of radio and television signals.
conductor: A material which contains movable electric charges.
telecommunication: The science and technology of the communication or me ssages over a distance, especially using electric,
electronic or electromagnetic impulses.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Wireless communication. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_communication.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wireless communication. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_communication.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
conductor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conductor. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
telecommunication. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/telecommunication. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radio wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radio_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Cell Phones. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Two_Cell_Phones.png. License: CC BY:
Attribution
23.3: Applications of EM Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
24: Geometric Optics
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
24.3: Lenses
24.4: Mirrors
24: Geometric Optics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571524.1: Overview
Distinguish three ways that rays can travel
Rays, or beams of light, can travel in three ways: dir ectly, through a material, or indirectly (reflectio n). These three methods of
light travel are shown in this image. The word ray com es from mathematics, and refers to a straight line tha t originates at some
point. Even when passing through a material, or bounc ing off of a material in a reflection, the light con tinues to travel in a straight
line, even if that line has changed direction. The mov ement of light, as a ray, can be shown with simple geom etry and trigonometry.
This is called geometric optics.
Methods of Travel by a Ray of Light: Light can travel through empty space directly from t he source, through media like air and
glass, reflect from an object like a mirror, or travel i n a straight line.
Direct Light Travel
Direct light travel is when a ray of light starts at a source, and continues to travel from that source to its destination without
encountering any interference. The light will contin ue in a straight line or ray until it reaches the o bserver. An example of this is the
light that travels from the sun to the earth.
Light Travel Through a Material
When light travels through any material, air, glass, water, etc., it encounters interference and changes dir ection. This is only a
directional change and will continue in this new path, but still as a straight line, or ray. The law that deals with this change in
direction is called the law of refraction. This change in ray direction will depend on the refractive index of the material through
which the light is travelling. This concept is what led to the development of lenses and glasses. Have you ever noticed that if you
put part of a pencil, spoon, or straw in a bowl of wat er, the object no longer appears straight, but seems t o bend? This is because the
index of refraction of the water is different from that o f the air. This causes the light rays to change direction.
learning objectives

24.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15715Refraction of Light Rays: The concept of refraction explains how a pencil subme rged in water appears to bend.
Light Bouncing Off a Material
When light is bounced off of a material, such as a m irror, this is called a reflection. This is when a light ray, the incident ray, hits a
reflective material and bounces off as the reflected ray at a specific angle. This is called the angle o f reflection. Since the movement
of the light rays can be shown geometrically, if a mirror is o ne-half your height, you could see your whole body in the r eflection.
Reflected Rays: This diagram shows how light rays reflects off of a surfa ce.
Key Points
Direct light motion is when a ray of light travels from a sou rce and is uninterrupted until it reaches it destination.
Refracted light is when a light ray travels through anoth er medium and, due to the difference in refractive inde xes of the
materials, changes direction slightly.
When a light ray hits a reflective material, it bounce s off as a reflected ray at a specific angle.
Key Terms
refraction: Changing of a light ray’s direction when it passes throug h variations in matter.
geometric optics: Optics that describes light propagation in terms of “rays ”.
reflection: the property of a propagated wave being thrown back from a surface (such as a mirror)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Light ray. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Ray Aspect of Light. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42452/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
reflection. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reflection. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
geometric optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/geometric%20optics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/refraction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ray optics diagram incidence reflection and refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ray_optics_diagram_incidence_reflecti on_and_refraction.svg. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
OpenStax College, The Ray Aspect of Light. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42452/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pencil in a bowl of water. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pencil_in_a_bowl_of_water.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

24.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571524.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571624.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
Formulate the relationship between the angle of reflecti on and the angle of incidence
Whenever you look into a mirror or squint at sunligh t glinting off a lake, you are seeing a reflection. When you look at the text in a
book, you are actually seeing the light that is ref lected from it. Large telescopes use reflections to fo rm images of stars and other
astronomical objects. In fact, the only way we can see an o bject that does not itself emit light is if that object r eflects light.
The law of reflection is illustrated in, which also sho ws how the angles are measured relative to the perpend icular to the surface at
the point where the light ray strikes. The law of refle ction is very simple: The angle of reflection equal s the angle of incidence.
When we see our reflection in a mirror, it appears tha t our image is actually behind the mirror — we see th e light coming from a
direction determined by the law of reflection. The a ngles are such that our image appears exactly the sa me distance behind the
mirror as we stand away from the mirror.
Mirror Reflection: An image in a mirror appears as though it is behind the m irror. The two rays shown are those that strike the
mirror at just the correct angles to be reflected into the eyes of the viewer. The image appears to come from th e direction the rays
are coming from when they enter the viewer’s eyes.
learning objectives

24.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716Law of Reflection: The law of reflection states that the angle of reflect ion equals the angle of incidence: θr = θi. The angles are
measured relative to the perpendicular to the surface a t the point where the ray strikes the surface.
We expect to see reflections off a smooth surface. Howe ver, light strikes different parts of a rough surface at different angles, and it
is reflected in many different directions (“diffuse d”). Diffused light is what allows us to see a sheet of paper from any angle. Many
objects, such as people, clothing, leaves, and walls, h ave rough surfaces and can be seen from all sides. A mirror, on the other hand,
has a smooth surface (compared with the wavelength of light) and reflects light at specific angles. When t he moon reflects off the
surface of a lake, a combination of these effects takes p lace.
High School Phy sics - Re ectionHigh School Phy sics - Re ection
Reflection: A brief overview of reflection and the law of reflection.
The Law of Refraction: Snell’s Law and the Index of Refraction
The amount that a light ray changes its direction depends bo th on the incident angle and the amount that the speed ch anges.

24.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716Formulate the relationship between the index of refracti on and the speed of light
It is easy to notice some odd things when looking into a fish tank. For example, you may see the same fish appe aring to be in two
different places. This is because light coming from the fish to us changes direction when it leaves the t ank, and in this case, it can
travel two different paths to get to our eyes. The chan ging of a light ray’s direction (loosely called bend ing) when it passes through
variations in matter is called refraction. Refraction is responsible for a tremendous range of optical pheno mena, from the action of
lenses to voice transmission through optical fibers.
Law of Refraction: Looking at the fish tank as shown, we can see the same fish in two different locations, because light changes
directions when it passes from water to air. In this case, the light can reach the observer by two different paths, and so the fish
seems to be in two different places. This bending of light is called refraction and is responsible for many optical phe nomena.
Refraction: The changing of a light ray’s direction (loosely called bending) when it passes through varia tions in matter is called
refraction.
Speed of Light
The speed of light c not only affects refraction, it is one of the cent ral concepts of Einstein’s theory of relativity. The speed of light
varies in a precise manner with the material it trav erses. It makes connections between space and time and alters our expectations
that all observers measure the same time for the sam e event, for example. The speed of light is so impor tant that its value in a
vacuum is one of the most fundamental constants in nat ure as well as being one of the four fundamental SI units.
Why does light change direction when passing from on e material (medium) to another? It is because ligh t changes speed when
going from one material to another.
Law of Refraction
A ray of light changes direction when it passes from o ne medium to another. As before, the angles are measur ed relative to a
perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it. The change in direction of the light ray depends on how the
speed of light changes. The change in the speed of li ght is related to the indices of refraction of the m edia involved. In mediums
that have a greater index of refraction the speed of light is less. Imagine moving your hand through the air and then moving it
through a body of water. It is more difficult to move your hand through the water, and thus your hand slows down if you arelearning objectives

24.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716applying the same amount of force. Similarly, light t ravels slower when moving through mediums that have hi gher indices of
refraction.
The amount that a light ray changes its direction d epends both on the incident angle and the amount th at the speed changes. For a
ray at a given incident angle, a large change in spe ed causes a large change in direction, and thus a larg e change in angle. The exact
mathematical relationship is the law of refraction, or “ Snell’s Law,” which is stated in equation form as:
Here n and n are the indices of refraction for mediu m 1 and 2, and θ and θ are the angles between the ray s and the perpendicular
in medium 1 and 2. The incoming ray is called the in cident ray and the outgoing ray the refracted ray, a nd the associated angles the
incident angle and the refracted angle. The law of re fraction is also called Snell’s law after the Dutch mathe matician Willebrord
Snell, who discovered it in 1621. Snell’s experiments sh owed that the law of refraction was obeyed and that a characteristic index
of refraction n could be assigned to a given medium.
Understanding Snell' s Law w ith the Index of Refract i Understanding Snell' s Law w ith the Index of Refract i
Understanding Snell’s Law with the Index of Refraction: This video introduces refraction with Snell’s Law and the index of
refraction.The second video discusses total internal refl ection (TIR) in detail. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fvrvqm3Erzk1 2 1 2

24.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716Total Internal Reflection and Fiber Optics
Total internal reflection happens when a propagating wave strikes a medium boundary at an angle larger tha n a particular critical
angle.
Formulate conditions required for the total internal refl ection
Total internal reflection is a phenomenon that happe ns when a propagating wave strikes a medium boundary at an angle larger than
a particular critical angle with respect to the norm al to the surface. If the refractive index is lower on the other side of the boundary
and the incident angle is greater than the critical angle, the wave cannot pass through and is entirely reflected. The critical angle is
the angle of incidence above which the total internal r eflectance occurs.
Refraction (3 of 5) What is T otal Internal Re ectio n? Refraction (3 of 5) What is T otal Internal Re ectio n?
What is Total Internal Reflection?: Describes the concept of total internal reflection, deri ves the equation for the critical angle
and shows one example.learning objectives

24.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716Critical angle
The critical angle is the angle of incidence above which total internal reflection occurs. The angle of i ncidence is measured with
respect to the normal at the refractive boundary (s ee diagram illustrating Snell’s law). Consider a ligh t ray passing from glass into
air. The light emanating from the interface is bent towards the glass. When the incident angle is incre ased sufficiently, the
transmitted angle (in air) reaches 90 degrees. It is a t this point no light is transmitted into air. The critical angle θcθc is given by
Snell’s law, n1sinθ1=n2sinθ2n1sin θ1=n2sin θ2. Here, n a nd n are refractive indices of the media, and θ1θ1 a nd θ2θ2are angles of
incidence and refraction, respectively. To find the critical angle, we find the value for θ1θ1 when θ2θ2 = 90° and thus
sinθ2=1sin θ2=1. The resulting value of θ1θ1 is equal to the critical angle θc=θ1=arcsin(n2n1)θc=θ1=arcs in (n2n1). So the critical
angle is only defined when n /n is less than 1.
Fig 1: Refraction of light at the interface between two media, including total internal reflection.
Optical Fiber
Total internal reflection is a powerful tool since it can be used to confine light. One of the most common applications of total
internal reflection is in fibre optics. An optical fib re is a thin, transparent fibre, usually made of glass or plastic, for transmitting
light. The construction of a single optical fibre is shown in.
Fig 2: Fibers in bundles are clad by a material that has a l ower index of refraction than the core to ensure total in ternal reflection,
even when fibers are in contact with one another. This shows a s ingle fiber with its cladding.
The basic functional structure of an optical fiber co nsists of an outer protective cladding and an inner core through which light
pulses travel. The overall diameter of the fiber is about 125 μm and that of the core is just about 50 μm. The difference in refractive
index of the cladding and the core allows total inte rnal reflection in the same way as happens at an air- water surface show in. If
light is incident on a cable end with an angle of inc idence greater than the critical angle then the lig ht will remain trapped inside the
glass strand. In this way, light travels very quickly down the length of the cable over a very long distance (tens of kilometers).
Optical fibers are commonly used in telecommunication s, because information can be transported over long d istances, with1 2
2 1

24.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716minimal loss of data. Another common use can be found i n medicine in endoscopes. The field of applied scien ce and engineering
concerned with the design and application of optical fiber s are called fiber optics.
Total Polarization
Brewster’s angle is an angle of incidence at which light wi th a particular polarization is perfectly transmitted thr ough a surface.
Calculate the Brewster’s angle from the indices of refrac tion and discuss its physical mechanism
Brewster’s angle (also known as the polarization angle) is an angle of incidence at which light with a parti cular polarization is
perfectly transmitted through a transparent dielectri c surface, with no reflection. When unpolarized light is incident at this angle,
the light that is reflected from the surface is the refore perfectly polarized. This special angle of in cidence is named after the
Scottish physicist Sir David Brewster (1781–1868).
The physical mechanism for this can be qualitatively understood from the manner in which electric dipoles in the media respond to
p-polarized light (whose electric field is polarized in the same plane as the incident ray and the surfa ce normal). One can imagine
that light incident on the surface is absorbed, and t hen re-radiated by oscillating electric dipoles at the interface between the two
media. The refracted light is emitted perpendicular to the direction of the dipole moment; no energy ca n be radiated in the direction
of the dipole moment. Thus, if the angle of reflect ion θ (angle of reflection) is equal to the alignme nt of the dipoles (90 – θ),
where θ is angle of refraction, no light is reflected.
Fig 1: An illustration of the polarization of light that is incident on an interface at Brewster’s angle.
This geometric condition can be expressed as, where θ is the angle of incidence and θ is the angle of r efraction.
Using Snell’s law (n sinθ1 = n sinθ), one can calculate t he incident angle θ = at which no light is reflecte d:
Solving for θ gives.
When light hits a surface at a Brewster angle, reflec ted beam is linearly polarized. shows an example, wher e the reflected beam was
nearly perfectly polarized and hence, blocked by a p olarizer on the right picture. Polarized sunglasses use the same principle to
reduce glare from the sun reflecting off horizontal surf aces such as water or road.
Fig 2: Photograph taken of a window with a camera polarizer filter ro tated to two different angles. In the picture at left, the
polarizer is aligned with the polarization angle of the windo w reflection. In the picture at right, the polarizer has be en rotated 90°
eliminating the heavily polarized reflected sunlight.learning objectives
1 2
1 2
1 2 2 1 B
B

24.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716
Joy Phy sics- exp #26 PolarizationJoy Phy sics- exp #26 Polarization
Polarization Experience: A polarizing filter allows light of a particular plan e of polarization to pass, but scatters the rest of the
light. When two polarizing filters are crossed, almost no light gets through. Some materials have molecules that ro tate the plane of
polarization of light. When one of these materials is plac ed between crossed polarizing filters, more light is allo wed to pass
through.
Dispersion: Rainbows and Prisims
Dispersion is defined as the spreading of white light int o its full spectrum of wavelengths.
Describe production of rainbows by a combination of refra ction and reflection processes
We see about six colors in a rainbow—red, orange, yel low, green, blue, and violet; sometimes indigo is liste d, too. These colors are
associated with different wavelengths of light. White light, in particular, is a fairly uniform mixture of all visible wavelengths.
Sunlight, considered to be white, actually appears to b e a bit yellow because of its mixture of wavelengths, but it does contain all
visible wavelengths. The sequence of colors in rainbows i s the same sequence as the colors plotted versus wavele ngth. What this
implies is that white light is spread out according to wavelength in a rainbow. Dispersion is defined as the s preading of white light
into its full spectrum of wavelengths. More technicall y, dispersion occurs whenever there is a process that ch anges the direction of
light in a manner that depends on wavelength. Dispersion, as a general phenomenon, can occur for any type of wave and always
involves wavelength-dependent processes.
learning objectives

24.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716
Colors of a Rainbow: Even though rainbows are associated with seven colors, the r ainbow is a continuous distribution of colors
according to wavelengths.
Refraction is responsible for dispersion in rainbows and many other situations. The angle of refraction d epends on the index of
refraction, as we saw in the Law of Refraction. We know that the index of refraction n depends on the medium. But for a given
medium, n also depends on wavelength. Note that, for a given medi um, n increases as wavelength decreases and is greatest f or
violet light. Thus violet light is bent more than red li ght and the light is dispersed into the same sequence of wavelengths.
Pure Light and Light Dispersion: (a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refr acted at both surfaces. (b) White
light is dispersed by the prism (shown exaggerated). Since th e index of refraction varies with wavelength, the angles o f refraction
vary with wavelength. A sequence of red to violet is produ ced, because the index of refraction increases steadily wit h decreasing
wavelength.
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection. You may have noticed that you see a rainbow only when you
look away from the sun. Light enters a drop of water a nd is reflected from the back of the drop. The light is refracted both as it
enters and as it leaves the drop. Since the index of re fraction of water varies with wavelength, the light is d ispersed, and a rainbow
is observed. (There is no dispersion caused by reflec tion at the back surface, since the law of reflection does not depend on
wavelength.) The actual rainbow of colors seen by an o bserver depends on the myriad of rays being refracte d and reflected toward

24.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716the observer’s eyes from numerous drops of water. The ar c of a rainbow comes from the need to be looking at a specific angle
relative to the direction of the sun.
Light Reflecting on Water Droplet: Part of the light falling on this water drop enters and i s reflected from the back of the drop.
This light is refracted and dispersed both as it enters and a s it leaves the drop.
Key Points
Light strikes different parts of a rough surface at diff erent angles and is reflected, or diffused, in many diff erent directions.
A mirror has a smooth surface (compared with the wavelength of l ight) and so reflects light at specific angles.
We see the light reflected off a mirror coming from a d irection determined by the law of reflection.
The changing of a light ray’s direction (loosely called bending) when it passes through variations in matter is cal led refraction.
The index of refraction is n=c/v, where v is the speed of l ight in the material, c is the speed of light in vacuum, a nd n is the
index of refraction.
Snell’s law, the law of refraction, is stated in equation fo rm as n1sinθ1=n2sinθ2n1sin θ1=n2sin θ2.
The critical angle is the angle of incidence above whi ch total internal reflection occurs and given as
θc=arcsin(n2n1)θc=arcsin (n2n1).
The critical angle is only defined when n2/n1 is less th an 1.
If light is incident on an optical fiber with an angle o f incidence greater than the critical angle then the light will remain trapped
inside the glass strand. Light can travel over a very long distance without a significant loss.
When light hits a surface at a Brewster angle, reflected bea m is linearly polarized.
The physical mechanism for the Brewster’s angle can be qual itatively understood from the manner in which electric di poles in
the media respond to p-polarized light.
Brewsters’ angle is given as θB=arctan(n2n1)θB=arctan (n2n1).
Dispersion occurs whenever there is a process that changes th e direction of light in a manner that depends on wavelen gth.
Dispersion can occur for any type of wave and always involves wav elength-dependent processes.
For a given medium, n increases as wavelength decreases and i s greatest for violet light. Thus violet light is bent m ore than red
light, as can be seen with a prism.
In a rainbow, light enters a drop of water and is reflect ed from the back of the drop. The light is refracted both as it enters and as
it leaves the drop.
Key Terms
reflection: the property of a propagated wave being thrown back from a surface (such as a mirror)
refraction: Changing of a light ray’s direction when it passes throug h variations in matter.
index of refraction: For a material, the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum t o that in the material.
Snell’s law: A formula used to describe the relationship between the an gles of incidence and refraction.
cladding: One or more layers of materials of lower refractive index, in intimate contact with a core material of higher refr active
index.
dipole: A separation of positive and negative charges.
dielectric: An electrically insulating or nonconducting materia l considered for its electric susceptibility (i.e., it s property of
polarization when exposed to an external electric fie ld).

24.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716polarizer: An optical filter that passes light of a specific polariz ation and blocks waves of other polarizations.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/simpleo.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
reflection. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reflection. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Reflection. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaJ4WYV2gyk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/refraction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
index of refraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/index+of+refraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Reflection. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaJ4WYV2gyk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Understanding Snell's Law with the Index of Refraction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6IGWO3e2Wo.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical Optics: Total Internal Reflection. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40070/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fiber optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiber_optics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Total internal reflection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_internal_reflection. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
cladding. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/cladding. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Snell's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Snell's%20law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Reflection. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaJ4WYV2gyk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

24.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Understanding Snell's Law with the Index of Refraction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6IGWO3e2Wo.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Total Internal Reflection. January 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42462/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Total internal reflection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_internal_reflection. License: CC
BY: Attribution
What is Total Internal Reflection?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NXGLBMTtk40. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Brewster's angle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster's_angle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dipole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dipole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
polarizer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/polarizer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dielectric. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dielectric. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Reflection. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaJ4WYV2gyk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Understanding Snell's Law with the Index of Refraction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6IGWO3e2Wo.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Total Internal Reflection. January 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42462/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Total internal reflection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_internal_reflection. License: CC
BY: Attribution
What is Total Internal Reflection?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NXGLBMTtk40. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Polarization Experience. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qv7Y-Er7rgc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Brewster's angle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster's_angle. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Brewster's angle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster's_angle. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/refraction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Reflection. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaJ4WYV2gyk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

24.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15716OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Understanding Snell's Law with the Index of Refraction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6IGWO3e2Wo.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Total Internal Reflection. January 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42462/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Total internal reflection. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_internal_reflection. License: CC
BY: Attribution
What is Total Internal Reflection?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NXGLBMTtk40. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Polarization Experience. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qv7Y-Er7rgc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Brewster's angle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster's_angle. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Brewster's angle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster's_angle. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Janua ry 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Janua ry 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Janua ry 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/Figure%2026_05_02.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1571724.3: Lenses
Describe properties of a thin lens and the purpose of r ay tracing
Thin Lenses and Ray Tracing
Ray tracing is the technique of determining or foll owing (tracing) the paths that light rays take. Expe riments, as well as our own
experiences, show that when light interacts with objec ts several times as large as its wavelength, it travel s in straight lines and acts
like a ray. (A ray is simply a straight line that or iginates at a point.) Its wave characteristics are n ot pronounced in such situations.
Since the wavelength of light is less than a micron (a thousandth of a millimeter), it acts like a ray in t he many common situations
in which it encounters objects larger than a micron, such as le nses.
For rays passing through matter, the law of refraction is used to trace the paths. Here we use ray tracing to help us understand the
action of lenses in situations ranging from forming images on film to magnifying small print to correcti ng nearsightedness. While
ray tracing for complicated lenses, such as those f ound in sophisticated cameras, may require computer techniques, there is a set of
simple rules for tracing rays through thin lenses. A thin lens is defined to be one whose thickness allows rays to refract, as
illustrated in, but does not allow properties such a s dispersion and aberrations. An ideal thin lens has two refracting surfaces but the
lens is thin enough toassume that light rays bend onl y once. Another way of saying this is that the lens th ickness is much much
smaller than the focal length of the lens. A thin s ymmetrical lens has two focal points, one on either s ide and both at the same
distance from the lens. (See.) Another important char acteristic of a thin lens is that light rays throug h its center are deflected by a
negligible amount, as seen in the center rays in the first two figures. The treatment of a lens as a thin l ens is known as the “thin lens
approximation. ”
Convex Lens: Rays of light entering a converging lens parallel to i ts axis converge at its focal point F. (Ray 2 lies on the a xis of the
lens.) The distance from the center of the lens to the fo cal point is the lens’s focal length f. An expanded view of the path taken by
ray 1 shows the perpendiculars and the angles of inciden ce and refraction at both surfaces.learning objectives

24.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717
Thin Lens: Thin lenses have the same focal length on either side. (a) Parallel light rays entering a converging lens from th e right
cross at its focal point on the left. (b) Parallel light rays entering a diverging lens from the right seem to com e from the focal point
on the right.
Rules for Ray Tracing
Using paper, pencil, and a straight edge, ray tracing c an accurately describe the operation of a lens. The rules for ray tracing for thin
lenses are based on the illustrations included in this section:
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to its axis passes through the focal point F of the lens on the other side. (See rays 1
and 3 in.)
2. A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis seems to come from the focal point F. (See rays 1 and 3 in.)
3. A ray passing through the center of either a convergin g or a diverging lens does not change direction. (See ray 2 in and.)
4. A ray entering a converging lens through its focal po int exits parallel to its axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 in.)
5. A ray that enters a diverging lens by heading toward th e focal point on the opposite side exits parallel to the ax is. (The reverse
of rays 1 and 3 in).

24.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717
Diverging Lens: Rays of light entering a diverging lens parallel to i ts axis are diverged, and all appear to originate at its foc al point
F. The dashed lines are not rays—they indicate the dir ections from which the rays appear to come. The focal length f of a diverging
lens is negative. An expanded view of the path taken by ray 1 shows the perpendiculars and the angles of incidence and refraction
at both surfaces.
Ray Diagrams (4 of 4) Concave Lens and Convex MiRay Diagrams (4 of 4) Concave Lens and Convex Mi

24.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror: Shows how to draw the ray diagrams for locating the image produced by a
concave lens and a convex mirror.
The Thin Lens Equation and Magnification
The thin lens equation relates the object distance d, image distance d, and focal length f.
Formulate five basic rules of ray tracing
The Thin Lens Equation and Magnification
Image Formation by Thin Lenses
How does a lens form an image of an object? We can use the technique of ray tracing to illustrate how lense s form images. We can
also develop equations to describe the images quantitat ively. Recall the five basic rules of ray tracing:
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to its axis passes through the focal point F of the lens on the other side.
2. A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis seems to come from the focal point F.
3. A ray passing through the center of either a convergin g or a diverging lens does not change direction.
4. A ray entering a converging lens through its focal po int exits parallel to its axis.
5. A ray that enters a diverging lens by heading toward th e focal point on the opposite side exits parallel to the ax is.
Consider an object some distance away from a converg ing lens, as shown in. To find the location and size of the image formed, we
trace the paths of selected light rays originating from one point on the object (in this case the top of the person’s head). The figure
shows three rays from the top of the object that can be traced using the five ray tracing rules. Rays le ave this point going in many
directions, but we concentrate on only a few with paths that are easy to trace. The first ray is one that en ters the lens parallel to its
axis and passes through the focal point on the other side (rule 1). The second ray passes through the cent er of the lens without
changing direction (rule 3). The third ray passes thr ough the nearer focal point on its way into the lens and leaves the lens parallel
to its axis (rule 4). The three rays cross at the sa me point on the other side of the lens. The image of the top of the person’s head is
located at this point. All rays that come from the sam e point on the top of the person’s head are refracte d in such a way as to cross
at the point shown. Rays from another point on the obje ct, such as her belt buckle, will also cross at another common point,
forming a complete image, as shown. Although three rays are traced in, only two are necessary to locate the i mage. It is best to
trace rays for which there are simple ray tracing rul es. Before applying ray tracing to other situations, let us consider the example
shown in in more detail.
o i
learning objectives

24.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717
Image Formation with a Thin Lens: Ray tracing is used to locate the image formed by a lens. Rays originating from the same
point on the object are traced—the three chosen rays each follow one of the rules for ray tracing, so that their pat hs are easy to
determine. The image is located at the point where the ray s cross. In this case, a real image—one that can be proj ected on a screen
—is formed.
Several important distances appear in. We define d as the object distance—the distance of an object fr om the center of a lens.
Image distance dis defined as the distance of the image from the ce nter of a lens. The height of the object and height of the image
are given the symbols h and h, respectively. Images that appear upright relative to the object have heights that are positive and
those that are inverted have negative heights. Using the rules of ray tracing and making a scale drawing wi th paper and pencil, like
that in, we can accurately describe the location and size of an image. But the real benefit of ray tracin g is in visualizing how images
are formed in a variety of situations. To obtain nume rical information, we use a pair of equations that can be derived from a
geometric analysis of ray tracing for thin lenses. The thin l ens equation is:
We define the ratio of image height to object heigh t (h/h) as the magnification m. The magnification is related to d, d, h, and h
by the following relation:o
i
o i
i o o i o i

24.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717In many cases both of these equations are referred to together as the thin lens equation s. The thin lens equations are broadly
applicable to all situations involving thin lenses (and “ thin” mirrors).
Thin Lens Equation (1of 6) Convex Lens, Object DistThin Lens Equation (1of 6) Convex Lens, Object Dist
Thin Lens Equations for a Convex Lens: Shows how to use the thin lens equation to calculate t he image distance, image height
and image orientation for convex lenses when the object dist ance is greater the the focal length (f).
Combinations of Lenses
A compound lens is an array of simple lenses with a common axi s.
Calculate focal length for a compound lens from the foc al lengths of simple lenses
COMPOUND LENSES
In contrast to a simple lens, which consists of only one optical element, a compound lens is an array of simple lenses (elements)
with a common axis. The use of multiple elements allows for the correction of more optical aberrations, su ch as the chromatic
learning objectives

24.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717aberration caused by the wavelength-dependent index of refr action in glass, than is possible using a single lens. In many cases t hese
aberrations can be compensated for to a great extent by u sing a combination of simple lenses with complementary a berrations.
The simplest case is where lenses are placed in conta ct: if the lenses of focal lengths f and f are “thin”, the combined focal length
f of the lenses is given by
Since 1/ f is the power of a lens, it can be seen that the powers of thi n lenses in contact are additive.
If two thin lenses are separated in air by some dista nce d (where d is smaller than the focal length of the first lens), t he focal length
for the combined system is given by
BACK FOCAL LENGTH
The distance from the second lens to the focal point of the combined lenses is called the back focal length (BFL).
As d tends to zero, the value of the BFL tends to the value of f given for thin lenses in contact.
If the separation distance is equal to the sum of the focal lengths (d = f+f), the combined focal length and BFL are infinite. Thi s
corresponds to a pair of lenses that transform a paral lel (collimated) beam into another collimated beam (see). This type of system
is called an afocal system, since it produces no ne t convergence or divergence of the beam. Two lenses a t this separation form the
simplest type of optical telescope. Although the system does not alter the divergence of a collimated beam, it does alter the width of
the beam. The magnification of such a telescope is given by
Keplerian Telescope: All refracting telescopes use the same principles. The combi nation of an objective lens 1 and some type of
eyepiece 2 is used to gather more light than the human eye could collect on its own, focus it 5, and present the viewer with a
brighter, clearer, and magnified virtual image 6. The magn ification can be found by dividing the focal length of the objective lens
by the focal length of the eyepiece.
which is the ratio of the input beam width to the out put beam width. Note the sign convention: a telescope with two convex lenses
(f > 0, f > 0) produces a negative magnification, indicating an inverted image. A convex plus a concave lens (f > 0 > f) produces
a positive magnification and the image is upright.
ACHROMATS
An achromatic lens or achromat is a lens that is des igned to limit the effects of chromatic and spheric al aberration. Achromatic
lenses are corrected to bring two wavelengths (typically r ed and blue/violet) into focus in the same plane.
The most common type of achromat is the achromatic doublet, which is composed of two individual lenses m ade from glasses with
different amounts of dispersion Typically, one element is a negative (concave) element made out of flint, which has relatively high1 2
1 2
1 2 1 2

24.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717dispersion, and the other is a positive (convex) ele ment made of crown glass, which has lower dispersion. The lens elements are
mounted next to each other, often cemented together, and shaped so that the chromatic aberration of on e is counterbalanced by that
of the other.
In the most common type (shown in), the positive power of the crown lens element is not quite equaled by the negative power of
the flint lens element. Together they form a weak posit ive lens that will bring two different wavelengths of light to a common
focus. Negative doublets, in which the negative-power elemen t predominates, are also made.
Achromatic Doublet: (a) Chromatic aberration is caused by the dependence of a lens’s index of refraction on color (wavelength).
The lens is more powerful for violet (V) than for red (R), producing images with different locations and magnific ations. (b)
Multiple-lens systems, such as this achromatic doublet, can partially correct chromatic aberrations, but they m ay require lenses of
different materials and add to the expense of optical systems such as cameras.
The Lensmaker’s Equation
The lensmaker’s formula is used to relate the radii o f curvature, the thickness, the refractive index, and the focal length of a thick
lens.
Compare idealized thin lenses with real lenses
The Lensmaker’s Equation
Thick Lenses
Unlike idealized thin lenses, real lenses have a finit e thickness between their two surfaces of curvature. An ideal thin lens with two
surfaces of equal curvature would have zero optical p ower, meaning that it would neither converge nor diverg e light. A lens whose
thickness is not negligible is called a thick lens. In this case, we can not simply assume that a light ray is only refracted once while
traveling through the lens. Instead the extent of the re fraction must be dependent on the thickness of the lens.
Lenses are classified by the curvature of the two opti cal surfaces. A lens is biconvex (or double convex, or just convex) if both
surfaces are convex. If the lens is biconvex, a beam o f light travelling parallel to the lens axis and pa ssing through the lens will belearning objectives

24.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717converged (or focused) to a spot on the axis, at a certain distance behind the lens (i.e. the focal length). In this case, the lens is
called a positive or converging lens. See for a diagram of a positive (converging) lens.
Thick Converging Lens: Diagram of a positive (converging) lens. The lensmaker’s formula relates the radii of curvature, the index
of refraction of the lens, the thickness of the lens, and the focal length.
If the lens is biconcave, a beam of light passing t hrough the lens is diverged (spread); the lens is thus c alled a negative or diverging
lens. The beam after passing through the lens appears t o be emanating from a particular point on the axis i n front of the lens; the
distance from this point to the lens is also known as the focal length, although it is negative with respec t to the focal length of a
converging lens. See for a diagram of a negative (divergi ng) lens.
Negative Diverging Lens: Diagram of a negative (diverging) lens. The lensmaker’s f ormula relates the radii of curvature, the index
of refraction of the lens, the thickness of the lens, and the focal length.
The focal length of a thick lens in air can be calculated from the lensmaker’s equation:
where
P is the power of the lens,
f is the focal length of the lens,
n is the refractive index of the lens material,
Ris the radius of curvature of the lens surface closest to the light source,
R is the radius of curvature of the lens surface farth est from the light source, d and is the thickness of the len s (the distance
along the lens axis between the two surface vertices).
Sign convention of Radii R and R
The signs of the lens’ radii of curvature indicate whether the corresponding surfaces are convex or con cave. The sign convention
used to represent this varies, but for our treatment if R is positive the first surface is convex, and if R is negative the surface is
concave. The signs are reversed for the back surface of the lens: if R is positive the surface is concave, and if R is negative the1
1 2
1 1
2 2

24.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717surface is convex. If either radius is infinite, the co rresponding surface is flat. With this convention the signs are determined by the
shapes of the lens surfaces, and are independent of the direction in which light travels through the lens.
Thin Lens Approximation
The above equation can be greatly simplified if the lens thickness d is very small compared to R and R. In this case, the thin lens
approximation can then be made and the lensmaker’s equa tion can be approximated as
The focal length f is positive for converging lenses, and negative fo r diverging lenses. The reciprocal of the focal lengt h, 1/f, is the
optical of the lens. If the focal length is in meters, this gives the optical power in diopters (inverse meters).
Lenses have the same focal length when light travels f rom the back to the front as when light goes from the front to the back,
although other properties of the lens, such as the aberrat ions are not necessarily the same in both directions.
Refraction Through Lenses
Because the index of refraction of a lens is greater than air, a ray moves towards the perpendicular as it enters and away as it leaves.
Compare the effect of a convex lens and a concave lens on the light rays
Refraction Through Lenses
Lenses are found in a huge array of optical instrumen ts, ranging from the simple magnifying glass to a ca mera lens to the lens of
the human eye. The word lens derives from the Latin word for lentil bean—the shape of which is similar to that of the convex lens
(as shown in). The convex lens is shaped so that al l light rays that enter it parallel to its axis cros s one another at a single point on
the opposite side of the lens. The axis is defined a s a line normal to the lens at its center (as shown i n). Such a lens is called a
converging (or convex) lens for the corresponding e ffect it has on light rays. The expanded view of the p ath of one ray through the
lens illustrates how the ray changes direction both as it enters and as it leaves the lens.
Since the index of refraction of the lens is greater than that of air, the ray moves towards the perpendicu lar as it enters, and away
from the perpendicular as it leaves (this is in accor dance with the law of refraction). Due to the lens’s sha pe, light is thus bent
toward the axis at both surfaces. The point at which th e rays cross is defined as the focal point F of the l ens. The distance from the
center of the lens to its focal point is defined as t he focal length f of the lens. shows how a converging l ens, such as that in a
magnifying glass, can concentrate (converge) the nearly parallel light rays from the sun towards a small spot.
1 2
learning objectives

24.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717Magnifying Glass: Sunlight focused by a converging magnifying glass can burn paper. Light rays from the sun are nearly parallel
and cross at the focal point of the lens. The more powerfu l the lens, the closer to the lens the rays will cross.
The greater effect a lens has on light rays, the more powerful it is said to be. For example, a powerful con verging lens will focus
parallel light rays closer to itself and will have a smaller focal length than a weak lens. The light wil l also focus into a smaller, more
intense spot for a more powerful lens. The power P of a lens is defined as the inverse of its focal length. In equation form:
shows the effect of a concave lens on rays of light entering it parallel to its axis (the path taken by ray 2 in the figure is the axis of
the lens). The concave lens is a diverging lens, because it causes the light rays to bend away (dive rge) from its axis. In this case, the
lens is shaped so that all light rays entering it par allel to its axis appear to originate from the same point F, defined as the focal
point of a diverging lens. The distance from the ce nter of the lens to the focal point is again called the focal length f of the lens.
Note that the focal length and power of a diverging l ens are defined as negative. For example, if the distanc e to F in is 5.00 cm,
then the focal length is f=–5.00 cm and the power of the lens is P=–20 D. The expanded view of the path of o ne ray through the
lens illustrates how the shape of the lens (given the law of refraction) causes the ray to follow its particular pa th and be diverged.
In subsequent sections we will examine the technique of ray tracing to describe the formation of images by lenses. Additionally, we
will explore how image locations and characteristics can be q uantified with the help of a set of geometric optics equ ations.
Key Points
When light interacts with objects several times as larg e as its wavelength, it travels in straight lines and acts li ke a ray. A ray is
simply a straight line that originates at a point.
Ray tracing is the method for determining the paths li ght takes through matter, such as optical systems that inclu de lenses.
A thin lens is defined as one with a thickness that allows ra ys to refract, as illustrated in, but that does not allow properties such
as dispersion and aberrations. An ideal thin lens has two re fracting surfaces but the lens is thin enough to assume that light rays
bend only once.
There are five basic rules for tracing rays through a len s.
Ray tracing can be used to construct an image from the light rays originating from an object that pass through a lens. T he image
is located at the point where the rays cross. By choosing s everal points from an object the entire image can be constructed.
We define do to be the object distance, the distance of an object from the center of a lens. Image distance di is defined to be the
distance of the image from the center of a lens. The heigh t of the object and height of the image are given the symb ols ho and
hi, respectively.
The thin lens equation quickly provides the relation b etween d, d, and the focal length f. It can be derived from a geometric
analysis of ray tracing for thin lenses and is given by.
The magnification m of an image is the ratio between the image and object heig ht (h/h). The magnification is related to d, d,
h, and h by the following relation:.
The use of multiple elements allows for the correction o f more optical aberrations, such as the chromatic abberati on caused by
the wavelength -dependent index of refraction in glass, t han is possible using a single lens.
If the lenses of focal lengths f and fare “thin”, the combined focal length f of the lenses is giv en by while if the
lenses are separated by some distance d then the combined focal length is given by.
If the separation distance is equal to the sum of the focal lengths (d = f+f), the combined focal length is infinite. This
corresponds to a pair of lenses that transform a collimated beam into another collimated beam. This type of system is called an
afocal system (a simple optical telescope).
An achromatic doublet is a kind of compound lens designe d to bring two wavelengths (typically red and blue/viole t) into focus
in the same plane. This (partially) corrects for the ch romatic aberration found in a single simple lens. See.
If a lens is biconvex, a beam of light travelling paralle l to the lens axis and passing through the lens will be focused to a spot on
the axis, at a certain distance behind the lens (i.e. the f ocal length). In this case, the lens is called a positive or converging lens.
See.
If a lens is biconcave, a beam of light passing through the lens is diverged (spread); the lens is thus called a ne gative or
diverging lens. See.
The focal length of a thick lens in air can be calculat ed from the lensmaker’s equation:.i o
i o o i
o i
1 2
1 2

24.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717The signs of the lens’ radii of curvature indicate whether the corresponding surfaces are convex or concave. The sig ns are
reversed for the back surface of the lens: if R is positive the surface is concave, and if R is negative the surface is convex.
The lensmaker’s equation can be greatly simplified if the le ns thickness d is very small compared to R and R. In this case, the
thin lens approximation can then be made and the lensma ker’s equation can be approximated as.
Recall that the a ray will bend as it enters a medium with a d ifferent refractive index. Since the refractive index of a lens is
greater than air, a light ray will move towards the perp endicular as it enters and away as it leaves.
A convex lens has been shaped so that all light rays that enter it parallel to its axis cross one another at a singl e point on the
opposite side of the lens (the focal point). Such a lens is called a converging (or convex) lens for the converging e ffect it has on
light rays. See.
A concave lens is a diverging lens, because it causes the li ght rays to bend away (diverge) from its axis. shows the ef fect it has
on rays of light that enter it parallel to its axis (the pa th taken by ray 2 in the figure is the axis of the lens).
The greater effect a lens has on light rays, the more powerf ul it is said to be. A powerful converging lens will focu s parallel light
rays closer to itself and will have a smaller focal leng th than a weak lens. The power of a lens is given by the equ ation.
Key Terms
focal point: A focus—a point at which rays of light or other radiat ion converge.
ray tracing: A technique used in optics for analysis of optical sys tems.
thin lens: A thin lens is defined to be one whose thickness allows rays to refract but does not allow properties such as dis persion
and aberrations.
thin lens equation: Relates object distance do, image distance di, and focal l ength f:
image distance: The distance of the image from the center of the lens.
magnification: The apparent enlargement of an object in an image.
aberration: The convergence to different foci, by a lens or mir ror, of rays of light emanating from one and the same poin t, or
the deviation of such rays from a single focus; a defect in a focusing mechanism that prevents the intended focal point.
afocal system: An optical system that produces no net convergence or divergence of the beam, i.e. has an infinite effective foca l
length. This type of system can be created with a pair of optica l elements where the distance between the elements is equal to
the sum of each element’s focal length (d = f1+f2).
achromatic doublet: A type of lens made up of two simple lenses paired toget her designed so that the chromatic aberration of
each lens partially offsets the other; in this way light in a range of wavelengths may be brought to the same fo cus.
thick lens: Lenses whose thicknesses are not negligible (i.e., one cann ot make the simple assumption that a light ray is refracted
only once in the lens).
surface vertices: The points where each surface crosses the optical axis. T hey are important primarily because they are the
physically measurable parameters for the position of t he optical elements, and so the positions of the other cardinal points must
be known with respect to the vertices to describe the phys ical system.
convex lens: A lens having at least one convex surface, such that ligh t passing through it, may be brought to a focus.
concave lens: A lens having at least one concave surface, such that lig ht rays passing through it bend away from its optical axis.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42452/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Geometrical Optics - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32826/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution2 2
1 2

24.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717Simple lens. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_lens. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Lens (optics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lens_(optics). License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Ray tracing (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_tracing_(physics). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin lens approximation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_lens_approximation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thin-lens. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ray tracing. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ray_tracing. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
focal point. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/focal_point. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2GFG6cvPew. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Thin lens approximation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_lens_approximation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnification. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnification%23Calculating_the_magnificati on_of_optical_systems. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/image-distance. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thin-lens-equation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnification. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnification. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2GFG6cvPew. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thin Lens Equations for a Convex Lens. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4zhWFALZ-Q. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Achromat. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Achromat. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

24.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42292/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doublet (lens). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doublet_(lens). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Lens (optics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lens_(optics)%23Compound_lenses. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
aberration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aberration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
achromatic doublet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/achromatic%20doublet. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
afocal system. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/afocal%20system. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2GFG6cvPew. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thin Lens Equations for a Convex Lens. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4zhWFALZ-Q. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42292/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Lensmaker's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lensmaker's_equation%23Lensmaker.27s_equation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thick-lens. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
surface vertices. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/surface%20vertices. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2GFG6cvPew. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thin Lens Equations for a Convex Lens. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4zhWFALZ-Q. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42292/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright

24.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15717Lensmaker's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lensmaker's_equation%23Lensmaker.27s_equation. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Lensmaker's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lensmaker's_equation%23Lensmaker.27s_equation. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42459/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Lens (optics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lens_(optics). License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/concave-lens. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
convex lens. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convex_lens. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
focal point. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/focal_point. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Image Formation by Lenses. December 29, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/#import-auto-id1625442. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ray Diagrams, Concave Lens and Convex Mirror. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2GFG6cvPew. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thin Lens Equations for a Convex Lens. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4zhWFALZ-Q. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42292/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Lensmaker's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lensmaker's_equation%23Lensmaker.27s_equation. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Lensmaker's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lensmaker's_equation%23Lensmaker.27s_equation. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42470/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
24.3: Lenses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1618424.4: Mirrors
Describe interaction of the light with a mirror surface
Plane Mirrors and Reflection
A mirror is a reflective surface that does not allow t he passage of light and instead bounces it off, thus producing an image. The
most common mirrors are flat and called plane mirro rs. These mirrors are made by putting a thin layer o f silver nitrate or
aluminium behind a flat piece of glass.
When you place an object in front of a mirror, you s ee an image of the same object in the mirror. The ob ject is the source of the
incident rays, and the image is formed by the reflec ted rays. An image formed by reflection may be real o r virtual. A “real” image
occurs when light rays actually intersect at the imag e, and become inverted, or turned upside down. A “virtua l” image occurs when
light rays do not actually meet at the image. Instead, you “see” the image because your eye projects ligh t rays backward. You are
fooled into seeing an image! A virtual image is right s ide up (upright).
In flat, or plane mirrors, the image is a virtual im age, and is the same distance behind the mirror as t he object is in front of the
mirror. The image is also the same size as the object. These images are also parity inverted, which means t hey have a left-right
inversion.
Ray Diagrams
The way that we can predict how a reflection will look is by drawing a ray diagram. These diagrams can be use d to find the
position and size of the image and whether that image is rea l or virtual. These are the steps you follow to draw a ray d iagram:
1. Draw the plane mirror as a straight line on a principal a xis. The principal axis is an imaginary line that is dr awn perpendicular to
the mirror.
2. Draw the object as an arrow in front of the mirror.
3. Draw the image of the object, by using the principle tha t the image is placed at the same distance behind the mirr or that the
object is in front of the mirror. The image size is also t he same as the object size. shows these first three steps.
4. Place a dot at the point the eye is located.
5. Pick one point on the image and draw the reflected ray that travels to the eye as it sees this point. Remember to add an
arrowhead.
6. Draw the incident ray for light traveling from the corresp onding point on the object to the mirror, such that the la w of reflection
is obeyed.
7. Continue for other extreme points on the object (i.e. the tip and base of the arrow). A completed ray diagram is shown in
The angle in which a light ray hits the mirror is the same angle in which it will be reflected back. If, f or example, a light ray leaves
the top of an object travelling parallel to the pri ncipal axis, it will hit the mirror at a 0 degree ang le, and be reflected back at 0
degrees. When this happens, we say the ray hit the mi rror normally. If the light ray hit the object at a 30 degree angle, it will be
reflected back at a 30 degree angle.
Image Formation by Spherical Mirrors: Reflection and Sign Conventions
A mirror is a reflective surface that light does not pass through, made by a layer of silver nitrate or aluminium behind piece of
glass.
Distinguish properties of the concave and the convex mir rors
Overview
A mirror is a reflective surface that light does not pass through, but bounces off of and this produces a n image. Mirrors are made by
putting a thin layer of silver nitrate or aluminium behin d a flat piece of glass.learning objectives
learning objectives

24.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16184When you place an object in front of a mirror, you see the same object in the mirror. This image that appears to be behind the
mirror is called the image. The object is the source of the incident rays, and the image is formed by th e reflected rays. An image
formed by reflection may be real or virtual. A real image occurs when light rays actually intersect at t he image, and is inverted, or
upside down. A virtual image occurs when light rays d o not actually meet at the image. Instead, you “see” the image because your
eye projects light rays backward. A virtual image is right side up (upright).
This section will cover spherical mirrors. Spherical mir rors can be either concave or convex. The center of curvature is the point at
the center of the sphere and describes how big the sphere is. These concepts are shown in.
Spherical Mirrors: This figure shows the difference between a concave and con vex mirror.
Concave Mirrors
In a concave mirror, the principal axis is a line th at is perpendicular to the center of the mirror. The easiest way to visualize what a
image will look like in this type of mirror is a ray diagram. Before that can be done, the focal point m ust first be defined. This point
is half way between the mirror and the center of curv ature on the principal axis. The distance to the foca l point from the mirror is
called the focal length. We can see from the figure that this focal length is also equal to half of the radius of the curvature. shows
the ray diagram of a concave mirror.
Concave Ray Diagram: This is a ray diagram of a concave mirror. The steps t aken to draw are the same as those in a plane mirror.
A summary of the properties of concave mirrors is shown below:
converging
real image
inverted
image in front of mirror
Convex Mirrors
In convex mirrors, the principal axis is the same a s in a plane or concave mirror, perpendicular to the center of the mirror. In this
case, the focal point is behind the mirror. A convex mirror has a negative focal length because of this. The focal point is the same
distance from the mirror as in a concave mirror. This is sho wn in.

24.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16184
Convex Mirror Ray Diagram: A convex mirror with three rays drawn to locate the im age. Each incident ray is reflected according
to the Law of Reflection. The reflected rays diverge. If t he reflected rays are extended behind the mirror, then t heir intersection
gives the location of the image behind the mirror. For a convex mirror, the image is virtual and upright.
A summary of the properties of convex mirrors is shown bel ow:
diverging
virtual image
upright
image behind mirror
Key Points
Reflected images can be either real or virtual. In a pl ane mirror, the images are virtual.
The virtual images in a plane mirror have a left-right inversion.
Drawing a ray diagram is a way to predict what a reflected imag e will look like.
Images in mirrors can be either real or virtual.
A summary of the properties of the concave mirrors ar e shown below: converging real image inverted image in front of mirror.
A summary of the properties of the convex mirrors are sho wn below: diverging virtual image upright image behind mir ror.
Key Terms
virtual image: A virtual image occurs when light rays do not actually me et at the image
concave: curved like the inner surface of a sphere or bowl
convex: curved or bowed outward like the outside of a bowl or spher e or circle
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical optics: Mirrors. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40068/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optics%23Reflections. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/virtual-image. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optics%23Reflections. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical optics: Mirrors. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40068/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/concave. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
convex. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convex. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical optics: Mirrors. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40068/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

24.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16184Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical optics: Mirrors. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40068/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical optics: Mirrors. December 30, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40068/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
24.4: Mirrors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
25: Vision and Optical Instruments
25: Vision and Optical Instruments is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.25.1: The Human Eye
25.2: Other Optical InstrumentsTopic hierarchy

25.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1618625.1: The Human Eye
Identify parts of human eye and their functions
The human eye is the gateway to one of our five sens es. The human eye is an organ that reacts with light. It allows light perception,
color vision and depth perception. A normal human ey e can see about 10 million different colors! There a re many parts of a human
eye, and that is what we are going to cover in this atom.
Properties
Contrary to what you might think, the human eye is n ot a perfect sphere, but is made up of two differently shaped pieces, the
cornea and the sclera. These two parts are connected by a ring called the limbus. The part of the eye that is seen is the iris, which is
the colorful part of the eye. In the middle of the i ris is the pupil, the black dot that changes size. The cornea covers these elements,
but is transparent. The fundus is on the opposite o f the pupil, but inside the eye and can not be seen without special instruments.
The optic nerve is what conveys the signals of the e ye to the brain. is a diagram of the eye. The human e ye is made up of three
coats:
Diagram of the Human Eye: The cornea and lens of an eye act together to form a r eal image on the light-sensing retina, which has
its densest concentration of receptors in the fovea and a bli nd spot over the optic nerve. The power of the lens of an eye is
adjustable to provide an image on the retina for varyin g object distances. Layers of tissues with varying indices of re fraction in the
lens are shown here. However, they have been omitted from othe r pictures for clarity.
1. Outermost Layer – composed of the cornea and the sclera.
2. Middle Layer – composed of the choroid, ciliary body a nd iris.
3. Innermost Layer – the retina, which can be seen with an instr ument called the ophthalmoscope.
Once you are inside these three layers, there is the aq ueous humor (clear fluid that is contained in the a nterior chamber and
posterior chamber), vitreous body (clear jelly that is much bigger than the aqueous humor), and the fle xible lens. All of these are
connected by the pupil.
Dynamics
Whenever the eye moves, even just a little, it autom atically readjusts the exposure by adjusting the ir is, which regulates the size of
the pupil. This is what helps the eye adjust to dark places or really bright lights. The lens of the eye is similar to one in glasses or
cameras. The human eye is had an aperture, just like a camera. The pupil serves this function, and the iris is the aperture stop. The
different parts of the eye has different refractive i ndexes, and this is what bends the rays to form an im age. The cornea provides
two-thirds of the power to the eye. The lens provides th e remaining power. The image passes through several l ayers of the eye, but
happens in a way very similar to that of a convex len s. When the image finally reaches the retena, it is inverted, but the brain will
correct this. shows what happens.learning objectives

25.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186
Vision Diagram: An image is formed on the retina with light rays conve rging most at the cornea and upon entering and exiting th e
lens. Rays from the top and bottom of the object are traced and p roduce an inverted real image on the retina. The distance to the
object is drawn smaller than scale.
Eye Movement
Each eye has six muscles; lateral rectus, medial rect us, inferior rectus, superior rectus, inferior obliqu e, and superior oblique. All of
these muscles provide differnt tensions and torques t o control the movement of the eye. These are a few e xamples of types of eye
movement:
Rapid Eye Movement – Often referred to as REM, this happe ns in the sleep stage when most vivid dreams occur.
Saccade – These are quick, simultaneous movements of both ey es, and is controlled by the frontal lobe of the brain.
Vestibulo-ocular Reflex – This is the eye movement which is opposite to the movement of the head and keeps the obje ct you are
looking at in the center of vision.
Pursuit Movement – This is the tracking movement when you are following a moving object. It is less accurate than the
vestibulo-ocular reflex.
Color Vision
Using the cone cells in the retina, we perceive images in c olor; each type of cone specifically sees in regions of r ed, green, or blue.
Explain how the human eye perceives colors
With human eyesight, cone cells are responsible for color vision. From there, it is important to understan d how color is perceived.
Using the cone cells in the retina, we perceive images in color. Each type of cone specifically sees in regi ons of red, green, or blue,
(RGB), in the color spectrum of red, orange, yellow, green, b lue, indigo, violet.
The colors in between these absolutes are seen as di fferent linear combinations of RGB. This is why TVs and c omputer screens are
made up of thousands of little red, green, or blue lights, and why colors in electronic form are represente d by different values of
RGB. These values are usually given in the value of their frequency in log form.
YUV Color Space
The human eye is more sensitive to intensity change s than color changes, which is why it is acceptable to u se black and white
photography in place of color and why people can sti ll distinguish everything in the photo without colors. The intensity, or
luminance Y, can be found from the following equation:
The prior equation deals with the luminance, but the c hrominance (dealing with colors) can be found from the foll owing equations:learning objectives

25.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186You can go from RGB to YUV color spaces with the following ma trix operation:
Where C is equal to:
Visual Sensitivity
In, we can see that
Visual Sensitivity: This graph shows the sensitivity of the eye to luminance (Y) and chrominance (U, V) components of images.
The horizontal scale is spatial frequency, and represe nts the frequency of an alternating pattern of parallel st ripes with sinusoidally
varying intensity. The vertical scale is the contrast se nsitivity of human vision, which is the ratio of the maxim um visible range of
intensities to the minimum discernible peak-to-peak i ntensity variation at the specified frequency.
the maximum sensitivity to Y occurs for spatial freque ncies around 5 cycles / degree, which corresponds to striped patterns with
a half-period (stripe width) of 1.8 mm at a distance of 1 m (~a rm’s length).
The eye has very little response above 100 cycles / degre e, which corresponds to a stripe width of 0.1 mm at 1 m. On a standard
PC display of width 250 mm, this would require 2500 pels per line! Hence the current SVGA standard of 1024×768 pels still
falls somewhat short of the ideal and is limited by CRT spo t size. Modern laptop displays have a pel size of about 0.3 mm, but
are pleasing to view because the pel edges are so sharp (and there is no flicker).
The sensitivity to luminance drops off at low spatial fre quencies, showing that we are not very good at estimating abs olute
luminance levels as long as they do not change with time – the luminance sensitivity to temporal fluctuations (fl icker) does not
fall off at low spatial frequencies.
The maximum chrominance sensitivity is much lower than th e maximum luminance sensitivity with blue-yellow (U) sensi tivity
being about half of red-green (V) sensitivity and about 16 of the maximum luminance sensitivity.
The chrominance sensitivities fall off above 1 cycle / de gree, requiring a much lower spatial bandwidth than lu minance.
We can now see why it is better to convert to the YUV do main before attempting image compression. The U and V components
may be sampled at a lower rate than Y (due to narrower bandwidth) and may be quantified more coarsely (due to lower contrast
sensitivity).
Resolution of the Human Eye
The human eye is a sense organ that allows vision and is cap able to distinguish about 10 million colors.

25.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186Describe field of view and color sensitivity of the huma n eye
The human eye is an organ that reacts to light in ma ny circumstances. As a conscious sense organ the human eye allows vision; rod
and cone cells in the retina allow conscious light pe rception and vision, including color differentiation and the perception of depth.
The human eye can distinguish about 10 million colors. A model of the human eye can be seen in.
Schematic Diagram of the Human Eye: Structure of the eye and closeup of the retina.
The retina of human eye has a static contrast ratio of around 100:1 (about 6.5 f-stops). As soon as the eye m oves, it re-adjusts its
exposure, both chemically and geometrically, by adjust ing the iris (which regulates the size of the pupil). Initial dark adaptation
takes place in approximately four seconds of profoun d, uninterrupted darkness; full adaptation, through a djustments in retinal
chemistry, is mostly complete in thirty minutes. Hence, a dynamic contrast ratio of about 1,000,000:1 (abou t 20 f-stops) is possible.
The process is nonlinear and multifaceted, so an int erruption by light starts the adaptation process ove r again. Full adaptation is
dependent on good blood flow (thus dark adaptation may be hampered by poor circulation, and vasoconstrictors lik e tobacco).
The eye includes a lens not dissimilar to lenses found in optical instruments (such as cameras). The same principles can be applied.
The pupil of the human eye is its aperture. The iris is the diaphragm that serves as the aperture stop. Ref raction in the cornea causes
the effective aperture (the entrance pupil) to diff er slightly from the physical pupil diameter. The ent rance pupil is typically about 4
mm in diameter, although it can range from 2 mm (f/ 8.3) in a brightly lit place to 8 mm (f/2.1) in the dark. The latter value
decreases slowly with age; older people’s eyes sometimes dila te to not more than 5-6mm.
The approximate field of view of an individual human eye is 95° away from the nose, 75° downward, 60° toward the nose, and 60°
upward, allowing humans to have an almost 180-degree f orward-facing horizontal field of view. With eyeball r otation of about 90°
(head rotation excluded, peripheral vision included), horizontal field of view is as high as 170°. About 12 –15° temporal and 1.5°
below the horizontal is the optic nerve or blind spot whic h is roughly 7.5° high and 5.5° wide.
Nearsightedness, Farsidedness, and Vision Correction
In order for the human eye to see clearly, the image n eeds to be formed directly on the retina; if it is not, the im age is blurry.
Identify factors responsible for nearsightedness and far sightedness vision defects
The human eye is the gateway to one of our five sens es. The human eye is an organ that reacts with light. It allows light perception,
color vision, and depth perception, but not all eyes are perfect. A normal human eye can see about 10 million di fferent colors!learning objectives
learning objectives

25.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186Properties
Contrary to what you might think, the human eye is n ot a perfect sphere, but is made up of two differently shaped pieces, the
cornea and the sclera. These two parts are connected by a ring called the limbus. The part of the eye that is seen is the iris, which is
the colorful part of the eye. In the middle of the iris is the pupil, which is the black dot that changes size. The cornea covers these
elements, but it is transparent. The fundus is on the o pposite of the pupil, but inside the eye and cannot be seen without special
instruments. The optic nerve is what conveys the signals of the eye to the brain. shows a diagram of the eye.
Vision
The different parts of the eye have different refrac tive indexes, and this is what bends the rays to form an image. The cornea
provides two-thirds of the power to the eye. The lens provides the remaining power. The image passes throug h several layers of the
eye, but this happens in a way very similar to that o f a convex lens. When the image finally reaches the re tena, it is inverted, but the
brain will correct this. For the vision to be clear, th e image has to be formed directly on the retina. The focus needs to be changed,
much like a camera, depending on the distance and si ze of the object. The eye’s lens is flexible, and ch anges shape. This changes
the focal length. The eye’s ciliary muscles control the shape of the lens. When you focus on something, you squeeze or relax these
muscles.
Vision Diagram: An image is formed on the retina with light rays conve rging most at the cornea and upon entering and exiting th e
lens. Rays from the top and bottom of the object are traced and p roduce an inverted real image on the retina. The distance to the
object is drawn smaller than scale.
Near Sighted Vision
Nearsightedness, or myopia is a vision defect that o ccurs when the focus of the image is in front of the r etina. This is shown in.
Close objects are seen fine, but distant objects are blurry. This can be corrected by placing diverging lenses in front of the eye. This
will cause the light rays to spread out before they enter t he eye.
Near Sighted Vision: This occurs when the image is formed before the retina
Far Sighted Vision
Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is a vision defect that oc curs when the focus of the image is behind the retina. This is shown in.
Distant objects are seen fine, but closer objects are blurry. This can be corrected by placing converging lenses in front of the eye.
This will cause the light rays to slightly converge togeth er before they enter the eye.

25.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186Far Sighted Vision: This occurs when the image is formed behind the retina
Key Points
The eye is made up of a number of parts, including the iri s, pupil, cornea, and retina.
The eye has six muscles which control the eye movement, all p roviding different tension and torque.
The eye works a lot like a camera, the pupil provides the f- stop, the iris the aperture stop, the cornea resembles a lens. The way
that the image is formed is much like the way a convex lens forms an image.
The cones in the retina are responsible for seeing col ors. There are three types of cones, each type can only pick up one color:
red, green, or blue. This is why TVs and computer screens are ma de up of thousands of little red, green, or blue lights.
The human eye is more sensitive to intensity changes than color changes, which is why it is acceptable to use black a nd white
photography in place of color and why people can still d istinguish everything in the photo without colors.
Colors are usually written in different values of red, gree n, or blue. Each value is the log form of that frequency.
The retina of human eye has a static contrast ratio of ar ound 100:1 and a dynamic contrast ratio of about 1,000,00 0:1.
The eye includes a lens not dissimilar to lenses found in opt ical instruments, such as cameras.
The approximate field of view of an individual human eye is 95° away from the nose, 75° downward, 60° toward the no se, and
60° upward, allowing humans to have an almost 180-degree for ward-facing horizontal field of view.
The focal point of the image will change depending on how th e lens is shaped. Your lens changes depending on the distan ce of
the object, by the relaxation or contraction of the mus cles, and this controls the focal length.
Near sightedness occurs when the image is formed before the re tina.
Farsightedness occurs when the image is formed behind the r etina.
Key Terms
pupil: The hole in the middle of the iris of the eye, through which light passes to be focused on the retina.
aperture: The diameter of the aperture that restricts the width of the light path through the whole system. For a telescope, t his is
the diameter of the objective lens (e.g., a telescope may have a 100 cm aperture).
luminance: The intensity of an object, independent from its color.
static contrast ratio: Luminosity ratio of the brightest and darkest color the system is capable of processing simultaneously at
any instant of time.
dynamic contrast ratio: Luminosity ratio of the brightest and darkest color the s ystem is capable of processing over time
(while the picture is moving).
field of view: The angular extent of what can be seen, either with the eye or with an optical instrument or camera.
myopia: A disorder of the vision where distant objects appear b lurred because the eye focuses their images in front of t he retina
instead of on it.
hyperopia: A disorder of the vision where the eye focusses images b ehind the retina instead of on it, so that distant objects can
be seen better than near objects.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Human eye. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_eye. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
aperture. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aperture. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
pupil. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pupil. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

25.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nick Kingsbury, Human Vision. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11084/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
luminance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/luminance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Nick Kingsbury, Human Vision. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11084/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
field of view. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/field_of_view. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Optics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Human eye. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_e...3Dynamic_range. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
static contrast ratio. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/static%...ntrast%20ratio. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dynamic contrast ratio. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dynamic...ntrast%20ratio. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Nick Kingsbury, Human Vision. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11084/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
File:Schematic diagram of the human eye en.svg - Wikibooks, open books for an open world. Provided by: Wikibooks.
Located at: en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?...20080202013345. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical Optics: The Human Eye (Grade 11). September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39031/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Human eye. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_eye. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
hyperopia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/hyperopia. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
myopia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/myopia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Nick Kingsbury, Human Vision. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m11084/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
File:Schematic diagram of the human eye en.svg - Wikibooks, open books for an open world. Provided by: Wikibooks.
Located at: en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?...20080202013345. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical Optics: The Human Eye (Grade 11). December 25, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39031/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

25.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16186OpenStax College, Physics of the Eye. December 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42482/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Geometrical Optics: The Human Eye (Grade 11). December 25, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39031/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
25.1: The Human Eye is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1618725.2: Other Optical Instruments
A magnifying glass is a convex lens that lets the obse rver see a larger image of the object under observa tion. The lens is usually
mounted in a frame with a handle, as shown below.
Magnifying Glass: A magnifying glass is a convex lens that lets the observer s ee a larger image of the object under observation.
The magnification of a magnifying glass depends upon where the instrument is placed between the user’s ey e and the object being
viewed and upon the total distance between eye and ob ject. The magnifying power is the ratio of the sizes of the images formed on
the user’s retina with and without the magnifying glas s. When not using the lens, the user would typically bring the object as close
to the eye as possible without it becoming blurry. (Th is point, known as the near point, varies with age. In a young child its distance
can be as short as five centimeters, while in an elderl y person its distance may be as long as one or two me ters.) Magnifiers are
typically characterized using a “standard” value of 0.25 m.
The highest magnifying power is obtained by putting th e lens very close to the eye and moving both the eye and th e lens together to
obtain the best focus. When the lens is used this way, the mag nifying power can be found with the following equation:
where = optical power. When the magnifying glass is held close to the object and the eye is moved away, the m agnifying power is
approximated by:
Typical magnifying glasses have a focal length of 25c m and an optical power of four diopters. This type of glass would be sold as a
2x magnifier, but a typical observer would see about one t o two times magnification depending on the lens position.
The earliest evidence of a magnifying device was Arist ophanes’s “lens” from 424 BC, a glass globe filled with water. (Seneca
wrote that it could be used to read letters “no matte r how small or dim.”) Roger Bacon described the proper ties of magnifying
glasses in the 13th century, and eyeglasses were also devel oped in 13th-century Italy.
The Camera
Cameras are optical devices that allow a user to record an image of an object, either on photo paper or digitally.
What is a Camera?
A camera is a device that allows you to record images, either on film or digitally. Cameras can record im ages as well as movies;
movies themselves got their name from moving picture s. The word camera comes from the Latin phrase camera obscura, which
means “dark chamber. ” The camera obscura was an earl y instrument for projecting images from slides. The camera that you use
today is an evolution of the camera obscura.
A camera is usually comprised of an opening, or aper ture, that allows light to enter into a hollow area an d a surface that records the
light at the other end. In the 20 century, these imag es would be stored on photographic paper that then had to be developed, butth

25.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187now most cameras store images digitally.
How does a Camera Work?
Cameras have a lot of components that allow them to work. Let ’s look at them one at a time.
The Lens
The camera lens allows the light to enter into the c amera and is typically convex. There are many types of lenses that can be used,
each for a different type of photography. There are lenses fo r close-ups, for sports, for architecture, and for portr aits.
The two major features of a lens are focal length and aperture. The focal length determines the magnifica tion of the image, and the
aperture controls the light intensity. The f-number on a camera controls the shutter speed. This is the sp eed at which the shutter,
which acts as its “eyelid,” opens and closes. The lar ger the aperture, the smaller the f-number must be in order to get the shutter
opened and closed fully. The time it takes to open and close the shutter is called the exposure. shows an e xample of two lenses of
the same size but with different apertures.
Focus
Some cameras have a fixed focus, and only objects of a certain size at a certain distance from the camera will be in focus. Other
cameras allow you to manually or automatically adjust the focus. shows a picture taken with a camera with ma nual focus; this
allows the user to determine which objects will be in fo cus and which will not. The range of distance within wh ich objects appear
sharp and clear is called the depth of field.
Exposure
The aperture controls the intensity of the light en tering the camera, and the shutter controls the exp osure — the amount of time that
the light is allowed into the camera.
Shutter
The shutter is what opens and closes to allow light t hrough the aperture. The speed at which it opens and c loses is called the fnumber. For a larger aperture, the f-number is genera lly small for a quick shutter speed. For a smaller ap erture, the f-number is
larger, allowing for a slower shutter speed.
The Compound Microscope
A compound microscope is made of two convex lenses; the first, the ocular lens, is close to the eye, and t he second is the objective
lens.
A compound microscope uses multiple lenses to magni fy an image for an observer. It is made of two convex lenses: the first, the
ocular lens, is close to the eye; the second is the object ive lens.
Compound microscopes are much larger, heavier and mo re expensive than simple microscopes because of the mu ltiple lenses. The
advantages of these microscopes, due to the multiple lenses, are the reduced chromatic aberrations and e xchangeable objective
lenses to adjust magnification.
shows a diagram of a compound microscope made from two convex lenses. The first lens is called the objectiv e lens and is closest
to the object being observed. The distance between th e object and the objective lens is slightly longer th an the focal length, f. The
objective lens creates an enlarged image of the objec t, which then acts as the object for the second lens. The second or ocular lens
is the eyepiece. The distance between the objective l ens and the ocular lens is slightly shorter than th e focal length of the ocular
lens, f. This causes the ocular lens to act as a magni fying glass to the first image and makes it even lar ger. Because the final image
is inverted, it is farther away from the observer’s eye and thus much easier to view.0
e

25.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187
Diagram of a Compound Microscope: This diagram shows the setup of mirrors that allow for the m agnification of images.
Since each lens produces a magnification that multip lies the height of the image, the total magnificatio n is a product of the
individual magnifications. The equation for calculati ng this is as follows:
where m is total magnification, m is objective lens magn ification, m is ocular lens magnification.
The Telescope
The telescope aids in observation of remote objects by collecting electromagnetic radiation, such as visible li ght.
The telescope aids in observation of remote objects by collecting electromagnetic radiation, such as x- rays, visible light, infrared,
and submillimeter rays. The first telescopes were inv ented in the Netherlands in the 1600s and used glass lenses. Shortly after,
people began to build them using mirrors and called them ref lecting telescopes.
History
The first telescope was a refracting telescope made by spectacle makers in the Netherlands in 1608. In 161 0, Galileo made his own
improved design. After the refracting telescope was inv ented, people began to explore the idea of a telesc ope that used mirrors. The
potential advantages of using mirrors instead of le nses were a reduction in spherical aberrations and th e elimination of chromatic
aberrations. In 1668, Newton built the first practical re flecting telescope. With the invention of achromatic lenses in 1733, color
aberrations were partially corrected, and shorter, mo re functional refracting telescopes could be construc ted. Reflecting telescopes
were not practical because of the highly corrosive m etals used to make mirrors until the introduction of silver-coated glass mirrors
in 1857.
Types of Telescopeso e

25.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187Refracting Telescopes
Schematic of Keplerian Refracting Telescope: All refracting telescopes use the same principles. The combi nation of an objective
lens 1 and some type of eyepiece 2 is used to gather more light than the human eye is able to collect on its own, focu s it 5, and
present the viewer with a brighter, clearer, and magnifie d virtual image 6.
The figure above is a diagram of a refracting telesc ope. The objective lens (at point 1) and the eyepiece (point 2) gather more light
than a human eye can collect by itself. The image i s focused at point 5, and the observer is shown a brig hter, magnified virtual
image at point 6. The objective lens refracts, or bend s, light. This causes the parallel rays to converge at a focal point, and those that
are not parallel converge on a focal plane.
Reflecting Telescopes
Reflecting telescopes, such as the one shown in, use e ither one or a combination of curved mirrors that re flect light to form an
image. They allow an observer to view objects that have very large diameters and are the primary type of t elescope used in
astronomy. The object being observed is reflected b y a curved primary mirror onto the focal plane. (Th e distance from the mirror to
the focal plane is called the focal length.) A sensor could be located here to record the image, or a sec ondary mirror could be added
to redirect the light to an eyepiece.
Catadioptric Telescopes
Catadioptric telescopes, such as the one shown in, com bine mirrors and lenses to form an image. This system ha s a greater degree
of error correction than other types of telescopes. The combination of reflective and refractive element s allows for each element to
correct the errors made by the other.
X-Ray Diffraction
The principle of diffraction is applied to record interf erence on a subatomic level in the study of x-ray crystal lography.
X-ray diffraction was discovered by Max von Laue, who wo n the Nobel Prize in physics in 1914 for his mathemati cal evaluation of
observed x-ray diffraction patterns.
Diffraction is the irregularities caused when waves encou nter an object. You have most likely observed the ef fects of diffraction
when looking at the bottom of a CD or DVD. The rainbow pat tern that appears is a result of the light being in terfered by the pits
and lands on the disc that hold the data. shows this effect. Diffraction can happen to any type of wave, not just visible light waves.
Bragg Diffraction
In x-ray crystallography, the term for diffraction is Bragg diffraction, which is the scattering of waves from a crystalline structure.
William Lawrence Bragg formulated the equation for B ragg’s law, which relates wavelength to the angle of in cidence and lattice
spacing. Refer to for a diagram of the following equation: nλ=2dsin(θ)nλ=2dsin (θ)
n – numeric constant known as the order of the diffracted beam
λ – wavelength
d – distance between lattice planes
θ – angle of diffracted wave
The waves will experience either constructive interfer ence or destructive interference. Similarly, the x-ray beam that is diffracted
off a crystal will have some parts that have stronge r energy, and others that lose energy. This depends on the wavelength and the
lattice spacing.

25.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187The X-ray Diffractometer
The XRD machine uses copper metal as the element for the x-ray source. Diffraction patterns are recorded ov er an extended period
of time, so it is very important that the beam inten sity remains constant. Film used to be used to record the data, but that was
inconvenient because it had to be replaced often. No w the XRD machines are equipped with semiconductor detec tors. These XRD
machines record images in two ways, either continuous scan s or step scanning. In continuous scans, the detector moves in circular
motions around the object, while a beam of x-ray is c onstantly shot at the detector. Pulses of energy are plotted with respect to
diffraction angle. The step scan method is the more popular method. It is much more efficient than cont inuous scans. In this
method, the detector collects data at a single fixed angle at a time. To ensure that the incident beam i s continuous, XRD machines
are equipped with a Soller slit. This acts like polar ized sunglasses by organizing random x-ray beams into a stack of neatly
arranged waves parallel to the plane of the detector.
X-Ray Imaging and CT Scans
Radiography uses x-rays to view material that cannot b e seen by the human eye by identifying areas of diff erent density and
composition.
Overview
X-ray imaging, or radiography, used x-rays to view mate rial within the body that cannot be seen by the human eye by identifying
areas of different density and composition. CT Scans use the assistance of a computer to take this informa tion, and generate 3
dimensional images.
X-ray Imaging
X-ray radiographs are produced by projecting a beam of X-rays toward an object, in medical cases, a part of th e human body.
Depending on the physical properties of the object (density and composition), some of the X-rays can be part ially absorbed. The
portion of the rays that are not absorbed then pass t hrough the object and are recorded by either film o r a detector, like in a camera.
This provides the observer with a 2 dimensional represe ntation of all the components of that object superim posed on each other.
shows an image of a human elbow.
X-Ray Radiography: Radiography of the knee in a modern X-ray machine.
Tomography
Tomography refers to imaging by sections, or section ing. demonstrates this concept. The three-dimensional image is broken down
into sections. (S) shows a section from the left and (S) shows a section from the right. 1 2

25.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187CT Scans
CT scans, or computed tomography scans use a combin ation of X-ray radiography and tomography to produce slices of areas of the
human body. Doctors can analyze the area, and based o n the ability of the material to block the X-ray bea m, understand more about
the material. shows a CT Scan of a human brain. Doctors c an cross reference the images with known properties of the same
material and determine if there are any inconsistenci es or problems. Although generally these scans are shown as in, the
information recorded can be used to create a 3 dime nsional image of the area. shows a three dimensional i mage of a brain that was
made by compiling CT Scans.
Specialty Microscopes and Contrast
Microscopes are instruments that let the human eye see ob jects that would otherwise be too small.
Microscopes are instruments that let the human eye see objects that would otherwise be too small. There are ma ny types of
microscopes: optical microscopes, transmission electro n microscopes, scanning electron microscopes and scan ning probe
microscopes.
Microscope Classes
One way to group microscopes is based on how the image is generated through the microscope. Here are three wa ys we can
classify microscopes:
1.) Light or Photon – optical microscopes
2.) Electrons – electron microscopes
3.) Probe – scanning probe microscopes.
Microscopes can also be classified based on whether the y analyze the sample by scanning a point at a time (scanning electron
microscopes), or by analyzing the entire sample at onc e (transmission electron microscopes).
Types of Microscopes
In optical microscopes, the better the contrast between t he image and the surface it is being viewed on, the better the resolution
will be to the viewer. There are many illumination techn iques to generate improved contrast. These techniques inc lude “dark
field” and “bright field.” With the dark field techniqu e the light is scattered by the object and the image appears to the observer
on a dark background. With the bright field technique the object is illuminated from below to increase the con trast in the image
seen by viewers.
Transmission Electron Microscope: The TEM passes electron s through the sample, and allows people to see objects th at are
normally not seen by the naked eye. A beam of electrons is t ransmitted through an ultra thin specimen, interacting with the
specimen as it passes through. This interaction forms an im age that is magnified and focused onto an imaging device.
Scanning Electron Microscopes: Referred to as SEM, these mi croscopes look at the surface of objects by scanning the m with a
fine electron beam. The electron beam of the microscope interacts with the electrons in the sample and produ ces signals that can
be detected and have information about the topography a nd composition.
Atomic Force Microscopy: The AFM is a scanning probe type of mi croscopy with very high resolution and is one of the
foremost tools for imaging at the nanoscale. The mechani cal probe feels the surface with a cantilever with a shar p tip. The
deflection of the tip is then measured using a laser s pot that is reflected from the surface of the cantilever.
Limits of Resolution and Circular Aperatures
In optical imaging, there is a fundamental limit to the re solution of any optical system that is due to diffraction.
The resolution of an optical imaging system (e.g., a m icroscope, telescope, or camera) can be limited by fac tors such as
imperfections in the lenses or misalignment. However, th ere is a fundamental maximum to the resolution of a ny optical system that
is due to diffraction (a wave nature of light). An op tical system with the ability to produce images with a ngular resolution as good
as the instrument’s theoretical limit is said to be diff raction limited.
For telescopes with circular apertures, the size of th e smallest feature in an image that is diffraction limited is the size of the Airy
disc, as shown in. As one decreases the size of the apertu re in a lens, diffraction increases and the ring feature s from diffraction

25.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187become more prominent. Similarly, when imaged objects g et smaller, features from diffraction begin to blur the boundary of the
object. Since effects of diffraction become most prom inent for waves whose wavelength is roughly similar to the dimensions of the
diffracting objects, the wavelength of the imaging beam se ts a fundamental limit on the resolution of any optical system.
Airy Disk: Computer-generated image of an Airy disk. The gray sca le intensities have been adjusted to enhance the brightne ss of
the outer rings of the Airy pattern.
The Abbe Diffraction Limit for a Microscope
The observation of sub-wavelength structures with micr oscopes is difficult because of the Abbe diffraction limit. In 1873, Ernst
Abbe found that light, with wavelength λ, traveling in a medium with refractive index n, cannot be converge d to a spot with a
radius less than:
The denominator nsinθnsin θ is called the numerical a perture and can reach about 1.4 in modern optics, henc e the Abbe limit is
roughly d=λ/2. With green light around 500 nm, the Ab be limit is 250 nm which is large compared to most n anostructures, or
biological cells with sizes on the order of 1μm and in ternal organelles which are much smaller. Using a 500 nm beam, you cannot
(in principle) resolve any features with size less than arou nd 250 nm.
Improving Resolution
To increase the resolution, shorter wavelengths can be used such as UV and X-ray microscopes. These techniques offer better
resolution but are expensive, suffer from lack of co ntrast in biological samples and may damage the sam ple. There are techniques
for producing images that appear to have higher res olution than allowed by simple use of diffraction-li mited optics. Although these
techniques improve some aspect of resolution, they gen erally involve an enormous increase in cost and compl exity. Usually the
technique is only appropriate for a small subset of imagin g problems.
Aberrations
An aberration, or distortion, is a failure of rays to conver ge at one focus because of limitations or defects in a lens or mirror.
The Basics of Aberrations
An aberration is the failure of rays to converge at o ne focus because of limitations or defects in a len s or mirror. Basically, an
aberration is a distortion of an image due to the fa ct that lenses will never behave exactly according t o the way they were modeled.
Types of aberrations vary due to the size, material comp osition, or thickness of a lens, or the position of an obj ect.
Chromatic Aberration
A chromatic aberration, also called achromatism or chromatic distortion, is a distortion of colors. This aberration happens when the
lens fails to focus all the colors on the same conve rgence point. This happens because lenses have a differ ent index of refraction for
different wavelengths of light. The refractive index decreases with increasing wavelength. These aberratio ns or distortions occur on
the edges of color boundaries between bright and dar k areas of an image. Since the index of refraction o f lenses depends on color
or wavelength, images are produced at different place s and with different magnifications for different co lors. shows chromatic
aberration for a single convex lens. Since violet rays have a higher refractive index than red, they are be nt more and focused closed
to the lens. shows a two-lens system using a diverging lens to partially correct for this, but it is nearl y impossible to do so
completely.

25.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187The law of reflection is independent of wavelength, an d therefore mirrors do not have this problem. This i s why it is advantageous
to use mirrors in telescopes and other optical system s.
Comatic Aberration
A comatic aberration, or coma, occurs when the object is off-center. Different parts of a lens of a mirror d o not refract or reflect the
image to the same point, as shown in. They can also be result of an imperfection in the lens or other compo nent and result in offaxis point sources. These aberrations can cause objects to appear pear-shaped. They can also cause stars to appear distorted or
appear to have tails, as with comets.
Other Aberrations
Spherical aberrations are a form of aberration where r ays converging from the outer edges of a lens conver ge to a focus closer to
the lens, and rays closer to the axis focus further. Asti gmatisms are also a form of aberration in the lenses of the eyes where rays
that propagate in two perpendicular planes have diffe rent foci. This can eventually cause a monochromatic image to distort
vertically or horizontally. Another aberration or di stortion is a barrel distortion where image magnific ation decreases with the
distance from the optical axis. The apparent effect i s that of an image which has been mapped around a sph ere, like in a fisheye
lens.
Key Points
The magnification of a magnifying glass depends upon whe re it is placed between the user’s eye and the object being viewed
and upon the total distance between eye and object.
The magnifying power is the ratio of the sizes of the imag es formed on the user’s retina with and without the lens.
The highest magnifying power is obtained by putting th e lens very close to the eye and moving both the eye and th e lens
together to obtain the best focus.
Cameras work very similarly to how the human eye works. The i ris is similar to the lens; the pupil is similar to the aper ture; and
the eyelid is similar to the shutter.
Cameras are a modern evolution of the camera obscura. The c amera obscura was a device used to project images.
The most important part of a camera is the lens, which allo ws the image to be magnified and focused. This can be done
manually on some cameras and automatically on newer camera s.
Movie cameras work by taking many pictures each second and then showing each image in order very quickly to give the effect
that the pictures are moving. This is where the name “movie ” comes from.
A compound microscope uses multiple lenses to create a n enlarged image that is easier for a human eye to see; thi s is due to the
fact that the final image is farther away from the observer, and therefore the eye is more relaxed when viewing the ima ge.
The object is placed just beyond to focal length of the objective lens. An enlarged image is then captured by the objective lens,
which acts as the object for the ocular lens. The ocular len s is closer to the new image than its focal length, causing it to act as a
magnifying glass.
Since the final image is just a multiple of the size of t he first image, the final magnification is a product of both magnifications
from each lens.
Until the invention of silver-backed mirrors, refractive mirrors were the standard for use in telescopes. This wa s because of the
highly corrosive nature of the metals used in older mirro rs. Since then, reflective mirrors have replaced refracti ve mirrors in
astronomy.
There are three main types of optical telescopes: refract ive, reflective, and catadioptric.
Refractive telescopes, such as the one invented by Galil eo, use an objective lens and an eyepiece. The image is focu sed at the
focal point and allows the observer to see a brighter, larg er image than they would with their own eye.
Reflective telescopes use curved mirrors that reflect li ght to form an image. Sometimes a secondary mirror redirects the image
to an eyepiece. Other times the image is recorded by a sensor a nd observed on a computer screen.
Catadioptric telescopes combine mirrors and lenses to form an image. This system has a greater degree of error correc tion than
other types of telescopes. The combination of reflecti ve and refractive elements allows for each element to co rrect the errors
made by the other.
Diffraction is what happens when waves encounter irregula rities on a surface or object and are caused to inter fere with each
other, either constructively or destructively.

25.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187The Bragg law pertains to applying the laws of diffractio n to crystallography in order to obtain precise images of the lattice
structures in atoms.
The x-ray diffractometer is the machine used to scan the o bject by shooting a wave at it and recording the interfer ence it
encounters.
Most XRDs are equipped with a Soller slit, which acts like a pol arizer for the incident beam. It makes sure that the inci dent
beam being recorded is perfectly parallel to the object bei ng analyzed.
Radiography uses x-rays to take pictures of materials with in an object that can not be seen. They shoot x-ray be ams through the
object, and collect the rays on film or a detector on the other side. Some of the rays are absorbed into the denser materials, and
this is how the image is produced.
X-ray radiographs take images of all the materials within an o bject superimposed on each other.
The traditional, superimposed images can be helpful for a number of applications, but CT scans enable the observer t o see just
the desired sections of a material.
Modern CT scans can even take all the slices, or layers, and ar range them into a three-dimensional representation of t he object.
For better resolution, it is important that there is a lot o f contrast between the image and the background.
Microscopes are classified by what interacts with the object, such as light or electrons. They are also classified by wh ether they
take images by scanning a little at a time or by taking im ages of the entire object at once.
Some common types of specialty microscopes are scanning e lectron micrscopes (SEM), transmission electron microscop es
(TEM), both of which are electron microscopes, and atomic force microscopes (ATM) which is a scanning probe microscope.
Since effects of diffraction become most prominent for wa ves whose wavelength is roughly similar to the dimensions o f the
diffracting objects, the wavelength of the imaging beam se ts a fundamental limit on the resolution of any optical system.
The Abbe diffraction limit for a microscope is given as.
Since the diffraction limit is proportional to waveleng th, to increase the resolution, shorter wavelengths can be used such as UV
and X-ray microscopes.
There are many types of aberrations, including chromatic, sp herical, comatic, astigmatism, and barrel distortion.
Chromatic aberrations occur due to the fact that len ses have different refractive indexes for different wa velengths, and therefore
colors. These aberrations occur right on the edges of image s between light and dark areas of the picture.
Mirrors do not have chromatic aberrations because they d o not rely on the index of refraction, but rather the inde x of reflection,
which is independent of wavelength.
Comatic aberrations are due to imperfections in lenses and cause the point source to be off-center. This can cause i mages to
appear pear-shaped, or cause images to have tails, as with c omets.
Key Terms
lens: an object, usually made of glass, that focuses or defocuse s the light that passes through it
diopter: a unit of measure of the power of a lens or mirror, equal t o the reciprocal of its focal length in meters. Myopia i s
diagnosed and measured in diopters
convex: curved or bowed outward like the outside of a bowl or spher e or circle
shutter speed: The duration of time for which the shutter of a camera remains open when exposing photographic film or other
photosensitive material to light for the purpose of record ing an image
chromatic aberration: an optical aberration, in which an image has colored frin ges, caused by differential refraction of light of
different wavelengths
spherical aberration: a type of lens aberration that causes blurriness, partic ularly away from the center of the lens
achromatic: free from color; transmitting light without color-rela ted distortion
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
crystallography: The experimental science of determining the arrange ment of atoms in solids.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
radiography: The use of X-rays to view a non-uniformly composed mat erial such as the human body.
tomography: Imaging by sections or sectioning.
superimposed: Positioned on or above something else, especially in lay ers

25.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187contrast: A difference in lightness, brightness and/or hue between two colors that makes them more or less distinguishable
diffraction: The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle.
nanostructure: Any manufactured structure having a scale between mole cular and microscopic.
aperture: The diameter of the aperture that restricts the width of the light path through the whole system. For a telescope, t his is
the diameter of the objective lens (e.g., a telescope may have a 100 cm aperture).
distortion: (optics) an aberration that causes magnification to cha nge over the field of view.
refraction: Changing of a light ray’s direction when it passes throug h variations in matter.
aberration: The convergence to different foci, by a lens or mir ror, of rays of light emanating from one and the same poin t, or
the deviation of such rays from a single focus; a defect in a focusing mechanism that prevents the intended focal point.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Magnifying glass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnifying_glass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diopter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diopter. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
lens. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/lens. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
convex. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convex. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Camera lens. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Camera_lens. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Camera. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Camera. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
shutter speed. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shutter_speed. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Compound microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compoun...und_microscope. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Microscopes. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42491/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
chromatic aberration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/chromatic_aberration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
chromatic aberration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/chromatic_aberration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Telescopes. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42493/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Catadioptric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Catadio...ric_telescopes. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Reflecting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflecting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

25.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187Telescopes. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Telescopes. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
achromatic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/achromatic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
spherical aberration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spherical_aberration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wayne Lin and Andrew Barron, An Introduction to X-Ray Diffrac tion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38289/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...e-interference. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...e-interference. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
crystallography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/crystallography. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
X-ray imaging. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray_imaging. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Tomography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Computed tomography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Computed_tomography. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
superimposed. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superimposed. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
tomography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tomography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Transmission electron microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmi...ron_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dark field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

25.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187Optical microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Microscopes. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microscopes. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Scanning electron microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scannin...ron_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
contrast. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contrast. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Diffraction limit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction_limit. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
aperture. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aperture. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
nanostructure. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nanostructure. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Airy Disk. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airy_di...ry-pattern.svg. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Airy Disk. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airy_di...ry-pattern.svg. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
Coma aberration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coma_aberration. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Chromatic aberration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromatic_aberration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Aberrations. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42292/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

25.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16187Distortion (optics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Distortion_(optics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
distortion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/distortion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...ion/refraction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
aberration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aberration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Magnifying Glass. Provided by: Pixabay. Located at: pixabay.com/p-450690/?no_redirect. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Optical_microscope_nikon_alphaphot. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Schematic of Keplerian refracting telescope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refracting_telescope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Airy Disk. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airy_di...ry-pattern.svg. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
25.2: Other Optical Instruments is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
26: Wave Optics
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.2: Diffraction
26.3: Further Topics
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
26: Wave Optics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1619126.1: Superposition and Interference
Contrast the effects of constructive and destructive int erference
Conditions for Wave Interference
Interference is a phenomenon in which two waves superimpose to form a resultant wave of greater or lesser amplitude. Its effects
can be observed in all types of waves (for example, light, acoustic waves and water waves). Interference usu ally refers to the
interaction of waves that are correlated (coherent) with each other because they originate from the same source, or they have the
same or nearly the same frequency. When two or more wa ves are incident on the same point, the total displac ement at that point is
equal to the vector sum of the displacements of the individual waves. If a crest of one wave meets a crest of another wave of the
same frequency at the same point, then the magnitud e of the displacement is the sum of the individual magnitudes. This is
constructive interference and occurs when the phase difference between the wave s is a multiple of 2π. Destructive interference
occurs when the crest of one wave meets a trough of an other wave. In this case, the magnitude of the displac ements is equal to the
difference in the individual magnitudes, and occurs when this difference is an odd multiple of π. Example s of constructive and
destructive interference are shown in. If the differe nce between the phases is intermediate between these two extremes, then the
magnitude of the displacement of the summed waves lies betwe en the minimum and maximum values.
Wave Interference: Examples of constructive (left) and destructive (right) wave interference.
High School Phy sics - Wave InterferenceHigh School Phy sics - Wave Interferencelearning objectives

26.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191Wave Interference: A brief introduction to constructive and destructive wave interference and the principle of superposition.
A simple form of wave interference is observed when two waves of the same frequency (also called a plane wave) intersect at an
angle, as shown in. Assuming the two waves are in phase a t point B, then the relative phase changes along th e x-axis. The phase
difference at point A is given by:
Interference of Plane Waves: Geometrical arrangement for two plane wave interference.
Constructive interference occurs when the waves are in ph ase, or
Destructive interference occurs when the waves are half a c ycle out of phase, or
Reflection Due to Phase Change
Light exhibits wave characteristics in various media as well as in a vacuum. When light goes from a vacuum t o some medium (like
water) its speed and wavelength change, but its frequ ency f remains the same. The speed of light in a medium i s v = c/n, where n is
the index of refraction. For example, water has an ind ex of refraction of n = 1.333. When light is reflected off a medium with a
higher index of refraction, crests get reflected as tro ughs and troughs get reflected as crests. In other words, t he wave undergoes a
180 degree change of phase upon reflection, and the ref lected ray “jumps” ahead by half a wavelength.
Air Wedge
An air wedge is a simple interferometer used to visualize th e disturbance of the wave front after propagation throug h a test object.

26.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191Describe how an air wedge is used to visualize the disturba nce of a wave front after proagation
Air Wedge
An air wedge is one of the simplest designs of shearin g interferometers used to visualize the disturbance of the wave front after
propagation through a test object. An air wedge can be used with nearly any light source, including non-cohe rent white light. The
interferometer consists of two optical glass wedges (~2-5 degrees), pushed together and then slightly sep arated from one side to
create a thin air-gap wedge. An example of an air wedge i nterferometer is shown in.
Air Wedge: Example of air wedge interferometer
The air gap between the two glass plates has two unique properties: it is very thin (micrometer scale) and has perfect flatness.
Because of this extremely thin air-gap, the air wedg e interferometer has been successfully used in exper iments with femto-second
high-power lasers.
An incident beam of light encounters four boundaries at which the index of refraction of the media chang es, causing four reflected
beams (or Fresnel reflections) as shown in. The first reflection occurs when the beam enters the first gla ss plate. The second
reflection occurs when the beam exits the first plate and enters the air wedge, and the third reflection o ccurs when the beam exits
the air wedge and enters the second glass plate. The fourth beam is reflected when it encounters the bound ary of the second glass
plate. The air wedge angle, between the second and thir d Fresnel reflections, can be adjusted, causing the refl ected light beams to
constructively and destructively interfere and crea te a fringe pattern. To minimize image aberrations of the resulting fringes, the
angle plane of the glass wedges has to be placed orthogon al to the angle plane of the air-wedge.
learning objectives

26.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191Light Reflections Inside an Air Wedge Interferometer: Beam path inside of air wedge interferometer
Newton’s Rings
Newton’s rings are a series of concentric circles centered at th e point of contact between a spherical and a flat surface.
Apply Newton’s rings to determine light characteristics of a lens
Newton’s Rings
In 1717, Isaac Newton first analyzed an interference p attern caused by the reflection of light between a sp herical surface and an
adjacent flat surface. Although first observed by Rob ert Hooke in 1664, this pattern is called Newton’s ring s, as Newton was the
first to analyze and explain the phenomena. Newton’s r ings appear as a series of concentric circles centered at the point of contact
between the spherical and flat surfaces. When viewed wi th monochromatic light, Newton’s rings appear as alter nating bright and
dark rings; when viewed with white light, a concentric r ing pattern of rainbow colors is observed. An example of Newton’s rings
when viewed with white light is shown in the figure below.
Newton’s Rings in a drop of water: Newton’s rings seen in two plano-convex lenses with their fla t surfaces in contact. One
surface is slightly convex, creating the rings. In white l ight, the rings are rainbow-colored, because the differe nt wavelengths of
each color interfere at different locations.
The light rings are caused by constructive interfere nce between the light rays reflected from both surfac es, while the dark rings are
caused by destructive interference. The outer rings a re spaced more closely than the inner ones because the slope of the curved lens
surface increases outwards. The radius of the Nth bright rin g is given by:
where N is the bright-ring number, R is the radius of cu rvature of the lens the light is passing through, and λ is the wavelength of
the light passing through the glass.
A spherical lens is placed on top of a flat glass surf ace. An incident ray of light passes through the curved lens until it comes to the
glass-air boundary, at which point it passes from a re gion of higher refractive index n (the glass) to a region of lower n (air). At this
boundary, some light is transmitted into the air, while some light is reflected. The light that is transmit ted into the air does not
experience a change in phase and travels a a distanc e, d, before it is reflected at the flat glass surface be low. This second air-glass
boundary imparts a half-cycle phase shift to the reflec ted light ray because air has a lower n than the glass. The two reflected light
rays now travel in the same direction to be detected. As one gets farther from the point at which the two su rfaces touch, the distance
dincreases because the lens is curving away from the flat sur face.learning objectives

26.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191
Formation of Interference Fringes: This figure shows how interference fringes form.
If the path length difference between the two reflect ed light beams is an odd multiple of the wavelength di vided by two, λ/2, the
reflected waves will be 180 degrees out of phase and de structively interfere, causing a dark fringe. If the path-length difference is
an even multiple of λ/2, the reflected waves will be in phase with one anothe r. The constructive interference of the two reflected
waves creates a bright fringe.
Key Points
When two or more waves are incident on the same point, the total displacement at that point is equal to the vect or sum of the
displacements of the individual waves.
Light exhibits wave characteristics in various media as well as in a vacuum. When light goes from a vacuum to s ome medium,
like water, its speed and wavelength change, but its frequen cy f remains the same.
When light is reflected off a medium with a higher inde x of refraction, crests get reflected as troughs and trou ghs get reflected
as crests. In other words, the wave undergoes a 180 degree ch ange of phase upon reflection, and the reflected ray “j umps” ahead
by half a wavelength.
An air wedge interferometer consists of two optical glas s wedges (~2-5 degrees), pushed together and then slightl y separated
from one side to create a thin air-gap wedge.
The air gap between the two glass plates has two unique prop erties: it is very thin (micrometer scale) and has perfect flatness.
To minimize image aberrations of the resulting fringes, the angle plane of the glass wedges has to be placed orthogonal to the
angle plane of the air wedge.
When viewed with monochromatic light, Newton’s rings appe ar as alternating bright and dark rings; when viewed with wh ite
light, a concentric ring pattern of rainbow colors is ob served.
If the path length difference between the two reflected l ight beams is an odd multiple of the wavelength divided by two, λ/2, the
reflected waves will be 180 degrees out of phase and destru ctively interfere, causing a dark fringe.
If the path length difference is an even multiple of λ/ 2, the reflected waves will be in-phase with one another. T he constructive
interference of the two reflected waves creates a bright fringe.
Key Terms
coherent: Of waves having the same direction, wavelength and phase, as light in a laser.
plane wave: A constant-frequency wave whose wavefronts (surfaces of con stant phase) are infinite parallel planes of constant
peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velocity ve ctor.
orthogonal: Of two objects, at right angles; perpendicular to each ot her.
interferometer: Any of several instruments that use the interference of wa ves to determine wavelengths and wave velocities,
determine refractive indices, and measure small distances, temperature changes, stresses, and many other useful mea surements.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
lens: an object, usually made of glass, that focuses or defocuse s the light that passes through it
monochromatic: Describes a beam of light with a single wavelength (i.e., of one specific color or frequency).

26.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42456/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42501/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
plane wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/plane%20wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
coherent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coherent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Air-wedge shearing interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airwedge_shearing_interferometer. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interferometer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interferometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
orthogonal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/orthogonal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Air-wedge shearing interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airwedge_shearing_interferometer. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Air-wedge shearing interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airwedge_shearing_interferometer. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Newton's rings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_rings. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
lens. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/lens. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/monochromatic.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Interference (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference_(wave_propagation). License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

26.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16191Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Air-wedge shearing interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airwedge_shearing_interferometer. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Air-wedge shearing interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Airwedge_shearing_interferometer. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Newton's rings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_rings. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Newton's rings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_rings. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
26.1: Superposition and Interference is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1619526.2: Diffraction
Formulate Huygens’s Principle
Overview
The Huygens-Fresnel principle states that every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets. These wavelets sp read out in the
forward direction, at the same speed as the source wave. The n ew wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets.
Background
Christiaan Huygens was a Dutch scientist who developed a useful technique for determining how and where waves p ropagate. In
1678, he proposed that every point that a luminous d isturbance touches becomes itself a source of a sphe rical wave. The sum of the
secondary waves (waves that are a result of the distu rbance) determines the form of the new wave. shows secon dary waves
traveling forward from their point of origin. He was ab le to come up with an explanation of the linear and spherical wave
propagation, and derive the laws of reflection and re fraction (covered in previous atoms) using this pri nciple. He could not,
however, explain what is commonly known as diffraction effects. Diffraction effects are the deviations from rectilinear propagation
that occurs when light encounters edges, screens and a pertures. These effects were explained in 1816 by Fre nch physicist AugustinJean Fresnel.
Straight Wavefront: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront. Each poi nt on the wavefront emits a semicircular
wavelet that moves a distance s=vt. The new wavefront is a line tangent to the wavelets.
Huygens’s Principle
Figure 1 shows a simple example of the Huygens’s Principle of diffraction. The principle can be shown with the equation bel ow:
where s is the distance, v is the propagation speed, and t is time.
Each point on the wavefront emits a wave at speed, v. T he emitted waves are semicircular, and occur at t, time later. The new
wavefront is tangent to the wavelets. This principle wo rks for all wave types, not just light waves. The princip le is helpful in
describing reflection, refraction and interference. shows visually how Huygens’s Principle can be used to expl ain reflection, and
shows how it can be applied to refraction.learning objectives

26.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195
Huygens’s Refraction: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront traveli ng from one medium to another where its speed
is less. The ray bends toward the perpendicular, since th e wavelets have a lower speed in the second medium.
Reflection: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront strikin g a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitted as each point
on the wavefront struck the mirror. The tangent to these wav elets shows that the new wavefront has been reflected at a n angle equal
to the incident angle. The direction of propagation is pe rpendicular to the wavefront, as shown by the downward-poin ting arrows.
This principle is actually something you have seen o r experienced often, but just don’t realize. Although this principle applies
to all types of waves, it is easier to explain using sound waves, since sound waves have longer wavelengths. If someone is
playing music in their room, with the door closed, y ou might not be able to hear it while walking past the room. However, if
that person where to open their door while playing mu sic, you could hear it not only when directly in fron t of the door opening,
but also on a considerable distance down the hall to e ither side. is a direct effect of diffraction. When l ight passes through much
smaller openings, called slits, Huygens’s principle sho ws that light bends similar to the way sound does, just on a much smaller
scale. We will examine in later atoms single slit diff raction and double slit diffraction, but for now it i s just important that we
understand the basic concept of diffraction.
Diffraction
As we explained in the previous paragraph, diffraction is defined as the bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an
obstacle.
Young’s Double Slit Experiment
The double-slit experiment, also called Young’s expe riment, shows that matter and energy can display both wave and particle
characteristics.Example:

26.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195Explain why Young’s experiment more credible than Huygens’
The double-slit experiment, also called Young’s expe riment, shows that matter and energy can display both wave and particle
characteristics. As we discussed in the atom about the Huygens principle, Christiaan Huygens proved in 1628 that light was a wave.
But some people disagreed with him, most notably Isaa c Newton. Newton felt that color, interference, and diffr action effects
needed a better explanation. People did not accept th e theory that light was a wave until 1801, when Englis h physicist Thomas
Young performed his double-slit experiment. In his e xperiment, he sent light through two closely spaced vertical slits and observed
the resulting pattern on the wall behind them. The pattern that resulted can be seen in.
Young’s Double Slit Experiment: Light is sent through two vertical slits and is diffracted i nto a pattern of vertical lines spread out
horizontally. Without diffraction and interference, the light would simply make two lines on the screen.
Wave-Particle Duality
The wave characteristics of light cause the light to pass through the slits and interfere with itself, produ cing the light and dark areas
on the wall behind the slits. The light that appears on the wall behind the slits is scattered and absor bed by the wall, which is a
characteristic of a particle.
Young’s Experiment
Why was Young’s experiment so much more credible than Huygens’? Because, while Huygens’ was correct, he could not
demonstrate that light acted as a wave, while the doubl e-slit experiment shows this very clearly. Since light has relatively short
wavelengths, to show wave effects it must interact with somet hing small — Young’s small, closely spaced slits worked.
The example in uses two coherent light sources of a si ngle monochromatic wavelength for simplicity. (This m eans that the light
sources were in the same phase.) The two slits cause the two coherent light sources to interfere with each othe r either
constructively or destructively.
Constructive and Destructive Wave Interference
Constructive wave interference occurs when waves inter fere with each other crest-to-crest (peak-to-peak) or trough-to-trough
(valley-to-valley) and the waves are exactly in phas e with each other. This amplifies the resultant wave. Destructive wave
interference occurs when waves interfere with each othe r crest-to-trough (peak-to-valley) and are exactly out of phase with each
other. This cancels out any wave and results in no li ght. These concepts are shown in. It should be noted that this example uses a
single, monochromatic wavelength, which is not common in rea l life; a more practical example is shown in.learning objectives

26.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195
Practical Constructive and Destructive Wave Interference: Double slits produce two coherent sources of waves that inte rfere.
(a) Light spreads out (diffracts) from each slit because t he slits are narrow. These waves overlap and interfere constru ctively (bright
lines) and destructively (dark regions). We can only see this if the light falls onto a screen and is scattered into our eyes. (b)
Double-slit interference pattern for water waves are nearly identical to that for light. Wave action is greatest in r egions of
constructive interference and least in regions of dest ructive interference. (c) When light that has passed thr ough double slits falls on
a screen, we see a pattern such as this.
Theoretical Constructive and Destructive Wave Interference: The amplitudes of waves add together. (a) Pure constru ctive
interference is obtained when identical waves are in phase. (b) Pure destructive interference occurs when identica l waves are
exactly out of phase (shifted by half a wavelength).
The pattern that results from double-slit diffraction is not random, although it may seem that way. Each sl it is a different distance
from a given point on the wall behind it. For each different distan ce, a different number of wavelengths fit into that path. The wa ves

26.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195all start out in phase (matching crest-to-crest), bu t depending on the distance of the point on the wall from the slit, they could be in
phase at that point and interfere constructively, or they c ould end up out of phase and interfere with each other de structively.
Diffraction Gratings: X-Ray, Grating, Reflection
Diffraction grating has periodic structure that splits a nd diffracts light into several beams travelling in diff erent directions.
Describe function of the diffraction grating
Diffraction Grating
A diffraction grating is an optical component with a periodic structure that splits and diffracts light into several beams travelling in
different directions. The directions of these beams depend on the spacing of the grating and the waveleng th of the light so that the
grating acts as the dispersive element. Because of t his, gratings are often used in monochromators, spectrom eters, wavelength
division multiplexing devices, optical pulse compressi ng devices, and many other optical instruments.
A photographic slide with a fine pattern of purple l ines forms a complex grating. For practical applicati ons, gratings generally have
ridges or rulings on their surface rather than dark l ines. Such gratings can be either transmissive or ref lective. Gratings which
modulate the phase rather than the amplitude of the inc ident light are also produced, frequently using hologra phy.
Ordinary pressed CD and DVD media are every-day examples of diffraction gratings and can be used to demonstrat e the effect by
reflecting sunlight off them onto a white wall. (see). This is a side effect of their manufacture, as one surface of a CD has many
small pits in the plastic, arranged in a spiral; th at surface has a thin layer of metal applied to make the pits more visible. The
structure of a DVD is optically similar, although it may have more than one pitted surface, and all pitted su rfaces are inside the
disc. In a standard pressed vinyl record when viewed fr om a low angle perpendicular to the grooves, one can see a similar, but less
defined effect to that in a CD/DVD. This is due to viewi ng angle (less than the critical angle of reflection of the black vinyl) and
the path of the light being reflected due to being cha nged by the grooves, leaving a rainbow relief pattern be hind.
Readable Surface of a CD: The readable surface of a Compact Disc includes a spiral track wound tightly enough to cause light to
diffract into a full visible spectrum.
Some bird feathers use natural diffraction grating whi ch produce constructive interference, giving the fe athers an iridescent effect.
Iridescence is the effect where surfaces seem to change color when the angle of illumination is changed. An op al is another
example of diffraction grating that reflects the ligh t into different colors.
X-Ray Diffraction
X-ray crystallography is a method of determining the a tomic and molecular structure of a crystal, in which the crystalline atoms
cause a beam of X-rays to diffract into many specific directions. By measuring the angles and intensitie s of these diffracted beams,
a crystallographer can produce a three-dimensional picture of the density of electrons within the crystal. From this electron density,
the mean positions of the atoms in the crystal can b e determined, as well as their chemical bonds, their di sorder and various other
information.
In an X-ray diffraction measurement, a crystal is mou nted on a goniometer and gradually rotated while bein g bombarded with Xrays, producing a diffraction pattern of regularly s paced spots known as reflections (see). The two-dimension al images taken atlearning objectives

26.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195different rotations are converted into a three-dime nsional model of the density of electrons within the crystal using the
mathematical method of Fourier transforms, combined with chemical data known for the sample.
Reflections in Diffraction Patterns: Each dot, called a reflection, in this diffraction patte rn forms from the constructive
interference of scattered X-rays passing through a crystal. The data can be used to determine the crystalline st ructure.
Single Slit Diffraction
Single slit diffraction is the phenomenon that occur s when waves pass through a narrow gap and bend, formin g an interference
pattern.
Formulate the Huygens’s Principle
Diffraction
As we explained in a previous atom, diffraction is defin ed as the bending of a wave around the edges of an o pening or obstacle.
Diffraction is a phenomenon all wave types can experie nce. It is explained by the Huygens-Fresnel Principle, and the principal of
superposition of waves. The former states that every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets. These wav elets spread out in the
forward direction, at the same speed as the source wa ve. The new wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets. The
superposition principle states that at any point, the net result of multiple stimuli is the sum of all stimuli.
Single Slit Diffraction
In single slit diffraction, the diffraction pattern is determined by the wavelength and by the length of the slit. Figure 1 shows a
visualization of this pattern. This is the most simpl istic way of using the Huygens-Fresnel Principle, which wa s covered in a
previous atom, and applying it to slit diffraction. But what happens when the slit is NOT the exact (or clos e to exact) length of a
single wave?
Single Slit Diffraction – One Wavelength: Visualization of single slit diffraction when the slit is equal to one wavelength.learning objectives

26.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195A slit that is wider than a single wave will produce in terference -like effects downstream from the slit. It is easier to understand by
thinking of the slit not as a long slit, but as a numb er of point sources spaced evenly across the width of the slit. This can be seen in
Figure 2.
Single Slit Diffraction – Four Wavelengths: This figure shows single slit diffraction, but the slit is th e length of 4 wavelengths.
To examine this effect better, lets consider a single m onochromatic wavelength. This will produce a wavefront that is all in the
same phase. Downstream from the slit, the light at any given point is made up of contributions from each o f these point sources.
The resulting phase differences are caused by the d ifferent in path lengths that the contributing port ions of the rays traveled from
the slit.
The variation in wave intensity can be mathematicall y modeled. From the center of the slit, the diffractin g waves propagate
radially. The angle of the minimum intensity (θ) can be related to wavelength (λ) and the slit’s width (d) such th at:
The intensity (I) of waves at any angle can also be c alculated as a relation to slit width, wavelength and intensity of the original
waves before passing through the slit:
where x is equal to:
The Rayleigh Criterion
The Rayleigh criterion determines the separation angle between two light sources which are distinguishable from eac h other.
Explain meaning of the Rayleigh criterion
Resolution Limits
Along with the diffraction effects that we have discusse d in previous atoms, diffraction also limits the detai l that we can obtain in
images. shows three different circumstances of resolution limits due to diffraction:
min
learning objectives

26.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195Resolution Limits: (a) Monochromatic light passed through a small circular ap erture produces this diffraction pattern. (b) Two
point light sources that are close to one another produce overlapping images because of diffraction. (c) If they ar e closer together,
they cannot be resolved or distinguished.
(a) shows a light passing through a small circular apertu re. You do not see a sharp circular outline, but a spot with fuzzy edges.
This is due to diffraction similar to that through a s ingle slit.
(b) shows two point sources close together, producing over lapping images. Due to the diffraction, you can just barely
distinguish between the two point sources.
(c) shows two point sources which are so close together that yo u can no longer distinguish between them.
This effect can be seen with light passing through sma ll apertures or larger apertures. This same effect ha ppens when light passes
through our pupils, and this is why the human eye has limit ed acuity.
Rayleigh Criterion
In the 19th century, Lord Rayleigh invented a crite ria for determining when two light sources were disting uishable from each other,
or resolved. According to the criteria, two point sourc es are considered just resolved (just distinguishabl e enough from each other
to recognize two sources) if the center of the diffra ction pattern of one is directly overlapped by the f irst minimum of the diffraction
pattern of the other. If the distance is greater be tween these points, the sources are well resolved (i.e., they are easy to distingiush
from each other). If the distance is smaller, they a re not resolved (i.e., they cannot be distinguished f rom each other). The equation
to determine this is:
θ – angle the objects are separated by, in radian λ – wavelength of light D – aperture diameter. shows this c oncept visually. This
equation also gives the angular spreading of a source of li ght having a diameter D.
Rayleigh Criterion: (a) This is a graph of intensity of the diffraction pat tern for a circular aperture. Note that, similar to a sing le
slit, the central maximum is wider and brighter than those to the sides. (b) Two point objects produce overlapping diffraction
patterns. Shown here is the Rayleigh criterion for being jus t resolvable. The central maximum of one pattern lies o n the first
minimum of the other.
Key Points
Diffraction is the concept that is explained using Huygens ’s Principle, and is defined as the bending of a wave around the edges
of an opening or an obstacle.
This principle can be used to define reflection, as shown in the figure. It can also be used to explain refraction and interference.
Anything that experiences this phenomenon is a wave. By appl ying this theory to light passing through a slit, we can prove it is
a wave.
The principle can be shown with the equation below: s=vt s – distance v – propagation speed t – time Each point on the
wavefront emits a wave at speed, v. The emitted waves are semicir cular, and occur at t, time later. The new wavefront is tan gent
to the wavelets.

26.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195The wave characteristics of light cause the light to pass through the slits and interfere with each other, produ cing the light and
dark areas on the wall behind the slits. The light that appears on the wall behind the slits is partially absorbe d by the wall, a
characteristic of a particle.
Constructive interference occurs when waves interfere with e ach other crest-to-crest and the waves are exactly in phase with
each other. Destructive interference occurs when waves in terfere with each other crest-to-trough (peak-to-vall ey) and are
exactly out of phase with each other.
Each point on the wall has a different distance to each sl it; a different number of wavelengths fit in those two path s. If the two
path lengths differ by a half a wavelength, the waves will interfere destructively. If the path length differs by a whole
wavelength the waves interfere constructively.
The directions of the diffracted beams depend on the s pacing of the grating and the wavelength of the light so that the grating
acts as the dispersive element.
Gratings are commonly used in monochromators, spectrometer s, wavelength division multiplexing devices, optical puls e
compressing devices, and other optical instruments.
Diffraction of X-ray is used in crystallography to produ ce the three-dimensional picture of the density of electr ons within the
crystal.
The Huygens’s Principle states that every point on a wave front is a source of wavelets. These wavelets spread out in t he forward
direction, at the same speed as the source wave. The new wavef ront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets.
If a slit is longer than a single wavelength, think of i t instead as a number of point sources spaced evenly acro ss the width of the
slit.
Downstream from a slit that is longer than a single wavelengt h, the light at any given point is made up of contribution s from
each of these point sources. The resulting phase differ ences are caused by the different in path lengths tha t the contributing
portions of the rays traveled from the slit.
Diffraction plays a large part in the resolution at which we are able to see things. There is a point where two light so urces can be
so close to each other that we cannot distinguish them ap art.
When two light sources are close to each other, they can be: unresolved (i.e., not able to distinguish one from the other), just
resolved (i.e., only able to distinguish them apart from each other), and a little well resolved (i.e., easy to tell apart from one
another).
In order for two light sources to be just resolved, the c enter of one diffraction pattern must directly overlap with the first
minimum of the other diffraction pattern.
Key Terms
diffraction: The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle.
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
iridescence: The condition or state of being iridescent; exhibitio n of colors like those of the rainbow; a prismatic play o f color.
diffraction: The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle.
monochromatic: Describes a beam of light with a single wavelength (i.e., of one specific color or frequency).
resolution: The degree of fineness with which an image can be recorded or produced, often expressed as the number of pixels
per unit of length (typically an inch).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION

26.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. Septembe r 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Huygensu2013Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Huygens%E2%80%93Fresnel_principle. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Youngs double-slit experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Youngs_doubleslit_experiment. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction grating. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction_grating. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
X-ray diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray_diffraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Iridescent. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Iridescent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction%23Diffraction_grating. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Diffraction grating. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction_grating%23Natural_gratings.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
X-ray crystallography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray_crystallography. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Multiple Slit Diffraction. September 18, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42512/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

26.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195iridescence. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/iridescence. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-ray diffraction pattern 3clpro. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Xray_diffraction_pattern_3clpro.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/Compact_disc.svg/500pxCompact_disc.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Paul Padley, Single Slit Diffraction. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12915/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Single slit diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_slit_diffraction%23Singleslit_diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/monochromatic.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-ray diffraction pattern 3clpro. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Xray_diffraction_pattern_3clpro.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/Compact_disc.svg/500pxCompact_disc.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wavelength=slitwidthspectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wavelength=slitwidthspectrum.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave Diffraction 4Lambda Slit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave_Diffraction_4Lambda_Slit.png. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Rayleigh criterion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh_criterion%23Explanation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

26.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16195OpenStax College, Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Crite rion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42517/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
resolution. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resolution. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Huygens's Principle: Diffraction. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42505/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Youngu2019s Double Slit Experiment. Janu ary 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42508/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-ray diffraction pattern 3clpro. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Xray_diffraction_pattern_3clpro.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/Compact_disc.svg/500pxCompact_disc.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wavelength=slitwidthspectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wavelength=slitwidthspectrum.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave Diffraction 4Lambda Slit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave_Diffraction_4Lambda_Slit.png. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Crite rion. January 12, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42517/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Crite rion. January 11, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42517/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
26.2: Diffraction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1619626.3: Further Topics
Describe process that leads to the thin film interference
Thin Film Interference
This is a phenomenon that occurs when incident rays re flected by the upper and lower boundaries of a thin film interfere with one
another and form a new wave. A material is considered to be a thin film if its thickness is in the sub-nan ometer to micron range,
e.g. a soap bubble. Studying the new wave can shed light on properties of the film, such as thickness or refrac tive index.
Interference effects are most prominent when the ligh t interacts with something that has a size similar to i ts own wavelength. The
thickness of a thin film is a few times smaller than the wavelength of the light, λ. Color is indirectly a ssociated with wavelength.
The interference ratio of wavelength to size of the obje ct causes the appearance of colors.
EM to Optics 29: Thin Film InterferenceEM to Optics 29: Thin Film Interference
Thin Film Interference: In this video I continue with my tutorials on Electromag netism to Optics which is pitched at university
undergraduate level. I have intended for a long time t o record videos which describe the transition made from cl assicallearning objectives

26.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196electromagnetism to optics. In many respects these video s will cover ‘wave’ optics. I devote much time to discussing th e complex
exponential representation of waves, Maxwell’s Equations, t he wave equation etc.Specifically here, I derive the form ula for the
optical path difference and the phase difference for a ‘ wave’ of light propagating through a thin film. This exp ression can be used
for anti reflective coatings. The phase difference is th e product of the optical path differene and the wave vector k.I hope it’s of
use!! Thank you for watching and I hope that this matches yo ur requirements.
Thin Film Interference in Oil: Thin film interference can be seen in this oil slick.
Examples of Thin Film Interference
You have probably witnessed thin film interference i n your every day life and just not realized it. Whe never you see the bright,
rainbow like colors in oil floating in water, shown in, this is thin film interference. The colors that ap pear in bubbles that kids play
with are also a result of thin film interference. Thi n film interference can have commercial application s, such as anti- reflection
coatings and optical filters.
How it Works
shows a diagram of how thin film interference works. As l ight strikes the surface of a film it is either tran smitted or reflected at the
upper surface. Light that is transmitted reaches the bottom surface and may once again be transmitted or r eflected. The light
reflected from the upper and lower surfaces will inte rfere. The degree of constructive or destructive inte rference between the two
light waves is dependent upon the difference in their phase. This difference is dependent upon the thickn ess of the film layer, the
refractive index of the film, and the angle of inci dence of the original wave on the film. Additionally, a phase shift of 180° or ππ
radians may be introduced upon reflection at a boun dary depending on the refractive indices of the mate rials on either side said
boundary. This phase shift occurs if the refractive i ndex of the medium the light is travelling through is less than the refractive
index of the material it is striking. In other words, if n1<n2n1<n2and the light is travelling from mater ial 1 to material 2, then a
phase shift will occur upon reflection. The pattern of light that results from this interference can appea r either as light and dark
bands or as colorful bands depending upon the source of t he incident light.

26.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196
Light on a Thin Film: Light incident on a thin film. Demonstration of the optic al path length difference for light reflected from the
upper and lower boundaries.
Interference will be constructive if the optical path dif ference is equal to an integer multiple of the wavelength of light:
where mm is the integer, dd is the thickness of the fil m, and λλ is the wavelength of light. However, this co ndition may change if
phase shifts occur upon reflection.
Polarization By Passing Light Through Polarizers
Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations hav e a definite direction relative to the direction of propag ation of the wave.
Discuss polarization of electromagnetic waves
Definition of Polarization
As we discusses in previous atoms, light waves are a type o f electromagnetic waves, in the visible spectrum. These electromagnetic
(EM) waves are transverse waves. Figure 1 demonstrates tha t a transverse wave is one oscillates perpendicular to the direction of
the energy transfer. If the wave is traveling from le ft to right, it is oscillating up and down. Polarizati on is the property of waves
that allow them to oscillate in more than one direct ion, but that direction is relative to that of the d irection the wave is traveling in.
For an EM wave, the direction of polarization is the d irection parallel to the electric field. In Figure 2 you can see that the EM and
magnetic fields are perpendicular to the path of tr avel. Since the direction of polarization is parallel to the electric field, you can
consider the blue arrows to be the direction of polarizatio n.
Figure 2: An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave. The electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to the direction o f
propagation.learning objectives

26.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196
Figure 1: Transverse Waves
How it Works
Now, to examine the effects of passing light through a polarizer, lets look at Figure 3. shows a stationary ve rtical slot, which will
act as a polarizer, and two waves traveling in the sam e direction, but one is oscillating vertically,a, (an d therefore vertically
polarized), and the other, b, horizontally. What hap pens to these waves as they pass through the polarize r?When wave a, the
vertically oscillating wave is passed through the vert ically polarized slot, nothing happens. The wave pass es through untouched or
manipulated. When wave b, the horizontally oscillating wave is passed through, the vertically polarized slot blocks the wave, and it
is not passed through at all. Now that we understand the concept of polarization, and how it works, how can we a pply this to make
it useful? Look at Figure 4. The image on the left is full of glare, which makes it hard to see what we are l ooking at. The image on
the right was taken with a polarized lens, so you only see the image, and none of the annoying glare. How this works is diagramed
in Figure 5. Many light sources are unpolarized, and a re comprised of many waves in all possible directions. Po larized lenses only
allow one direction of light to pass through, minimiz ing the unwanted aspects of the light rays, such as glar e. Simply, passing light
through a polarized material changes the intensity of th e light.
Figure 5: A polarizing filter has a polarization axis that acts as a slit passing through electric fields parallel to its di rection. The
direction of polarization of an EM wave is defined to be the direction of its electric field.
Figure 4: These two photographs of a river show the effect of a pol arizing filter in reducing glare in light reflected fro m the surface
of water. Part (b) of this figure was taken with a polarizing f ilter and part (a) was not. As a result, the reflection of cloud s and sky
observed in part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizin g sunglasses are particularly useful on snow and water. (credit: Amithshs,
Wikimedia Commons)

26.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196
Figure 3: Example of passing light through a polarizer
Intensity
Lets call the angle between the direction of polariz ation and the axis of the polarization filter θ. The original intensity of the light
before it is passed through a filter is denoted by I. In order to find the new intensity of light after t raveling through the material is
shown by the following equation:
If you pass light through two polarizing filters, you wi ll get varied effects of polarization. If the two fi lters are oriented exactly
perpendicular to each other, no light will pass throu gh at all. If they are exactly parallel to each oth er, there will be no additional
affect from the additional filter.
Polarization By Scattering and Reflecting
Unpolarized light can be polarized artificially, as well as by natural phenomenon like reflection and scattering.
Calculate angle of reflection of complete polarization f rom indices of refraction
Polarization by Reflection
In the previous atom we discussed how polarized lenses work. In the case of polarized sunglasses, for exampl e, when you look
through them, reflected light is not entirely filtere d out; reflected light can be slightly polarized by the reflection process (as shown
in). Most light sources produce unpolarized light. When light hits a reflective surface, the vertically pola rized aspects of that light
are refracted at that surface. The reflected light is more horizontally polarized. To better remember t his, we can think of light as an
arrow and the reflective surface as a target. If the a rrow hits the target perpendicularly (vertically pola rized), it is going to stick in
the target (be refracted into the surface). If the a rrow hits the target on its side (horizontally polariz ed) then it will bounce right off
(be reflected).0
learning objectives

26.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196
Polarization by Reflection: Unpolarized light has equal amounts of vertical and horizo ntal polarization. After interaction with a
surface, the vertical components are preferentially abs orbed or refracted, leaving the reflected light more hori zontally polarized.
This is akin to arrows striking on their sides bouncing off, whereas arrows striking on their tips go into the surface.
Since the light is split into two, and part of it is r efracted, the amount of polarization to the reflecte d light depends on the index of
refraction of the reflective surface. We can use the following equation to determine the angle of reflec tion at which light will be
completely polarized:
where: θ = angle of reflection of complete polarizat ion (also known as Brewster’s angle); n = index of re fraction of medium in
which reflected light will travel; and n = index of refr action of medium by which light is reflected.
Polarization by Scattering
Just as unpolarized light can be partially polarized by reflecting, it can also be polarized by scattering (also known as Rayleigh
scattering; illustrated in). Since light waves are el ectromagnetic (EM) waves (and EM waves are transverse wav es) they will
vibrate the electrons of air molecules perpendicular to the direction in which they are traveling. The e lectrons then produce
radiation (acting like small antennae) that is polar ized perpendicular to the direction of the ray. The light parallel to the original ray
has no polarization. The light perpendicular to the original ray is completely polarized. In all other directions, the light scattered by
air will be partially polarized.
Polarization by Scattering: Also known as Rayleigh scattering. Unpolarized light scatte ring from air molecules shakes their
electrons perpendicular to the direction of the original ray. The scattered light therefore has a polarization perpendicular to the
original direction and none parallel to the original d irection.b 1

26.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196Scattering of Light by the Atmosphere
Rayleigh scattering describes the air’s gas molecule s scattering light as it enters the atmosphere; it a lso describes why the sky is
blue.
Describe wave-particle relationship that leads to Rayl eigh scattering and apply it to explain common phenome na
Rayleigh Scattering
Rayleigh scattering is the elastic scattering of wave s by particles that are much smaller than the wavele ngths of those waves. The
particles that scatter the light also need to have a refractive index close to 1. This law applies to al l electromagnetic radiation, but in
this atom we are going to focus specifically on why th e atmosphere scatters the visible spectrum of electro magnetic waves, also
known as visible light. In this case, the light is scattered by the gas molecules of the atmosphere, and the refractive i ndex of air is 1.
Rayleigh scattering is due to the polarizability of an individual molecule. This polarity describes how muc h the electric charges in
the molecule will vibrate in an electric field. The formula to calculate the intensity of the scattering for a single particle is as
follows:
where I is the resulting intensity, I is the original intensity, α is the polarizability, λ is the wavelength, R is the distance to the
particle, and θ is the scattering angle.
While you will probably not need to use this formula, it is important to understand that scattering has a strong dependence on
wavelength. From the formula, we can see that a shorter wa velength will be scattered more strongly than a longe r one.(The longer
the wavelength, the larger the denominator, and from algebra we know that a larger denominator in a fracti on means a smaller
number.)
Why is the Sky Blue?
As we just learned, light scattering is inversely propor tional to the fourth power of the light wavelength. So, the shorter the
wavelength, the more it will get scattered. Since green and blue have relatively short wavelengths, you see a mixture of these colors
in the sky, and the sky appears to be blue. When you look closer and closer to the sun, the light is not b eing scattered because it is
approaching a 90-degree angle with the scattering pa rticles. Since the light is being scattered less and le ss, you see the longer
wavelengths, like red and yellow. This is why the sun appears to be a light yellow color.
Why are Sunsets Colorful?
shows a sunset. We know why the sky is blue, but why are there all those colors in a sunset? The reddening th at occurs near the
horizon is because the light has to pass through a sig nificantly higher volume of air than when the sun is high in the sky. This
increases the Rayleigh scattering effect and remove s all blue light from the direct path of the observer. The remaining unscattered
light is of longer wavelengths and so appears orange.
learning objectives

26.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196Sunset: A gradient of colors in the sky during sunset
Dispersion of the Visible Spectrum
Dispersion is the spreading of white light into its ful l spectrum of wavelengths; this phenomenon can be obs erved in prisms and
rainbows.
Describe process of dispersion
The Visible Spectrum
Within the electromagnetic spectrum, there is only a portion that is visible to the human eye. Visible l ight is the range of
wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation that humans can see. For a typical human eye, this ranges from 390 nm to 750 nm. shows
this range and the colors associated with it:
The Visible Spectrum: Visible Spectrum, represented linearly
Violet: 380-450 nm
Blue: 450-495 nm
Green: 495-570 nm
Yellow: 570-590 nm
Orange: 590-620 nm
Red: 620-750 nm
As you can see from, these are the colors of a rainbow and it is no coincidence.
Dispersion
Dispersion is the spreading of white light into its ful l spectrum of wavelengths. How does this happen? The ind ex of refraction is
different for every medium that light travels throu gh, as we learned in previous atoms. When a light ra y enters a medium with a
different index of refraction, the light is disperse d, as shown in with a prism. When white light enters the pr ism, it spreads. Since
the index of refraction varies with wavelength, the l ight refracts at different angles as it exits, causi ng the exiting light rays to
appear as a rainbow, or as a sequence of decreasing wavele ngths, from red to violet.learning objectives

26.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196
Light and a Glass Prism: (a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refr acted at both surfaces. (b) White light is
dispersed by the prism (shown exaggerated). Since the inde x of refraction varies with wavelength, the angles of refr action vary
with wavelength. A sequence of red to violet is produced, b ecause the index of refraction increases steadily with decr easing
wavelength.
This same principle can be applied to rainbows. Refer t o. Rainbows are not only caused by refraction, like p risms, but also
reflection. Light enters a drop of water and is refle cted from the back of the droplet. The light is ref racted once as it enters the drop,
and again as is exits the drop. In water, the refractive inde x varies with wavelength, so the light is dispersed.
Light and a Water Droplet: Part of the light falling on this water drop enters and is reflected from the back of the drop. This light
is refracted and dispersed both as it enters and as it leav es the drop.

26.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196Key Points
When the incident light reaches the thin film, it is parti ally reflected and passed through to the bottom layer o f the film. The
difference in refractive indices of the air and film ca uses the light to change direction and interfere with th e reflected portion of
the ray when it emerges.
This interference can be constructive, producing bright c olors, or destructive, producing darker colors.
Interference will be constructive if the optical path dif ference is equal to an integer multiple of the wavelength o f light.
The direction of polarization is parallel to the direc tion of the electric field associated with an electroma gnetic wave, which
includes light waves.
By employing the polarization properties of waves, compa nies like Polariod how been able to produce materials tha t filter out
unwanted waves of light, and minimize light intensity.
Polarization materials can be oriented at different a ngles to produce different effects. The new intensity o f light after passing
through these materials can be found using the following for mula: I=I cos2θ.
When unpolarized light hits a reflective surface, the verti cally polarized aspects are refracted into the surface. The horizontally
polarized aspects are reflected off the surface and the light is now perceived as partially polarized.
When light is reflected, there is an angle at which this li ght is completely polarized. This is called Brewster’s an gle, after the
Scottish physicst who discovered the law.
Unpolarized light can also become polarized when it is sc attered in air (also known as Rayleigh scattering). This o ccurs due to
the fact that the EM waves cause the electron in air to vibrate, producing radiation and causing polarization of t he light.
The phenomenon of light scattering is called Rayleigh scat tering; it can happen to any electromagnetic waves. It only occurs
when waves encounter particles that are much smaller tha n the wavelengths of the waves.
The amount that light is scattered is inversely proport ional to the fourth power of the light wavelength. For this r eason, shorterwavelength light like greens and blues scatter more easily t han longer wavelengths like yellows and reds.
As you look closer to the sky’s light source, the sun, th e light is scattered less and less because the angle betwe en the sun and
the scattering particles approaches 90 degrees. This i s why the sun has a yellowish color when we look at it from Eart h while
the rest of the sky appears blue.
In outer space, where there is no atmosphere and therefore n o particles to scatter the light, the sky appears black and the sun
appears white.
During a sunset, the light must pass through an increased volume of air. This increases the scattering effect, c ausing the light in
the direct path of the observer to appear orange rather than blue.
Dispersion is a side effect of the law of refraction. As ref raction angles depend on wavelength, when light enters a m edium with
a different index of refraction, it can be dispersed, like a prism.
The dispersion of white light can often cause the refracted light to be observed is in order of either increasing or de creasing
wavelength, causing a rainbow effect.
As you can see from the visible spectrum, there are some col ors that the brain perceives that are not included. Thi s is because
some colors are a mixture of different wavelengths, like pink and magenta.
Key Terms
incident ray: The ray of light that strikes the surface.
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
oscillate: To swing back and forth, especially if with a regular rhythm.
index of refraction: For a material, the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum t o that in the material.
polarization: The production of polarized light; the direction in which the electric field of an electromagnetic wave poin ts.
electromagnetic radiation: radiation (quantized as photons) consisting of oscillat ing electric and magnetic fields oriented
perpendicularly to each other, moving through space
polarizability: The relative tendency of a system of electric charges to become polarized in the presence of an external elect ric
field
refraction: Changing of a light ray’s direction when it passes throug h variations in matter.0

26.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196reflection: the property of a propagated wave being thrown back from a surface (such as a mirror)
dispersion: The separation of visible light by refraction or diff raction.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Thin film interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_film_interference. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Thin Film Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42519/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Thin film interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_film_interference. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Paul Padley, Thin Film Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12910/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
incident ray. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/incident%20ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Dieselrainbow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dieselrainbow.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f1/Thin_film_interference.gif /670pxThin_film_interference.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin Film Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg0WX0suVCU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Polarization. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polarization (waves). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polarization_(waves). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
oscillate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Dieselrainbow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dieselrainbow.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f1/Thin_film_interference.gif /670pxThin_film_interference.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin Film Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg0WX0suVCU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Onde cisaillement impulsion 1d 30 petit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_cisaillement_impulsion_1d_30_petit. gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

26.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196OpenStax College, Polarization. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
polarization. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polarization. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
index of refraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/index+of+refraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dieselrainbow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dieselrainbow.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f1/Thin_film_interference.gif /670pxThin_film_interference.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin Film Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg0WX0suVCU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Onde cisaillement impulsion 1d 30 petit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_cisaillement_impulsion_1d_30_petit. gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Rayleigh light scattering. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh_light_scattering. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
polarizability. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polarizability. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dieselrainbow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dieselrainbow.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f1/Thin_film_interference.gif /670pxThin_film_interference.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin Film Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg0WX0suVCU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Onde cisaillement impulsion 1d 30 petit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_cisaillement_impulsion_1d_30_petit. gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

26.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16196OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
SDIM0241b. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:SDIM0241b.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/refraction. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Visible spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Visible_spectrum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dispersion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dispersion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
reflection. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reflection. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Dieselrainbow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dieselrainbow.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f1/Thin_film_interference.gif /670pxThin_film_interference.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thin Film Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg0WX0suVCU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Onde cisaillement impulsion 1d 30 petit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Onde_cisaillement_impulsion_1d_30_petit. gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Polarization. January 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42522/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
SDIM0241b. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:SDIM0241b.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Janua ry 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Janua ry 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42466/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Linear visible spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Linear_visible_spectrum.svg.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
26.3: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1619726.4: Applications of Wave Optics
Compare optical and electron microscopy
Microscopes are used to view objects that cannot be seen with the naked eye. In this section we will discuss both optical and
electron microscopy.
Optical Microscopy
You have probably used an optical microscope in a hi gh school science class. In optical microscopy, light r eflected from an object
passes through the microscope’s lenses; this magnifie s the light. The resultant, magnified image is then seen by the eye. Although
this type of microscopy has many limitations, there are several techniques that use properties of light an d optics to enhance the
magnified image:
Bright field: This technique increases the contrast by il luminating the surface on which the objects sit from bel ow.
Oblique illumination: This technique illuminates the obje ct from the side, giving it a three-dimensional appearan ce and
highlighting features that would otherwise not be visible.
Dark field: This technique is good for improving the cont rast of transparent objects. A carefully aligned light source minimizes
the un-scattered light entering the object plane and so only collects the light that is scattered by the objec t itself.
Dispersion staining: This results in a colored image of a c olorless object; it does not actually require that th e object be stained.
Phase contrast: This uses the refractive index of an objec t to show differences in optical density as a difference in contrast.
provides a demonstration of this technique.
Electron Microscopy
Electron microscopes use electron beams to achieve h igher resolutions than are possible in optical micros copy. Two kinds of
electron microscopes are:
Transmission electron microscope (TEM): The TEM sends an elect ron beam through a thin slice of a specimen. The electr on
interacts with the specimen and is then transmitted onto photographic paper or a screen. Since electron beams ha ve a much
smaller wavelength than traditional light, the resolution of the resulting image is much higher.
Scanning electron microscope (SEM): The SEM shows details on t he surface of a specimen and produces a three-dimensional
view by scanning the specimen. shows an SEM image of pollen.
The Spectrometer
A spectrometer uses properties of light to identify atoms by measuring wavelength and frequency, which ar e functions of radiated
energy.
Compare design and function of early and modern spectrom eters
The Spectrometer
A spectrometer is an instrument used to intensely measu re light over a specific portion of the electromagn etic spectrum, to identify
materials. The instrument produces lines, much like those produced from diffraction grating as covered in a previous atom, and
then measures the wavelengths and intensities of those lines.
shows a diagram of how a spectrometer works. The source i s placed in front of a mirror, which reflects the li ght emitted from that
object onto a diffraction grating. This grating then disperses the emitted light to anther mirror which spre ads the different resultant
wavelengths and reflects them onto a detector which records t he findings. This type of instrument is used in spectroscopy.learning objectives
learning objectives

26.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197
Spectrometer Diagram: This diagram shows the light pathways in a spectrometer.
Spectroscopy
Spectroscopy studies the interaction between matter and radiated energy. This radiated energy is a function of wavelength and
frequency. Every type of atom has its own frequency. W hen the spectrometer produces a reading, the observer can then use
spectroscopy to identify the atoms and therefore molec ules that make up that object.
Spectroscopes
Spectroscopes are used in a variety of fields, such as astronomy and chemistry. They use a diffraction grat ing, movable slit, and a
photodetector. All of these elements are controlled b y a computer, which records the findings. A material is heated to incandescence
and it emits a light that is characteristic of its at omic makeup. Each atom has its own spectroscopic ‘fin gerprint’. In you can see a
very simple spectroscope based on a prism. As another ex ample, Sodium produces a double yellow band.
A simple spectroscope: A very simple spectroscope based on a prism
The Michelson Interferometer
The Michelson interferometer is the most common config uration for optical interferometry.
Explain how the Michelson interferometer works
Interferometry
Before we can discuss the Michelson Interferometer, it is important we first understand interferometry—which r efers to techniques
that use superimposed waves to extract information abo ut the waves. More simply, it uses the interference the se waves experiencelearning objectives

26.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197to make accurate measurements of the waves. It is used in many areas of science, such as astronomy, engineeri ng, oceanography,
physics, and fiber optics.
Popular applications of interferometry in industry i nclude the measurement of small displacements, refr active index changes, and
surface irregularities. As shown in previous atoms, when t wo waves with the same frequency combine, the resultin g pattern is
determined by the phase difference between the two. Co nstructive interference occurs when the waves are in ph ase, and destructive
interference occurs when they are out of phase. Inte rferometry uses this principle to combine waves and stu dy the resulting wave in
order to obtain information about the original state of th e waves.
The Michelson Interferometer
The most common tool in interferometry, the Michelso n Interferometer, shown in Figure 1, was invented by Albe rt Abraham
Michelson, the first American to win a Nobel Prize for s cience. The interferometer works by splitting a beam of light into two
paths, bouncing them back and then recombining them t o create an interference pattern. To create interfer ence fringes on a detector
(see Figure 2), the paths may be different lengths or co mposed of different materials.
Fringes in a Michelson Interferometer: Colored and monochromatic fringes in a Michelson interfe rometer: (a) White light
fringes where the two beams differ in the number of phase invers ions; (b) White light fringes where the two beams have
experienced the same number of phase inversions; and (c) Fri nge pattern using monochromatic light (sodium D lines).
Michelson Interferometer: A Michelson Interferometer.
Figure 3 shows a diagram of how a Michelson Interferomete r works. M and M are two highly polished mirrors, S is the light
source, M is a half silvered mirror that acts as a beam splitter when the light hits the surface, and C is a p oint on M that is partially
reflective. When the beam S hits this point on M it is split into two beams. One beam is reflected in the dire ction of A and the other
is transmitted through the surface of M to the point B. A and B are both points on the highly polished (a nd therefore reflective)
mirrors M and M. When the beams hit these points, they are then reflected back to point C’, where they reco mbine to produce an
interference pattern. At point E, the interference pattern produced at point C’ is visible to an observer.1 2
1 2

26.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197
Figure 3: This diagram of a Michelson Interferometer shows the path that the light waves travels in the instrument.
Applications
The Michelson Interferometer has been used for the de tection of gravitational waves, as a tunable narrow ban d filter, and as the
core of Fourier transform spectroscopy. It has played a n important role in studies of the upper atmosphere, revealing temperatures
and winds (employing both space-borne and ground-bas ed instruments) by measuring the Doppler widths and s hifts in the spectra
of airglow and aurora. The best known application of t he Michelson Interferometer is the Michelson-Morley e xperiment—a failed
attempt to demonstrate the effect of the hypothetic al ” aether wind” on the speed of light. Their experi ment left theories of light
based on the existence of a luminiferous aether with out experimental support, and served ultimately as an inspiration for special
relativity.
LCDs
Liquid crystal displays use liquid crystals which do no t emit light, but use the light modulating properties of the crystals.
Explain how liquid crystal displays produce images and dis cuss their benefits and deficiencies
LCDs
LCD stands for a liquid crystal display. The liquid cr ystals themselves do not emit light, but the display uses the light modulating
properties of the crystals. LCDs can be used to display arbitrary images, such as in a computer monitor or television, by using a
large number of very small pixels, or they can be used to d isplay fixed images, like a digital clock, such as in.
Digital Clock: A digital clock which uses LCD to either hide or display fixed images.
Unlike the newer cathode ray tube (CRT) and plasma di splays, LCDS do not use phosphors. For this reason they do not suffer
image burn-in. They do however suffer image persistence. Image burn-in occurs when an image is displayed so m any times, or for
so long, that an outline of image can be seen even whe n the display is turned off. Image persistence is sim ilar, but the outline fades
away shortly after the display is turned off and is not pe rmanent.learning objectives

26.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197LCD displays are made up of numerous layers. A typical layer is diagrammed in. Each pixel of an LCD consist s of a layer of
molecules aligned between two transparent electrodes a nd two polarizing films, and the actual liquid cryst als are between these
polarizing filters. The light passes through the first filter, and is blocked by the second. The electrodes are used to align the crystals
in a particular direction, which produces the image seen on the screen. The crystals do not emit any lig ht, but rather give the light a
specific shape to be emitted in.
Layers of LCD Displays: Polarizing filter film with a vertical axis to polarize l ight as it enters.Glass substrate with ITO electrodes.
The shapes of these electrodes will determine the shapes tha t will appear when the LCD is turned on. Vertical ridges e tched on the
surface are smooth.Twisted nematic liquid crystal.Glass sub strate with common electrode film (ITO) with horizontal rid ges to line
up with the horizontal filter.Polarizing filter film with a h orizontal axis to block/pass light.Reflective surface to send light back to
viewer. (In a backlit LCD, this layer is replaced with a light source.)
Twisted Nematic Devices
The twisted nematic device is the most common LCD appl ication. When no electric field is being applied, the surface alignment
directions at the electrodes are perpendicular to eac h other. The molecules arrange themselves in a helic al structure (twisted
structure). Some light is able to pass through and som e is not, so the result is that the screen appears gray. When the electric field is
applied, the crystals in the center layer untwist, and the light is completely blocked from passing through and those pixels will
appear black.
Using Interference to Read CDs and DVDs
Optical discs are digital storing media read in an optical di sc drive using laser beam.
Explain how information is stored on the optical disks
Overview
Compact disks (CDs) and digital video disks (DVDs) are ex amples of optical discs. They are read in an optical disc drive which
directs a laser beam at the disc. The reader then detect s whether the beam has been reflected or scattered.
Function of Digital Discs
Optical discs are digital storing media. They can store music, files, movies, pictures etc.. These discs are fl at, usually made of
aluminum, and have microscopic pits and lands on on e of the flat surfaces (as shown in). The information on these discs are read
by a computer in the form of binary data. First, a la ser beam is shot at the disc. If the beam hits a land, it gets reflected back and is
recorded as a value of 1. If the beam hits a pit, it gets scat tered and is recorded as a value of zero.learning objectives

26.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197
Early Version of an Optical Disc: In this early version of an optical disc, you can see t he pits and lands which either reflect back
light or scatter it.
These microscopic pits and lands cover the entire surf ace of the disc in a spiral path, starting in the c enter and working its way
outward. The data is stored either by a stamping machin e or laser and is read when the data is illuminated by a laser diode in the
disc drive. The disc spins at a faster speed when it i s being read in the center track, and slower for an outer track. This is because
the center tracks are smaller in circumference and the refore can be read quicker.
These pits also act as slits and cause the light to be diffracted as it is reflected back, which causes a n iridescent effect. This explains
the rainbow pattern that you see on the back of a CD, as sh own in.
Compact Disc: The bottom surface of a compact disc showing character istic iridescence.
Key Points
In optical microscopy, light reflected from an object passe s through the microscope’s lenses; this magnifies the light. The
resultant, magnified image is then seen by the eye. This technique has many limitations but can be enhanced in various ways to
create more contrast.
The transmission electron microscope (TEM) sends an electron beam through a thin slice of a specimen. The electron is then
transmitted onto photographic paper or a screen. Since ele ctron beams have a much smaller wavelength than tradition al light,
the resolution of this image is much higher.
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) shows details on the surface of a specimen and produces a three-dimensional vi ew by
scanning the specimen.
The source is placed in front of a mirror, which reflects the light emitted from that object onto a diffraction gr ating. This grating
then disperses the emitted light to anther mirror which spreads the different resultant wavelengths and reflects them on to a
detector which records the findings.
Early forms of spectrometers were simple prisms, but modern sp ectrometers are automated by a computer and can record a
much broader range of frequencies.
Spectrometers are used in spectroscopy. Spectroscopy studie s the interaction between matter and radiated energy. This r adiated
energy is a function of wavelength and frequency. Every typ e of atom has its own frequency.
Interferometry refers to techniques that use superimpo sed waves to extract information about the waves.
Michelson interferometer works by splitting a beam of ligh t into two paths, bouncing them back and recombining them to
create an interference pattern. To create interferenc e fringes on a detector, the paths may be different lengths or composed of
different materials.

26.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197The best known application of the Michelson interferomet er is the Michelson-Morley experiment, the unexpected nul l result of
which was an inspiration for special relativity.
LCDs use an electric field to arrange the liquid crystals into the desired pattern, and then pass light through the se layers to
produce an image on the screen.
LCDs can be used to display an arbitrary image made up of t iny fixed pixels, or can be used to display a fixed imag e, as in on a
digital clock.
A twisted nematic display is the most common LCD in use. This type of display is on calculators, digital watches, and clo cks.
When no electric field is applied, the molecules are twiste d, and let some light through. When the field is applied, they untwist,
blocking the light and are seen as black.
The iridescent layer of the disc is imprinted with tiny pits and lands. Pits scatter light when illuminated, and produce a reading
of 0; lands reflect light back and produce a readin g of 1.
The optical disc drive records the 0 and 1 readings and t ranslates them into binary data which is used to relay wh atever
information is recorded on the disc.
Rainbow pattern on the back of a CD is due diffraction of th e reflected light by pits.
Key Terms
microscopy: using microscopes to view objects that cannot be seen wit h the naked eye
contrast: A difference in lightness, brightness and/or hue between two colors that makes them more or less distinguishable
incandescence: Incandescence is the emission of light (visible elec tromagnetic radiation) from a hot body as a result of i ts
temperature.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
superimposed: Positioned on or above something else, especially in lay ers
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
LCD: a liquid crystal display.
helical: In the shape of a helix, twist.
nematic: Describing the structure of some liquid crystals whose mo lecules align in loose parallel lines.
binary data: Data which can take on only two possible values, traditiona lly termed 0 and 1.
pit: An imprint on an optical disc that scatters light when illuminated.
land: A flat area on an optical disc that reflects light when illuminated.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Melissa Dominguez, Sean McCudden, McKenzie Smith, and Kevin Kelly, B eyond Optical Microscopy. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14353/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Microscopy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Microscopy. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
contrast. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contrast. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/microscopy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectrometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectrometer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Spectroscopic analysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectroscopic_analysis. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

26.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197incandescence. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incandescence. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple spectroscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_spectroscope.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectrometer schematic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spectrometer_schematic.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Interferometry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interferometry. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Michelson interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Michelson_interferometer. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
superimposed. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superimposed. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple spectroscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_spectroscope.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectrometer schematic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spectrometer_schematic.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Michelson Interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michelson_Interferometer.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/d/dc/Colored_and_monochrome_fringes.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Michaelson with letters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michaelson_with_letters.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lcd. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Lcd. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
helical. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/helical. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/lcd. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nematic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nematic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple spectroscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_spectroscope.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectrometer schematic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spectrometer_schematic.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Michelson Interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michelson_Interferometer.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/d/dc/Colored_and_monochrome_fringes.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Michaelson with letters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michaelson_with_letters.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
LCD layers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:LCD_layers.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
MA-2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MA-2.JPG. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Optical disc. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_disc. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
CD-ROM. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/CD-ROM. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

26.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16197Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/land. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/pit. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
binary data. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/binary%20data. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple spectroscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_spectroscope.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Spectrometer schematic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spectrometer_schematic.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Michelson Interferometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michelson_Interferometer.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/d/dc/Colored_and_monochrome_fringes.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Michaelson with letters. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michaelson_with_letters.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
LCD layers. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:LCD_layers.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
MA-2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MA-2.JPG. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
CD autolev crop. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:CD_autolev_crop.jpg. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lichttonorgelversuchsscheibe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Lichttonorgelversuchsscheibe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
27: Special Relativity
27.1: Introduction
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
27: Special Relativity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1619927.1: Introduction
Explain why the Galilean invariance didn’t work in Maxwell’ s equations
Galilean invariance or Galilean relativity states tha t the laws of motion are the same in all inertial (or non-accelerating) frames.
Galileo Galilei first described this principle in 1632 using the example of a ship travelling at constant v elocity, without rocking, on
a smooth sea; any observer doing experiments below the deck would not be able to tell whether the ship was mov ing or stationary.
The fact that the Earth orbits around the sun at ap proximately 30 km/s offers a somewhat more dramatic ex ample, though it is
technically not an inertial reference frame.
Specifically, the term Galilean invariance today usuall y refers to this principle as applied to Newtonian me chanics—that is,
Newton’s laws hold in all inertial frames. In this cont ext it is sometimes called Newtonian relativity. Among th e axioms from
Newton’s theory are:
There exists an absolute space in which Newton’s laws are true. An inertial frame is a reference frame in relative unif orm
motion to absolute space.
All inertial frames share a universal (or absolute) time.
Derivation
Galilean relativity can be shown as follows. Consider t wo inertial frames S and S’. A physical event in S will have position
coordinates r = (x, y, z) and time t; similarly for S’. By the second axiom above, one can synchronize the clock in the two frames
and assume t = t‘. Suppose S’ is in relative uniform motion to S with vel ocity v. Consider a point object whose position is given by
r = r(t) in S. We see that
This transformation of variables between two inertial f rames is called Galilean transformation. Now, the velo city of the particle is
given by the time derivative of the position:
Galilean Invariance: Newtonian mechanics is invariant under a Galilean transf ormation between observation frames (shown).
This is called Galilean invariance.
Another differentiation gives the acceleration in the two frames:
It is this simple but crucial result that implies Ga lilean relativity. Assuming that mass is invariant in a ll inertial frames, the above
equation shows that Newton’s laws of mechanics, if valid in one frame, must hold for all frames. But it is assum ed to hold in
absolute space, therefore Galilean relativity holds.learning objectives

27.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16199Issues
Both Newtonian mechanics and the Maxwell’s equations were wel l established by the end of the 19 century. The puzzle li ed in the
fact that the Galilean invariance didn’t work in Maxwel l’s equations. That is, unlike Newtonian mechanics, Maxwel l’s equations
are not invariant under a Galilean transformation. Alb ert Einstein’s central insight in formulating speci al relativity was that, for full
consistency with electromagnetism, mechanics must also be revised, such that Lorentz invariance (introduce d later) replaces
Galilean invariance. At the low relative velocities cha racteristic of everyday life, Lorentz invariance and Galilean invariance are
nearly the same, but for relative velocities close to tha t of light they are very different.
Einstein’s Postulates
Special relativity is based on Einstein’s two postulates: t he Principle of Relativity and the Principle of Invaria nt Light Speed.
Identify two postulates forming the foundation of specia l relativity
In the late 19 century, the Newtonian mechanics was con sidered to be valid in all inertial frames of refer ence, which are moving
at a constant relative velocity with respect to each other. (See our previous lesson on “Galilean-Newtonian Re lativity. “) One issue,
however, was that another well-established theory, the la ws of electricity and magnetism represented by Maxwell’ s equations, was
not “invariant” under Galilean transformation—meanin g that Maxwell’s equations don’t maintain the same fo rms for different
inertial frames. In his “Special Theory of Relativity, ” Einstein resolved the puzzle and broadened the sco pe of the invariance to
extend the validity of all physical laws, including electr omagnetic theory, to all inertial frames of reference.
Albert Einstein: Albert Einstein, a true pioneer of modern physics. His work on relativity, gavity, quantum mechanics, and
statistical physics revolutionized physics.
Einstein’s Postulates
With two deceptively simple postulates and a careful consideration of how measurements are made, Einstein p roduced the theory
of special relativity.
1. The Principle of Relativity: The laws of physics are the same and can be stated in their simplest form in all inertial frames of
reference.
This postulate relates to reference frames. It says that the re is no preferred frame and, therefore, no absolute motio n.
2. The Principle of Invariant Light Speed: The speed of light c is a constant, independent of the relative motion of the source and
observer.th
learning objectives
th

27.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16199The laws of electricity and magnetism predict that lig ht travels at c = 2.998×10 m/s in a vacuum, but they do not specify th e frame
of reference in which light has this speed. Physicists assumed that there exists a stationary medium for the propagation of light,
which they called ” luminiferous aether. ” In 1887, Mi chelson and Morley attempted to detect the relative motion of the Earth
through the stationary luminiferous aether, but the ir negative results implied the speed of light c is independent of the motion of the
source relative to the observer. Einstein accepted the res ult of the experiment and incorporated it in his theory of relativity.
This postulate might sound easy to accept, but it is rather counterintuitive. Imagine that you can throw a baseball at a speed v
(relative to you). If you are on a train moving at a speed V and throw a ball in the direction of the train’s move ment, the baseball
will travel at a speed v+V for an observer stationary on the ground.
Now, instead of a baseball, let’s say you have a laser p ointer. You turn on the laser pointer while you are on a moving train. What
would be the speed of light from the laser pointer fo r a stationary observer on the ground? Our intuition sa ys that it should be c+V.
However, Einstein says that it should be only c!
The Speed of Light
The speed of light in vacuum is a universal physical con stant crucial to many areas of physics.
Discuss the invariance of the speed of light and identif y the value of that speed in vacuum
The speed of light in vacuum, commonly denoted c, is a universal physical constant that is crucial to many areas of physics. Its
value is 299,792,458 m/s; this is a precise known value because the length of the meter is itself derived fr om this constant and the
international standard for time. According to special relativity, c is the maximum speed at which all energy, matter, a nd information
in the universe can travel. It is the speed at which a ll massless particles and associated fields (including electromagnetic radiation
such as light) travel in vacuum. It is also the spee d of gravity (i.e., of gravitational waves) predicted by current theories. Such
particles and waves (including light) travel at c regardless of the motion of the source or the inert ial frame of reference of the
observer. In the theory of relativity, c interrelates space and time in the Lorentz transfor mation; it also appears in the famous
equation of mass-energy equivalence: E = mc.
Sunlight’s Flight to Earth: Sunlight takes about 8 minutes and 19 seconds to reach the earth (based on the average distance
between the sun and the earth)
First Measurement
The first quantitative estimate of the speed of lig ht was made in 1676 by Rømer. From the observation tha t the periods of Jupiter’s
innermost moon (Io) appeared to be shorter when Earth was approaching Jupiter than when it was moving away, he concluded that
light travels at a finite speed. He estimated that it takes light 22 minutes to cross the diameter of Earth ’s orbit. Christiaan Huygens
combined this estimate with an estimate for the diamet er of the Earth’s orbit to obtain an estimate of the speed of light of 220,000
km/s, 26 percent lower than the actual value.
Fundamental Role in Physics
The speed at which light waves propagate in vacuum is in dependent both of the motion of the wave source and of the inertial frame
of reference of the observer. This invariance of the speed of light was postulated by Einstein in 1905 af ter being motivated by
Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism and the lack of e vidence for “luminiferous aether”; it has since been consistently confirmed
by many experiments.8
learning objectives

27.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16199Key Points
Galilean invariance states that Newton’s laws hold in all ine rtial frames.
Newtonian mechanics assumes that there exists an absolute space and that time is universal.
Albert Einstein’s central insight in formulating speci al relativity was that, for full consistency with electrom agnetism,
mechanics must also be revised such that Lorentz invari ance (introduced later) replaces Galilean invariance.
The special theory of relativity explores the conseque nces of the invariance of c with the assumption that the laws of physics are
the same in all inertial frames of reference.
Einstein’s first postulate says that the laws of physics ar e the same and can be stated in their simplest form in all inertial frames
of reference. It means that there is no preferred frame and, therefore, no absolute motion.
The speed of light c is a constant, independent of the relative motion of th e source and observer.
The speed at which light waves propagate in vacuum is i ndependent both of the motion of the wave source and of th e inertial
frame of reference of the observer. This invariance of the speed of light was postulated by Einstein in 1905 in h is work on
special relativity.
The value of the speed of light is 299,792,458 m/s; this i s a precise known value because the length of the meter i s itself derived
from this constant and the international standard for tim e.
c is the maximum speed at which all energy, matter, and i nformation in the universe can travel.
Key Terms
Lorentz invariance: First introduced by Lorentz in an effort to explain how t he speed of light was observed to be independent
of the reference frame, and to understand the symmetries of the laws of electromagnetism.
absolute space: A concept introduced by Newton that assumes space remai ns always similar and immovable.
Maxwell’s equations: A set of equations describing how electric and magnetic f ields are generated and altered by each other
and by charges and currents.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
luminiferous aether: Light-bearing aether; the postulated medium for the pr opagation of light.
Lorentz transformation: a transformation relating the spacetime coordinates of one frame of reference to another in special
relativity
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Galilean invariance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Galilean_invariance%23Electromagnetism. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/lorentz-invariance.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
absolute space. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/absolute%20space. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Special Theory of Relativity. January 30, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m32527/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42528/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Special Theory of Relativity. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m32527/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Maxwell's equations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell's%20equations. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
luminiferous aether. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/luminiferous%20aether. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

27.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16199Sunil Kumar Singh, Special Theory of Relativity. January 30, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m32527/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/6/66/Einstein_1921_by_ F_Schmutzer.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of light. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light%23Fundamental_role_in_physics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
luminiferous aether. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/luminiferous%20aether. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz transformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_transformation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Special Theory of Relativity. January 30, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m32527/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/6/66/Einstein_1921_by_ F_Schmutzer.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Earth to Sun - en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Earth_to_Sun_-_en.png. License: CC
BY: Attribution
27.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1620027.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
Formulate conclusions of the theory of special relativity, noting the assumptions that were made in deriving it
The relativity of simultaneity is the concept that s imultaneity–whether two events occur at the same time –is not absolute, but
depends on the observer’s frame of reference.
According to the theory of special relativity, it is impossible to say in an absolute sense whether two dist inct events occur at the
same time if those events are separated in space, su ch as a car crash in London and another in New York. The question of whether
the events are simultaneous is relative: in some ref erence frames the two accidents may happen at the same time, in other frames
(in a different state of motion relative to the even ts) the crash in London may occur first, and still i n other frames, the New York
crash may occur first. If the two events are causally c onnected (“event A causes event B”), then the relativ ity of simultaneity
preserves the causal order (i.e. “event A causes event B” in all frames of reference).
If we imagine one reference frame assigns precisely the same time to two events that are at different point s in space, a reference
frame that is moving relative to the first will genera lly assign different times to the two events. This is illustrated in the ladder
paradox, a thought experiment which uses the example of a ladder moving at high speed through a garage.
A mathematical form of the relativity of simultaneit y (“local time”) was introduced by Hendrik Lorentz in 1892, and physically
interpreted (to first order in v/c) as the result o f a synchronization using light signals by Henri Poinc aré in 1900. However, both
Lorentz and Poincaré based their conceptions on the a ether as a preferred but undetectable frame of refere nce, and continued to
distinguish between “true time” (in the aether) and “app arent” times for moving observers.
In 1905, Albert Einstein abandoned the (classical) ae ther and emphasized the significance of relativity of simultaneity to our
understanding of space and time. He deduced the fail ure of absolute simultaneity from two stated assumption s: 1) the principle of
relativity–the equivalence of inertial frames, such that the laws of physics apply equally in all inertia l coordinate systems; 2) the
constancy of the speed of light detected in empty space, independent of the relative motion of its source.
Observer Standing on the Platform: Reference frame of an observer standing on the platform (length contraction not depicted).learning objectives

27.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200
Observer Onboard the Train: The train-and-platform experiment from the reference frame of an observer onboard the train.
Time Dilation
Time dilation is an actual difference of elapsed time bet ween two events as measured by observers moving relative to each other.
Explain why time dilation can be ignored in daily life
Time dilation is an actual difference of elapsed tim e between two events as measured by observers either mov ing relative to each
other.
For instance, two rocket ships (A and B) speeding past one another in space would experience time dilation. If they somehow had a
clear view into each other’s ships, each crew would se e the others’ clocks and movement as going too slowly. That is, inside the
frame of reference of Ship A, everything is moving nor mally, but everything over on Ship B appears to be mov ing slower (and vice
versa).
From a local perspective, time registered by clocks that are at rest with respect to the local frame of r eference (and far from any
gravitational mass) always appears to pass at the sam e rate. In other words, if a new ship, Ship C, travels al ongside Ship A, it is “at
rest” relative to Ship A. From the point of view of Ship A, new Sh ip C’s time would appear normal too.
The formula for determining time dilation is:
where Δt is the time interval between two co-local eve nts (i.e. happening at the same place) for an observer in some inertial frame
(e.g. ticks on his clock), this is known as the proper t ime, Δt’ is the time interval between those same even ts, as measured by
another observer, inertially moving with velocity v with respect to the former observer, v is the relative v elocity between the
observer and the moving clock, c is the speed of light, and
is the Lorentz factor. Thus the duration of the cloc k cycle of a moving clock is found to be increased: it is measured to be “running
slow”. Note that for speeds below 1/10 the speed of lig ht, Lorentz factor is approximately 1. Thus, time di lation effects and
extremely small and can be safely ignored in a daily life. They become important only when an object app roaches speeds on the
order of 30,000 km/s (1/10 the speed of light).learning objectives

27.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200
Lorentz Factor: Lorentz factor as a function of speed (in natural units wh ere c = 1). Notice that for small speeds (less than 0.1), γ
is approximately 1.
Effects of Time Dilation: The Twin Paradox and the Decay of the Muon
The twin paradox is a thought experiment: one twin ma kes a journey into space and returns home to find th at twin remained aged
more.
Explain the twin paradox within the standard framework of spe cial relativity
The twin paradox is a thought experiment in special relativity involving identical twins, one of whom make s a journey into space in
a high-speed rocket and returns home to find that the twi n who remained on Earth has aged more.
This occurs because special relativity shows that the faster one travels, the slower time moves for them.
This result appears puzzling because each twin sees the other twin as traveling, and so, according to a naive application of time
dilation, each should paradoxically find the other to have aged more slowly. In other words, from the per spective of the rocketship,
the earth is traveling away from the ship and from the per spective of the earth, the rocket is traveling away.
However, this scenario can be resolved within the stand ard framework of special relativity (because the twins are not equivalent;
the space twin experienced additional, asymmetrical ac celeration when switching direction to return home), and therefore is not a
paradox in the sense of a logical contradiction.
The Earth and the ship are not in a symmetrical rela tionship: regardless of whether we view the situation fr om the perspective of
the Earth or the ship, the ship experiences additional acceleration forces. The ship has a turnaround in whi ch it accelerates and
changes direction whereas the earth does not. Since th ere is no symmetry, it is not paradoxical if one twin is younger than the other.
Nevertheless twin paradox is useful as a demonstration that special relativity is self-consistent.
In the spacetime diagram, drawn for the reference fram e of the Earth-based twin, that twin’s world line coinc ides with the vertical
axis (his position is constant in space, moving only in time). On the first leg of the trip, the second twi n moves to the right (black
sloped line); and on the second leg, back to the le ft. Blue lines show the planes of simultaneity for the traveling twin during the first
leg of the journey; red lines, during the second leg. Just before turnaround, the traveling twin calcula tes the age of the Earth-based
twin by measuring the interval along the vertical axi s from the origin to the upper blue line. Just after turnaround, if he recalculates,
he’ll measure the interval from the origin to the l ower red line. In a sense, during the U-turn the plane of simultaneity jumps from
blue to red and very quickly sweeps over a large seg ment of the world line of the Earth-based twin. The tr aveling twin reckons that
there has been a jump discontinuity in the age of the Ear th-based twin.learning objectives

27.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200
Spacetime Diagram of the Twin Paradox: Spacetime diagram of the twin paradox. Time is relative, but both twins are not
equivalent (the ship experiences additional acceleratio n to changes the direction of travel).
Length Contraction
Objects that are moving undergo a length contraction along the dimension of motion; this effect is only significant at relativistic
speeds.
Explain why length contraction can be ignored in daily l ife
Length contraction is the physical phenomenon of a decrease in length detected by an observer of objects that travel at any nonzero velocity relative to that observer. Length con traction arises due to the fact that the speed of lig ht in a vacuum is constant in any
frame of reference. By taking this into account, as well as some geometrical considerations, we will show ho w perceived time and
length are affected.
Let us imagine a simple clock system that consists of two mirrors A and B in a vacuum. A light pulse bounces between the two
mirrors. The separation of the mirrors is L, and the clock ticks once each time the light pulse hits a given mirror. Now imagine
that the clock is at rest. The time that it will take for the light pulse to go from mirror A to mirror B and then back to mirror A
be can be described by:
where c is the speed of light. Now imagine that the clock is moving in the horizontal direction relative to a sta tionary observer.
The light pulse is emitted from mirror A. To the stati onary observer, it appears that the light pulse has a longer path to travel
because by the time the light reaches mirror B the clock has already moved somewhat in the horizontal di rection. This is the
same case for the light pulse on its way back. The station ary observer will perceive that it will take the light a total of:learning objectives
Example:

27.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200
Geometry for a Clock at Rest: This illustrates the path that light must traverse when the clock is at rest.
to traverse its path. We can see that D is longer than L, s o that means that.
Geometry for a Moving Clock: This illustrates the path that light must traverse when the clock is moving from the
perspective of a stationary observer.
We have established that in a frame of reference that is moving relative to the clock (the stationary ob server is moving in the
clock’s frame of reference), the clock appears to run more slowly. Now let us imagine that we want to measure the length of a
ruler. This time let us imagine that you are moving with velocity v. You can mathematically determine the length of th e ruler in
your frame of reference (L‘) by multiplying your velocity (v) by the time that you perceive that it takes you to pass by the ruler
(t‘). Expressing this in equation form, L‘ = vt‘. Now, if someone in the ruler’s rest frame wanted to d etermine the length of the
ruler, they could do the following. They could mathe matically determine the length of the ruler in thei r frame of reference (L)
by multiplying your velocity (v) by the time that they perceive that it takes you to pass by the ruler (t). This is expressed in the
following equation: L = vt. Just as in the clock explanation, the ruler appear s to be moving in your frame of reference, so t will
be longer than t‘ (your time interval). Consequently, the length of the ruler will appear to be shorter in your frame of reference
(the phenomenon of length contraction occurred).
The effect of length contraction is negligible at e veryday speeds and can be ignored for all regular pu rposes. Length
contraction becomes noticeable at a substantial fracti on of the speed of light (as illustrated in) with th e contraction only in the
direction parallel to the direction in which the observed body is travelling.Example:

27.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200
Observed Length of an Object: Observed length of an object at rest and at different speeds
For example, at a speed of 13,400,000 m/s (30 million mph,.0447 c), the length is 99.9 percent of the length at rest; a t a speed
of 42,300,000 m/s (95 million mph, 0.141 c), the length is still 99 percent. As the magnitude of the velocity approaches the
speed of light, the effect becomes dominant.The mathema tical formula for length contraction is:
where L is the proper length (the length of the object in its rest frame); L is the length observed by an observer in relative
motion with respect to the object; v is the relative velocity between the observer and th e moving object; c is the speed of light;
and the Lorentz factor is defined as:
In this equation it is assumed that the object is par allel with its line of movement. For the observer in r elative movement, the
length of the object is measured by subtracting the simultaneously measured distances of both ends of t he object. An observer
at rest viewing an object traveling very close to th e speed of light would observe the length of the obje ct in the direction of
motion as very close to zero.
Key Points
According to the theory of special relativity, it is imp ossible to say in an absolute sense whether two distinct even ts occur at the
same time if those events are separated in space.
A mathematical form of the relativity of simultaneity was i ntroduced by Hendrik Lorentz and physically interpreted b y Henri
Poincaré. The conceptions were based on the aether as a pr eferred but undetectable frame of reference.
Albert Einstein deduced the failure of absolute simultane ity from two assumptions: 1) the principle of relativity; 2) the
constancy of the speed of light detected in empty space, independent of the relative motion of its source.
Time dilation effects are extremely small for speeds below 1 /10 the speed of light and can be safely ignored at daily life.
Time dilation effects become important when an object app roaches speeds on the order of 30,000 km/s (1/10 the spee d of light).
The formula for determining time dilation is:.
From a naive application of time dilation, each twin shoul d paradoxically find the other to have aged more slowly.
The scenario is resolved within the standard framework of s pecial relativity: the twins are not equivalent, the spa ce twin
experiences additional, asymmetrical acceleration when s witching direction to return home.
Twin paradox is useful as a demonstration that special relat ivity is self-consistent.
Length contraction is negligible at everyday speeds an d can be ignored for all regular purposes.Example:

27.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200Length contraction becomes noticeable at a substantial frac tion of the speed of light with the contraction only in t he direction
parallel to the direction in which the observed body is travel ling.
An observer at rest viewing an object travelling very cl ose to the speed of light would observe the length of the ob ject in the
direction of motion as very near zero.
Key Terms
aether: A space-filling substance or field, thought to be neces sary as a transmission medium for the propagation of
electromagnetic or gravitational forces.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
speed of light: the speed of electromagnetic radiation in a perfect vac uum: exactly 299,792,458 meters per second by definition
time dilation: The slowing of the passage of time experienced by objec ts in motion relative to an observer; measurable only at
relativistic speeds.
Lorentz factor: The factor, used in special relativity, to calculate the degree of time dilation, length contraction and re lativistic
mass of an object moving relative to an observer.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Relativity of simultaneity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Relativity_of_simultaneity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Simultaneity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simultaneity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
aether. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/aether. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/Traincar_Relativit y2.svg/800px-Traincar_Relativity2.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Traincar_Relativit y1.svg/735px-Traincar_Relativity1.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
time dilation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/time_dilation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
speed of light. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/speed_of_light. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz factor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_factor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/Traincar_Rela tivity2.svg/800pxTraincar_Relativity2.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Traincar_Rela tivity1.svg/735pxTraincar_Relativity1.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Time_dilation.svg/ 480pxTime_dilation.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

27.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16200Twin paradox. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Twin_paradox. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
time dilation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/time_dilation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/Traincar_Rela tivity2.svg/800pxTraincar_Relativity2.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Traincar_Rela tivity1.svg/735pxTraincar_Relativity1.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Time_dilatio n.svg/480px-Time_dilation.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Twin_Paradox_Minkowski_ Diagram.svg/485pxTwin_Paradox_Minkowski_Diagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Length contraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length_contraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Time dilation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_dilation%23Simple_inference_of_time_dil ation_due_to_relative_velocity. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
speed of light. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/speed_of_light. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/Traincar_Rela tivity2.svg/800pxTraincar_Relativity2.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Traincar_Rela tivity1.svg/735pxTraincar_Relativity1.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Time_dilatio n.svg/480px-Time_dilation.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Twin_Paradox_Minkowski_ Diagram.svg/485pxTwin_Paradox_Minkowski_Diagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Creation Wiki. Located at: http://creationwiki.org/images/9/91/Srlc1.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Time dilation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_dilation%23Simple_inference_of_time_dil ation_due_to_relative_velocity. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Time dilation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_dilation%23Simple_inference_of_time_dil ation_due_to_relative_velocity. License: CC BY:
Attribution
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1620327.3: Relativistic Quantities
Express velocity-addition formulas for objects at speeds much less and approaching the speed of light
A velocity-addition formula is an equation that relates the velocities of moving objects in different reference frames.
As Galileo Galilei observed in 17th century, if a ship is moving relative to the shore at velocity vv, and a fly is moving with
velocity uu as measured on the ship, calculating the velocity of the fly as measured on the shore is what is meant by the addition of
the velocities vv and uu. When both the fly and the ship are moving slowly compared to speed of light, it is accurate enough to use
the vector sum s=u+vs=u+v where ss is the velocity of the fl y relative to the shore.
According to the theory of special relativity, the fr ame of the ship has a different clock rate and dist ance measure, and the notion of
simultaneity in the direction of motion is altered, so the a ddition law for velocities is changed.
Since special relativity dictates that the speed of light is the same in all frames of reference, light sh one from the front of a moving
car can’t go faster than light from a stationary lam p. Since this is counter to what Galileo used to add ve locities, there needs to be a
new velocity addition law.
This change isn’t noticeable at low velocities but as t he velocity increases towards the speed of light it b ecomes important. The
addition law is also called a composition law for veloc ities. For collinear motions, the velocity of the fly relative to the shore is
given by the following equation:
Composition law for velocities gave the first test o f the kinematics of the special theory of relativity. Using a Michelson
interferometer, Hyppolite Fizeau measured the speed of light in a fluid moving parallel to the light in 185 1. The speed of light in
the fluid is slower than the speed of light in vacuum, and it changes if the fluid is moving along with th e light. The speed of light in
a collinear moving fluid is predicted accurately by the collinear case of the relativistic formula.
Setup of the Fizeau Experiment: A light ray emanating from the source S’ is reflect ed by a beam splitter G and is collimated into
a parallel beam by lens L. After passing the slits O1 a nd O2, two rays of light travel through the tubes A1 an d A2, through which
water is streaming back and forth as shown by the arrows. The rays reflect off a mirror m at the focus of le ns L’, so that one ray
always propagates in the same direction as the water str eam, and the other ray opposite to the direction of the water stream. After
passing back and forth through the tubes, both rays unite at S, where they produce interference fringes tha t can be visualized
through the illustrated eyepiece. The interference pattern can be analyzed to determine the speed of li ght traveling along each leg of
the tube.
Relativistic Momentum
Relativistic momentum is given as where is the objec t’s invariant mass and is Lorentz transformation.
Compare Newtonian and relativistic momenta for objects at spe eds much less and approaching the speed of light
Relativistic Momentum
Newtonian physics assumes that absolute time and space e xist outside of any observer. This gives rise to Gal ilean relativity, which
states that the laws of motion are the same in all in ertial frames. It also results in a prediction that the speed of light can vary from
one reference frame to another. However, this is contr ary to observation. In the theory of special relativi ty, Albert Einstein keeps
the postulate that the equations of motion do not d epend on the reference frame, but assumes that the spe ed of light c is invariant.learning objectives
learning objectives

27.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203As a result, position and time in two reference frames are related by the Lorentz transformation instead o f the Galilean
transformation.
Albert Einstein: Albert Einstein in 1921
Consider, for example, a reference frame moving rela tive to another at velocity v in the x direction. The Galilean transformation
gives the coordinates of the moving frame as
while the Lorentz transformation gives
where is the Lorentz factor:
Conservation laws in physics, such as the law of conse rvation of momentum, must be invariant. That is, the property that needs to
be conserved should remain unchanged regardless of changes in the conditions of measurement. This means that the conservation
law needs to hold in any frame of reference. Newton’s se cond law [with mass fixed in the expression for momentu m (p=m*v)], is
not invariant under a Lorentz transformation. However, it can be made invariant by making the inertial ma ss m of an object a
function of velocity:
where is the object’s invariant mass.
The modified momentum,
obeys Newton’s second law:
It is important to note that for speeds much less th an the speed of light, Newtonian momentum and relativi stic momentum are
approximately the same. As one approaches the speed of light, however, relativistic momentum becomes infinite while Newtonian

27.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203momentum continues to increases linearly. Thus, it is n ecessary to employ the expression for relativistic m omentum when one is
dealing with speeds near the speed of light.
Relativistic and Newtonian Momentum: This figure illustrates that relativistic momentum app roaches infinity as the speed of
light is approached. Newtonian momentum increases linearl y with speed.
Relativistic Energy and Mass
In special relativity, as the object approaches the s peed of light, the object’s energy and momentum increase without bound.
Evaluate possibility for an object to travel at the speed of light
Relativistic Energy and Mass
In special relativity, an object that has a mass can not travel at the speed of light. As the object appro aches the speed of light, the
object’s energy and momentum increase without bound. R elativistic corrections for energy and mass need to b e made because of
the fact that the speed of light in a vacuum is con stant in all reference frames. The conservation of mass and energy are wellaccepted laws of physics. In order for these laws to ho ld in all reference frames, special relativity must be applied. It is important to
note that for objects with speeds that are well below the speed of light that the expressions for relativis tic energy and mass yield
values that are approximately equal to their Newtonian co unterparts.
Relativistic and Newtonian Kinetic Energy: This figure illustrates how relativistic and Newtonian Kinetic Energy are related to
the speed of an object. The relativistic kinetic en ergy increases to infinity when an object approaches the speed of light, this
indicates that no body with mass can reach the speed of light. On the other hand, Newtonian kinetic energy continues to increase
without bound as the speed of an object increases.learning objectives

27.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203Relativistic Mass
Relativistic mass was defined by Richard C. Tolman p ictured left of Albert Einstein here in 1934 as which holds for all
particles, including those moving at the speed of li ght. For a slower than light particle, a particle with a nonzero rest mass, the
formula becomes where is the rest mass and is the Lorentz factor. The Lorentz factor is equal to:,
where v is the relative velocity between inertial reference frames and c is the speed of light.
Richard C. Tolman and Albert Einstein: Richard C. Tolman (1881 – 1948) with Albert Einstein (1879 – 1955) at Caltech, 1932
When the relative velocity is zero, is simply equal to 1, and the relativistic mass is reduced to the res t mass. As the velocity
increases toward the speed of light (c), the denominator o f the right side approaches zero, and m consequently app roaches infinity.
In the formula for momentum the mass that occurs is the relativistic mass. In other words, the relativistic mass is the
proportionality constant between the velocity and the m omentum.
While Newton’s second law remains valid in the form the derived form is not valid because m in is generall y not a
constant.
Relativistic Energy
Relativistic energy () is connected with rest mass vi a the following equation:. Here the
term represents the square of the Euclidean norm (to tal vector length) of the various momentum vectors i n the system, which
reduces to the square of the simple momentum magnit ude, if only a single particle is considered. This eq uation reduces to when the
momentum term is zero. For photons where the equation reduce s to.
Today, the predictions of relativistic energy and m ass are routinely confirmed from the experimental da ta of particle accelerators
such as the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. The inc rease of relativistic momentum and energy is not onl y precisely measured but
also necessary to understand the behavior of cyclotrons and synchrotron, which accelerate particles to near the speed of light.
Matter and Antimatter
Antimatter is composed of antiparticles, which have the same mass as particles of ordinary matter but opposite charge and quantum
spin.
Describe properties of antiparticles
Antimatter is material composed of antiparticles, which have the same mass as particles of ordinary matter bu t have opposite
charge and quantum spin. Antiparticles bind with each other to form antimatter in the same way that normal particles bind to form
normal matter. For example, a positron (the antiparticle of the electron, with symbol e) and an antiproton (sy mbol p) can form an
antihydrogen atom. Furthermore, mixing matter and ant imatter can lead to the annihilation of both, in the same way that mixing
antiparticles and particles does. This gives rise to hi gh-energy photons (gamma rays) and other particle-an tiparticle pairs. The end
result of antimatter meeting matter is a release of energy proportional to the mass, as shown in the mass- energy equivalence
equation, E = mc.learning objectives

27.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203
Antihydrogen and Hydrogen Atoms: Antihydrogen consists of an antiproton and a positron; hydrogen consists of a proton and an
electron.
Almost all matter observable from the earth seems to be made of matter rather than antimatter. If antima tter-dominated regions of
space existed, the gamma rays produced in annihilatio n reactions along the boundary between matter and ant imatter regions would
be detectable.
Antimatter may still exist in relatively large amount s in far-away galaxies due to cosmic inflation in the primordial time of the
universe. Antimatter galaxies, if they exist, are expe cted to have the same chemistry and absorption and e mission spectra as
normal-matter galaxies, and their astronomical objec ts would be observationally identical, making them d ifficult to distinguish
from normal-matter galaxies.
There is considerable speculation as to why the obse rvable universe is apparently composed almost entirely of matter (as opposed
to a mixture of matter and antimatter), whether ther e exist other places that are almost entirely compos ed of antimatter instead, and
what sorts of technology might be possible if antimat ter could be harnessed. At this time, the apparent asy mmetry of matter and
antimatter in the visible universe is one of the greatest unsolved problems in physics.
Relativistic Kinetic Energy
Relativistic kinetic energy can be expressed as: where i s rest mass, is velocity, is speed of light.
Compare classical and relativistic kinetic energies for ob jects at speeds much less and approaching the speed of ligh t
In classical mechanics, the kinetic energy of an obje ct depends on the mass of a body as well as its speed. The kinetic energy is
equal to the mass multiplied by the square of the speed, m ultiplied by the constant 1/2. The equation is given as:
where m is the mass and v is the speed (or the velocity) of the body.
The classical kinetic energy of an object is related to it s momentum by the equation:
where p is momentum.
If the speed of a body is a significant fraction of of the speed of light, it is necessary to employ spec ial relativity to calculate its
kinetic energy. It is important to know how to apply sp ecial relativity to problems with high speed particles. In special relativity, we
must change the expression for linear momentum. Using m for rest mass, and for the object’s velocity an d speed respectively,
and c for the speed of light in vacuum, the relativistic expression for linear momentum is:learning objectives

27.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203
Time Magazine – July 1, 1946: The popular connection between Einstein,, and the ato mic bomb was prominently
indicated on the cover of Time magazine (July 1946) by t he writing of the equation on the mushroom cloud itself.
, where is the Lorentz factor:
Since the kinetic energy of an object is related to its momentum, we intuitively know that the relativisti c expression for kinetic
energy will also be different from its classical counter part. Indeed, the relativistic expression for kinetic energ y is:
The equation shows that the energy of an object appro aches infinity as the velocity v approaches the spee d of light c. Thus it is
impossible to accelerate an object across this boundary.
The mathematical by-product of this calculation is the mass-energy equivalence formula (referred to in). The body at rest must
have energy content equal to:
The general expression for the kinetic energy of an objec t that is not at rest is:
, where m is the relativistic mass of the object and m is th e rest mass of the object.
At a low speed (v<<cv<<c), the relativistic kinetic en ergy may be approximated well by the classical kinet ic energy. We can show
this to be true by using a Taylor expansion for the r eciprocal square root and keeping first two terms of the relativistic kinetic
energy equation. When we do this we get:
Thus, the total energy can be partitioned into the ene rgy of the rest mass plus the traditional classical kine tic energy at low speeds.
Key Points
When two objects are moving slowly compared to speed of li ght, it is accurate enough to use the vector sum of veloc ities:
As the velocity increases towards the speed of light, the vect or sum of velocities is replaced with:.
Composition law for velocities gave the first test of the kin ematics of the special theory of relativity when, using a Michelson
interferometer, Hyppolite Fizeau measured the speed of ligh t in a fluid moving parallel to the light.0

27.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203Newtonian physics assumes that absolute time and space ex ist outside of any observer, resulting in a prediction that the speed of
light can vary from one reference frame to another.
In the theory of special relativity, the equations of mo tion do not depend on the reference frame while the speed of light (c) is
invariant.
Within the domain of classical mechanics, relativistic m omentum closely approximates Newtonian momentum. At low ve locity
γm0vγm0v is approximately equal to m0vm0v, the Newtonian ex pression for momentum.
In special relativity, an object that has a mass cannot tr avel at the speed of light.
Relativistic mass is defined as and can be viewed as the proportionality constant between the velocity and the
momentum.
Relativistic energy is connected with rest mass via the fo llowing equation:.
The end result of antimatter meeting matter is a relea se of energy proportional to the mass, as shown in the ma ss-energy
equivalence equation,.
Although almost all matter observable from the Earth seem s to be made of matter rather than antimatter, antimatt er may still
exist in relatively large amounts in far-away galaxies.
No explanation for the apparent asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the visible universe exists.
Relativistic kinetic energy equation shows that the energy of an object approaches infinity as the velocity approa ches the speed
of light. Thus it is impossible to accelerate an object across this boundary.
Kinetic energy calculations lead to the mass -energy eq uivalence formula:.
At a low speed (), the relativistic kinetic energy may be ap proximated by the classical kinetic energy. Thus, the to tal
energy can be partitioned into the energy of the rest mass plus the traditional Newtonian kinetic energy at low sp eeds.
Key Terms
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
interferometer: Any of several instruments that use the interference of wa ves to determine wavelengths and wave velocities,
determine refractive indices, and measure small distances, temperature changes, stresses, and many other useful mea surements.
speed of light: the speed of electromagnetic radiation in a perfect vac uum: exactly 299,792,458 meters per second by definition
Galilean transformation: a transformation used to transform between the coordina tes of two reference frames which differ
only by constant relative motion within the constructs of Newtonian physics.
Lorentz transformation: a transformation relating the spacetime coordinates of one frame of reference to another in special
relativity
Lorentz factor: The factor, used in special relativity, to calculate the degree of time dilation, length contraction and re lativistic
mass of an object moving relative to an observer.
rest mass: the mass of a body when it is not moving relative to an obs erver
annihilation: the process of a particle and its corresponding antipar ticle combining to produce energy
positron: The antimatter equivalent of an electron, having th e same mass but a positive charge.
antimatter: matter that is composed of the antiparticles of those t hat constitute normal matter
classical mechanics: All of the physical laws of nature that account for the b ehaviour of the normal world, but break down
when dealing with the very small (see quantum mechanics) or the very fast or very heavy (see relativity).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Velocity-addition formula. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity-addition_formula. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Velocity-addition formula. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity-addition_formula. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

27.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203interferometer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interferometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
speed of light. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/speed_of_light. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a7/FizeauMascart1_retouched.png/799px-Fizeau-Mascart1_retouched.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Invariant (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Invariant_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Four-momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-momentum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Galilean transformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Galilean%20transformation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz transformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_transformation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a7/FizeauMascart1_retouched.png/799px-Fizeau-Mascart1_retouched.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Einstein_1921_portr ait2.jpg/480px-Einstein_1921_portrait2.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass in special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_in_special_relativity%23Relativisti c_mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass%23Mass_and_energy_in_special_relativi ty.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tests of special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_special_relativity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass in special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_in_special_relativity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass-energy equivalence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass-energy_equivalence. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mass in special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_in_special_relativity%23Relativisti c_mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
rest mass. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rest_mass. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Lorentz factor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_factor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a7/FizeauMascart1_retouched.png/799px-Fizeau-Mascart1_retouched.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Einstein_1921_portr ait2.jpg/480px-Einstein_1921_portrait2.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

27.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/c/c7/Tolman_&_Einstein.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Antimatter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Antimatter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Positron emission tomography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Positron_emission_tomography. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
antimatter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/antimatter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
annihilation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/annihilation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
positron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/positron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a7/FizeauMascart1_retouched.png/799px-Fizeau-Mascart1_retouched.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Einstein_1921_portr ait2.jpg/480px-Einstein_1921_portrait2.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/c/c7/Tolman_&_Einstein.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/b/b8/3D_image_of_Antihydrogen.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Correspondence principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Correspondence_principle. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
classical mechanics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/classical_mechanics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz factor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_factor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a7/FizeauMascart1_retouched.png/799px-Fizeau-Mascart1_retouched.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Einstein_1921_portr ait2.jpg/480px-Einstein_1921_portrait2.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tests of relativistic energy and momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tests_of_relativistic_energy_and_momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution

27.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16203Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/c/c7/Tolman_&_Einstein.jpg. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/b/b8/3D_image_of_Antihydrogen.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/en/5/57/Einstein_-_Time_Magazine__July_1,_1946.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
27.3: Relativistic Quantities is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1621227.4: Implications of Special Relativity
Formulate major changes in the understanding of time, space, mass, and energy that were introduced by the theory of
Special Relativity
The theory of Special Relativity and its implication s spurred a paradigm shift in our understanding of t he nature of the universe, the
fundamental fabric of which being space and time. Bef ore 1905, scientists considered space and time as c ompletely independent
objects. Time could not affect space and space could n ot affect time. After 1905, however, the Special Theory of Relativity
destroyed this old, but intuitive, view. Specifically, Special Relativity showed us that space and time are no t independent of one
another but can be mixed into each other and theref ore must be considered as the same object, which we shal l denote as space-time.
The consequences of space/time mixing are:
time dilation
and length contraction.
Other important consequences which will be discussed in anoth er section are
Relativity of Simultaneity (for certain events, the seq uence in which they occur is dependent on the observer)
Nothing can move faster than the speed of light (we shall den ote the value of the speed of light as cc)
Why is there a mixing between space and time? In orde r to examine this we must know the founding principles of relativity. They
are:
1. The Principle of Relativity: The laws of physics for observers which are not accelerating relative to one another should be the
same.
2. The Principle of Invariant Light Speed: All observers, m oving at constant speed, measure the same speed of light r egardless of
how fast they are moving.
If one accepts the second principle as fact then it immediately follows that space and time are not ind ependent. Why? Let us look at
the experiment in in which there is a light source, a fixed observer, and a rocket ship moving toward the l ight source. The two
observers are related by a coordinate, or space-time, transformation. The second principle then tells us that no matter ho w fast the
rocket is moving, both observers must measure the sam e light speed emanating from the source. The only wa y this can happen is if
the clock of the rocket observer is ticking at a dif ferent rate than the stationary observer. How much dif ferent? This can be
expressed in the time dilation equation:
Measuring Light: A stationary observer will measure the same speed of li ght as an observer who is moving in a rocket ship even if
that rocket is moving close to light speed.learning objectives

27.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212Where tsts is the time elapsed for the stationary obser ver, tmtm is the time elapsed for the moving observer, and vv is the velocity
of the rocket as measured from the stationary frame. One can then see that as then the time elapsed in the stationary frame
goes to infinity. To place some numbers, let, and. The time elapsed in the stationary frame is then on e hour.
Thus for every second lived in the rocket, the stationary man lives one hour!
One of the more radical results of time dilation is the so-called “twin paradox. ” The twin paradox is a th ought experiment in
special relativity that involves identical twins. One of the twins goes on a journey into space in a rocket that has a velocity near the
speed of light. Upon returning home the twin finds that the twin that remained on Earth has aged more. This c onsequence altered
the perception that aging is necessarily constant.
The square root factor in the time dilation equation is very important and we denote it as:
This factor shows up frequently in special relativity. For example the length contraction formula is:
where is the rest length, the length of an object m easured in the co-moving frame of the object, and is the length of the object
as measured by the observer who sees the object moving at speed. In our rocket example, the stationary obs erver measures the
length of the rocket as being less than what someone who was moving with the rocket would measure. This alter ed the perception
that the length of an object would appear the same regardle ss of the reference frame of the observer.
Another radical finding that was made possible by the discovery of special relativity is the equivalence of energy and mass.
Combined with other laws of physics, the postulates of s pecial relativity predict that mass and energy are related by:,
where c is the speed of light in vacuum. This altered t he perception that mass and energy are completely d ifferent things and paved
the way for nuclear power and nuclear weapons.
As a final note it is important to note how big the speed of light is compared to every day life. The speed of light is:
Thus in every day life and we do not experience sig nificant time dilation or length contraction. If we did, life would be very
different.
Four-Dimensional Space-Time
We live in four-dimensional space-time, in which the orderin g of certain events can depend on the observer.
Formulate major results of special relativity
Working in Four Dimensions
Let us examine two observers who are moving relative t o one another at a constant velocity. We shall denot e them as observer A
and observer A’. Observer A sets up a space-time coordi nate system (t, x, y, z); similarly, A’ sets up his own space-time coordinate
system (t’, x’, y’, z’). (See for an example.) Therefo re both observers live in a four-dimensional world wit h three space dimensions
and one time dimension.learning objectives

27.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212
Two Coordinate Systems: Two coordinate systems in which the primed frame moves with velocity v with respect to the unprimed
frame
You should not find it odd to work with four dimensio ns; any time you have to meet your friend somewhere y ou have to tell him
four variables: where (three spatial coordinates) and wh en (one time coordinate). In other words, we have alwa ys lived in four
dimensions, but so far you have probably thought of space a nd time as completely separate.
The Movement of Light in Four Dimensions
Back to our example: let us assume that at some poin t in space-time there is a beam of light that emerg es. Both observers measure
how far the beam has traveled at each point in time and how long it took to travel to travel that distanc e. That is to say, observer A
measures:
where, for example,; t is the time at which the measurement took place; an d t is the time at which the light was turned
on.
Similarly, observer A’ measures:
where we set up the system such that both observers agr ee on. Due to the invariance of the speed of light b oth
observers will agree on:
where refers to the coordinates in either frame. Ther efore there is a specific rule that all light paths must follow. For
general events we can define the quantity:
This is known as the line element and is the same for all observers. (Using the principles of relativity, yo u can prove this for general
separations, not just light rays). The set of all co ordinate transformations that leave the above quant ity invariant are known as
Lorentz Transformations. It follows that the coordinat e systems of all physical observers are related to ea ch other by Lorentz
Transformations. (The set of all Lorentz transformatio ns form what mathematicians call a group, and the stud y of group theory has
revolutionized physics). For the coordinate transformat ion in, the transformations are:
where0

27.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212We define the separation between space-time points as foll ows:
We separate these events because they are very differ ent. For example, for a space-like separation you can always find a coordinate
transformation that reverses the time-ordering of th e events (try to prove this for the example in). T his phenomenon is known as
the relativity of simultaneity and may be counterintuiti ve.
Space-Like Space-Time Separations
Let us examine two car crashes, one in New York and on e in London, such that they occur in the same time i n one frame. In this
situation, the space-time separation between the two e vents is space-like. The question of whether the even ts are simultaneous is
relative: in some reference frames the two accidents may happen at the same time; in other frames (in a d ifferent state of motion
relative to the events) the crash in London may occu r first; and in still other frames the New York crash may occur first. (In
practice, this does not affect us because the frames th at switch the order of the events must move at unreachably h igh speeds.)
Time-Like and Null Space-Time Separations
Events that are time-like or null do not share this p roperty, and therefore there is a causal ordering be tween time-like events. In
other words, if two events are time-like separated, the n they can effect each other. The reason is that if two space-time points are
time-like or null separated, one can always send a light si gnal from one point to another.
Special Relativity
Finally, let’s discuss an important result of special rela tivity — that the energy EE of an object moving with spe ed vv is:
where m0m0 is the mass of the object at rest and m=γm 0m=γm0 is the mass when the object is moving. The above formula
immediately shows why it is impossible to travel faster than the speed of light. As, and it takes an infinite amount of
energy to accelerate the object further.
The Relativistic Universe
Gravity is a geometrical effect in which a metric matrix plays a special role, and the motion of objects are altered by c urved space.
Identify factors that affect motion near massive objects
Relativity
Special relativity indicates that humans live in a f our-dimensional space-time where the ‘distance’ ssbet ween points in space-time
can be regarded as:
\[\mathrm{ s } ^ { 2 } = - \mathrm { c } ^ { 2 } \Del ta \mathrm { t } ^ { 2 } + \Delta \mathrm { x } ^ { 2 } + \Delta \mathrm{ y } ^
{ 2 } + \Delta \mathrm { z } ^ { 2 } = \mathrm{ X } ^ { \mathrm { T } } \eta \mathrm{ X }
The last equation is a matrix relation in which TT d enotes transpose (for vectors), is the vector \)(\mathrm { c }
\Delta \mathrm { t }, \Delta \mathrm { x }, \Delta \mathrm { y }, \Delta \mathrm { z })\), and is the matrix:learning objectives

27.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212A matrix that goes in between two vectors to give a le ngth is called a metric. In mathematics, a metric or distance function is a
function which defines a distance between elements of a set. In this case, the set is the space-time and th e elements are points in
that space-time. A space-time with the ηη metric is called Minkowski space and ηη is the Minkowski metric.
Four-dimensional Minkowski space-time is only one of man y different possible space-times (geometries) which dif fer in their
metric matrix. An arbitrary metric matrix can be den oted as gg, raising questions as to what space-times with different metrics
represent. In 1916, Einstein found the importance of these space-times in his theory of general relativity.
General Relativity
General relativity, or the general theory of relativ ity, is the geometric theory of gravitation publishe d by Albert Einstein in 1916. It
is the current description of gravitation in modern physics. General relativity generalizes special relati vity and Newton’s law of
universal gravitation, providing a unified descriptio n of gravity as a geometric property of space and ti me, or space-time. In
particular, the curvature of space-time is directly related to the energy and momentum of whatever matte r and radiation are present.
The relation is specified by the Einstein field equation s, a system of partial differential equations.
People can use the metric to calculate curvature and then use the Einstein field equations to relate the curvature to the energy and
momentum of the space-time. Going in the reverse orde r, energy and momentum affect the curvature and the space-time. Thus,
energy and momentum curves space-time. Minkowski space is the special space devoid of matter, and as a resu lt, it is completely
flat. The precise definition of curvature requires kn owledge of advanced mathematics, but an intuitive way t o understand it is that
the definition of a straight line changes in curved spac etime.
A pictorial example is shown in the figure below, wher e anything that is near the Earth has its motion alt ered due to the curved
space-time. This altering of motion affects satellit es, the moon, and even humans. If the space around th e Earth were flat, humans
would simply float away if they jumped upwards. Since the E arth alters the space-time, humans are pulled toward the Earth. In
essence, gravity is a geometrical effect.
Curvature of space-time: The massive Earth is altering the curvature of space-t ime.
Key Points
Time is relative.
Lengths of moving objects are different than if their len gths were measured in a co-moving frame.
Time and space are not independent.
We live in a four-dimensional universe; the first three dimensions are spatial, and the fourth is time.
The coordinate system of physical observers are relate d to one another via Lorentz transformations.
Nothing can travel faster than the speed of light.
The metric matrix can be used to calculate the curvatu re of space-time.
Curvature can be related to energy and momentum via the Ei nstein equations.
Due to the curvature of space-time, the motion of objects a re altered near massive objects.
Key Terms
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.

27.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212time dilation: The slowing of the passage of time experienced by objec ts in motion relative to an observer; measurable only at
relativistic speeds.
length contraction: Observers measure a moving object’s length as being smalle r than it would be if it were stationary.
line element: An invariant quantity in special relativity
Lorentz transformation: a transformation relating the spacetime coordinates of one frame of reference to another in special
relativity
relativity of simultaneity: For space-like separated space-time points, the time-o rdering between events is relative.
general relativity: A theory extending special relativity and uniforml y accounting for gravity and accelerated frames of
reference, postulating that space-time curves in the presen ce of mass.
Minkowski space: A four dimensional flat space-time. Because it is flat, i t is devoid of matter.
metric: A metric, or distance function, is a function which defi nes a distance between elements of a set.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Speed of sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_sound. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Time dilation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_dilation%23Muon_lifetime. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
length contraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/length%20contraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
time dilation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/time_dilation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50947657e4b0b4558d8e4fac/ sr_lightmeasure.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Special relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Relativity of simultaneity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Relativity_of_simultaneity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/line-element. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/relativity-ofsimultaneity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lorentz transformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Lorentz_transformation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50947657e4b0b4558d8e4fac/ sr_lightmeasure.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
File:Frames of reference in relative motion.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Frames_of_reference_in_re lative_motion.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
General relativity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/General_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

27.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16212Metric (mathematics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_(mathematics). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/minkowski-space--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
metric. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/metric. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
general relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/general_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50947657e4b0b4558d8e4fac/ sr_lightmeasure.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
File:Frames of reference in relative motion.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Frames_of_reference_in_re lative_motion.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spacetime curvature. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spacetime_curvature.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
28: Introduction to Quantum Physics
28: Introduction to Quantum Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
28.2: Applications of Quantum MechanicsTopic hierarchy

28.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1621428.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
Explain how the photoelectric effect paradox was solved by Albert Einstein.
Electrons are emitted from matter when light shines o n a surface. This is called the photoelectric effect, and the electrons emitted
in this manner are called photoelectrons.
The Photoelectric Effect: Electrons are emitted from matter by absorbed light.
The photoelectric effect typically requires photons with energies from a few electronvolts to 1 MeV for h eavier elements, roughly
in the ultraviolet and X-ray range. Study of the phot oelectric effect led to important steps in understan ding the quantum nature of
light and electrons and influenced the formation of the concept of wave-particle duality. The photoelectr ic effect is also widely used
to investigate electron energy levels in matter.
High School Phy sics - Photoelectric EffectHigh School Phy sics - Photoelectric Effectlearning objectives

28.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214Photoelectric Effect: A brief introduction to the Photoelectric Effect and el ectron photoemission.
Heinrich Hertz discovered the photoelectric effect in 1887. Although electrons had not been discovered yet, Hertz observed that
electric currents were produced when ultraviolet light was shined on a metal. By the beginning of the 20th century, physicists
confirmed that:
The energy of the individual photoelectrons increased with the frequency (or color) of the light, but was independ ent of the
intensity (or brightness) of the radiation.
The photoelectric current was determined by the light’ s intensity; doubling the intensity of the light doubled the number of
emitted electrons.
This observation was very puzzling to many physicists. At the time, light was accepted as a wave phenomenon. Sinc e energy
carried by a wave should only depend on its amplitude (and not on the frequency of the wave), the frequenc y dependence of the
emitted electrons’ energies didn’t make sense.
In 1905, Albert Einstein solved this apparent paradox by describing light as composed of discrete quanta (now called photons),
rather than continuous waves. Building on Max Planck’s theory of black body radiation, Einstein theorized that the energy in each
quantum of light was equal to the frequency multiplie d by a constant h, later called Planck’s constant. A p hoton above a threshold
frequency has the required energy to eject a single electron, creating the observed effect. As the freq uency of the incoming light
increases, each photon carries more energy, hence inc reasing the energy of each outgoing photoelectron. By doubling the number
of photons as the intensity is doubled, the number of pho telectrons should double accordingly.
According to Einstein, the maximum kinetic energy of an ejected electron is given by, where is the Planc k constant
and f is the frequency of the incident photon. The t erm is known as the work function, the minimum energy required to remove
an electron from the surface of the metal. The work function satisfies, where is the threshold frequency for the metal for
the onset of the photoelectric effect. The value of work f unction is an intrinsic property of matter.
Is light then composed of particles or waves? Young’s experiment suggested that it was a wave, but the photo electric effect
indicated that it should be made of particles. This q uestion would be resolved by de Broglie: light, and a ll matter, have both wavelike and particle-like properties.
Photon Energies of the EM Spectrum
The electromagnetic (EM) spectrum is the range of all po ssible frequencies of electromagnetic radiation.
Compare photon energy with the frequency of the radiation
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The electromagnetic (EM) spectrum is the range of al l possible frequencies of electromagnetic radiation. The electromagnetic
spectrum extends from below the low frequencies used for modern radio communication to gamma radiation a t the shortlearning objectives

28.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214wavelength (high-frequency) end, thereby covering wav elengths of thousands of kiilometers down to those of a fraction of the size
of an atom (approximately an angstrom). The limit for lon g wavelengths is the size of the universe itself.
Electromagnetic spectrum: This shows the electromagnetic spectrum, including the visi ble region, as a function of both frequency
(left) and wavelength (right).
Maxwell’s equations predicted an infinite number of fr equencies of electromagnetic waves, all traveling at t he speed of light. This
was the first indication of the existence of the ent ire electromagnetic spectrum. Maxwell’s predicted waves included waves at very
low frequencies compared to infrared, which in theory m ight be created by oscillating charges in an ordinar y electrical circuit of a
certain type. In 1886, the physicist Hertz built an app aratus to generate and detect what are now called rad io waves, in an attempt to
prove Maxwell’s equations and detect such low-frequenc y electromagnetic radiation. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer
(by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also
demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflecte d and refracted by various dielectric media, in the same manner as light.
Filling in the Electromagnetic Spectrum
In 1895, Wilhelm Röntgen noticed a new type of radiat ion emitted during an experiment with an evacuated t ube subjected to a high
voltage. He called these radiations ‘X-rays’ and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were
reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Befo re long, there were many new uses for them in the field of medic ine.
The last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was f illed in with the discovery of gamma rays. In 1900, Pau l Villard was
studying the radioactive emissions of radium when he i dentified a new type of radiation that he first thoug ht consisted of particles
similar to known alpha and beta particles, but far mo re penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British p hysicist William Henry
Bragg demonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnet ic radiation, not particles. In 1914, Ernest Rutherford (who had named them
gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fu ndamentally different from charged alpha and beta r ays) and Edward
Andrade measured their wavelengths, and found that gam ma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelen gths and higher
frequencies.
The relationship between photon energy and the radia tion’s frequency and wavelength is illustrated as th e following equilavent
equation:, or or where νν is the frequency, is the wavelength, is photon energy, is the speed of light, a nd
hh is the Planck constant. Generally, electromagnetic r adiation is classified by wavelength into radio waves, microwaves, terahertz
(or sub-millimeter) radiation, infrared, the visible region humans perceive as light, ultraviolet, X-rays, an d gamma rays. The
behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. W hen EM radiation interacts with single atoms and molec ules, its behavior
also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) i t carries.
Most parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are used in science for spectroscopic and other probing interac tions as ways to study
and characterize matter. Also, radiation from variou s parts of the spectrum has many other uses in commun ications and
manufacturing.

28.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214Energy, Mass, and Momentum of Photon
A photon is an elementary particle, the quantum of ligh t, which carries momentum and energy.
State physical properties of a photon
A photon is an elementary particle, the quantum of li ght. It has no rest mass and has no electric charge. The modern photon concept
was developed gradually by Albert Einstein to explain experimental observations of the photoelectric effect, which did not fit the
classical wave model of light. In particular, the phot on model accounted for the frequency dependence of light’s energy. Max
Planck explained black body radiation using semiclas sical models, in which light is still described by Maxwe ll’s equations, but the
material objects that emit and absorb light, do so in amou nts of energy that are quantized.
Photons are emitted in many natural processes. They ar e emitted from light sources such as floor lamps or lasers. For example,
when a charge is accelerated it emits photons, a phen omenon known as synchrotron radiation. During a molecu lar, atomic or
nuclear transition to a lower or higher energy level, photons of various energy will be emitted or absorbe d respectively. A photon
can also be emitted when a particle and its correspon ding antiparticle are annihilated. During all these p rocesses, photons will carry
energy and momentum.
laser: Photons emitted in a coherent beam from a laser.
Energy of photon: From the studies of photoelectric e ffects, energy of a photon is directly proportional t o its frequency with the
Planck constant being the proportionality factor. The refore, we already know that (Eq. 1), where is the ener gy and νν is
the frequency.
Momentum of photon: According to the theory of Special Relativity, energy and momentum (p) of a particle wi th rest mass m has
the following relationship:, where is the speed of light. In the case of a photon with zero rest mass, we g et
. Combining this with Eq. 1, we get. Here, is the wave length of the light. Since momentum is a vector quan tity
and p points in the direction of the photon’s propagati on, we can write, where and is a wave vector.
You may wonder how an object with zero rest mass can ha ve nonzero momentum. This confusion often arises bec ause of the
commonly used form of momentum (mvmv in non-relativ istic mechanics and γmvγmv in relativistic mechanics, where vv is
velocity and.) This formula, obviously, shouldn’t be used in the case.
Implications of Quantum Mechanics
Quantum mechanics has had enormous success in explain ing microscopic systems and has become a foundation of modern science
and technology.
Explain importance of quantum mechanics for technology a nd other branches of science
The field of quantum mechanics has been enormously successful in explaining many of the features of our world. The behavior of
the subatomic particles (electrons, protons, neutro ns, photons, and others) that make up all forms of matter can often be
satisfactorily described only using quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics has also strongly influenced string theo ry.learning objectives
learning objectives

28.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214Quantum mechanics is also critically important for un derstanding how individual atoms combine covalently to form molecules.
The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry i s known as quantum chemistry. Relativistic quantum mec hanics can, in
principle, mathematically describe most of chemistry. Quantum mechanics can also provide quantitative ins ight into ionic and
covalent bonding processes by explicitly showing which molecules are energetically favorable to which other molecules and the
magnitudes of the energies involved. Furthermore, most of the calculations performed in modern computational chemistry rely on
quantum mechanics.
A great number of modern technological inventions o perate on a scale where quantum effects are significa nt. Examples include the
laser, the transistor (and thus the microchip), the e lectron microscope, and magnetic resonance imaging (M RI). The study of
semiconductors led to the invention of the diode and the transistor, which are indispensable parts of moder n electronic systems and
devices.
Laser: Red (635-nm), green (532-nm), and blue-violet (445-nm) lasers
Researchers are currently seeking robust methods of directly manipulating quantum states. Efforts are b eing made to more fully
develop quantum cryptography, which will theoretically allow guaranteed secure transmission of information. A more distant goal
is the development of quantum computers, which are e xpected to perform certain computational tasks expon entially faster than
classical computers. Another topic of active research i s quantum teleportation, which deals with techniques t o transmit quantum
information over arbitrary distances.
Particle-Wave Duality
Wave–particle duality postulates that all physical entit ies exhibit both wave and particle properties.
Describe experiments that demonstrated wave-particle du ality of physical entities
Wave–particle duality postulates that all physical entit ies exhibit both wave and particle properties. As a centra l concept of quantum
mechanics, this duality addresses the inability of classical concepts like “particle” and “wave” to ful ly describe the behavior of
(usually) microscopic objects.
From a classical physics point of view, particles and waves are distinct concepts. They are mutually exclusi ve, in the sense that a
particle doesn’t exhibit wave-like properties and vic e versa. Intuitively, a baseball doesn’t disappear via destructive interference,
and our voice cannot be localized in space. Why the n is it that physicists believe in wave-particle duali ty? Because that’s how
mother Nature operates, as they have learned from seve ral ground-breaking experiments. Here is a short, chron ological list of those
experiments:
Young’s double-slit experiment: In the early Nineteenth ce ntury, the double-slit experiments by Young and Fresnel p rovided
evidence that light is a wave. In 1861, James Clerk Maxwell expl ained light as the propagation of electromagnetic waves
according to the Maxwell’s equations.
Black body radiation: In 1901, to explain the observed sp ectrum of light emitted by a glowing object, Max Planck assum ed that
the energy of the radiation in the cavity was quantize d, contradicting the established belief that electromag netic radiation is a
wave.learning objectives

28.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214Photoelectric effect: Classical wave theory of light als o fails to explain photoelectric effect. In 1905, Albe rt Einstein explained
the photoelectric effects by postulating the existence o f photons, quanta of light energy with particulate qual ities.
De Broglie’s wave (matter wave): In 1924, Louis-Victor de Bro glie formulated the de Broglie hypothesis, claiming that all
matter, not just light, has a wave-like nature. His hypothe sis was soon confirmed with the observation that electron s (matter)
also displays diffraction patterns, which is intuitively a wave property.
From these historic achievements, physicists now accept that all entities in nature behave as both a parti cle and a wave, depending
on the specifics of the phenomena under consideration. Because of its counter-intuitive aspect, the meanin g of the particle-wave
duality is still a point of debate in quantum physics. The standard interpretation is that the act of mea surement causes the set of
probabilities, governed by a probability distributio n function acquired from a “wave”, to immediately and randomly assume one of
the possible values, leading to a “particle”-like resul t.
So, why do we not notice a baseball acting like a wave? The wavelength of the matter wave associated with a bas eball, say moving
at 95 miles per hour, is extremely small compared to the si ze of the ball so that wave-like behavior is never noticea ble.
Diffraction Revisited
De Broglie’s hypothesis was that particles should show wave-like properties such as diffraction or interference.
Compare application of X-ray, electron, and neutron diffra ction for materials research
The de Broglie hypothesis, formulated in 1924, predic ts that particles should also behave as waves. The wavel ength of an electron
is given by the de Broglie equation. Here is Planck ’s constant and pp the relativistic momentum of the electron. is called
the de Broglie wavelength.
From the work by Planck (black body radiation) and Ein stein (photoelectric effect), physicists understood that electromagnetic
waves sometimes behaved like particles. De Broglie’s hyp othesis is complementary to this idea: particles sho uld also show wavelike properties such as diffraction or interference. De Broglie’s formula was confirmed three years later f or electrons (which have a
rest-mass) with the observation of electron diffracti on in two independent experiments. George Paget Thomso n passed a beam of
electrons through a thin metal film and observed the predicted interference patterns. Clinton Joseph Davisso n and Lester Halbert
Germerguided their beam through a crystalline grid to o bserve diffraction patterns.
X-ray diffraction is a commonly used tool in materials research. Thanks to the wave-particle duality, matter wa ve diffraction can
also be used for this purpose. The electron, which is easy to produce and manipulate, is a common choice. A neutron is another
particle of choice. Due to the different kinds of int eractions involved in the diffraction processes, the three types of radiation (Xray, electron, neutron) are suitable for different kind s of studies.
Electron diffraction is most frequently used in soli d state physics and chemistry to study the crystallin e structure of solids.
Experiments are usually performed using a transmissi on electron microscope or a scanning electron micro scope. In these
instruments, electrons are accelerated by an electro static potential in order to gain the desired energ y and, thus, wavelength before
they interact with the sample to be studied. The per iodic structure of a crystalline solid acts as a diffr action grating, scattering the
electrons in a predictable manner. Working back from the observed diffraction pattern, it is then possi ble to deduce the structure of
the crystal producing the diffraction pattern. Unlike other types of radiation used in diffraction studi es of materials, such as X-rays
and neutrons, electrons are charged particles and i nteract with matter through the Coulomb forces. This m eans that the incident
electrons feel the influence of both the positively charged atomic nuclei and the surrounding electrons. In comparison, X-rays
interact with the spatial distribution of the valenc e electrons, while neutrons are scattered by the atomi c nuclei through the strong
nuclear force.learning objectives

28.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214
Electron Diffraction Pattern: Typical electron diffraction pattern obtained in a transmission electron microscope with a parallel
electron beam.
Neutrons have also been used for studying crystallin e structures. They are scattered by the nuclei of th e atoms, unlike X-rays,
which are scattered by the electrons of the atoms. Thu s, neutron diffraction has some key differences compa red to more common
methods using X-rays or electrons. For example, the sca ttering of X-rays is highly dependent on the atomic n umber of the atoms
(i.e., the number of electrons), whereas neutron scatter ing depends on the properties of the nuclei. In addi tion, the magnetic
moment of the neutron is non-zero, and can thus also be scattered by magnetic fields. This means that neu tron scattering is more
useful for determining the properties of atomic nucl ei, despite the fact that neutrons are significantl y harder to create, manipulate,
and detect compared to X-rays and electrons.
The Wave Function
A wave function is a probability amplitude in quantum me chanics that describes the quantum state of a particle and how it behaves.
Relate the wave function with the probability density of f inding a particle, commenting on the constraints the wave function
must satisfy for this to make sense
In quantum mechanics, a wave function is a probabili ty amplitude describing the quantum state of a parti cle and how it behaves.
Typically, its values are complex numbers. For a sing le particle, it is a function of space and time. Th e most common symbols for a
wave function are or (lowercase or uppercase psi, respe ctively), when the wave function is given as a function of
position. Although is a complex number, is a real number and corresponds to the probability density o f finding a particle in
a given place at a given time, if the particle’s position is measured.
Trajectories of a Harmonic Oscillator: This figure shows some trajectories of a harmonic oscillato r (a ball attached to a spring) in
classical mechanics (A-B) and quantum mechanics (C-H). In qua ntum mechanics (C-H), the ball has a wave function, which i slearning objectives

28.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214shown with its real part in blue and its imaginary part i n red. The trajectories C-F are examples of standing waves, or “stationary
states. ” Each standing-wave frequency is proportional to a possible energy level of the oscillator. This “energy quantization” does
not occur in classical physics, where the oscillator can ha ve any energy.
The laws of quantum mechanics (the Schrödinger equatio n) describe how the wave function evolves over time. Th e wave function
behaves qualitatively like other waves, such as water wav es or waves on a string, because the Schrödinger equati on is
mathematically a type of wave equation. This explains the name “wave function” and gives rise to wave-particle dual ity.
The wave function must satisfy the following constraints f or the calculations and physical interpretation to make sense:
It must everywhere be finite.
It must everywhere be a continuous function and continuo usly differentiable.
It must everywhere satisfy the relevant normalization co ndition so that the particle (or system of particles) exists somewhere
with 100-percent certainty.
If these requirements are not met, it’s not possible to interpret the wave function as a probability ampl itude. This is because the
values of the wave function and its first order deri vatives may not be finite and definite (having exac tly one value), which means
that the probabilities can be infinite and have mul tiple values at any one position and time, which is nonsense. Furthermore, when
we use the wave function to calculate an observation o f the quantum system without meeting these requireme nts, there will not be
finite or definite values to use (in this case the obse rvation can take a number of values and can be infi nite). This is not a possible
occurrence in a real-world experiment. Therefore, a wave f unction is meaningful only if these conditions are satisfie d.
de Broglie and the Wave Nature of Matter
The concept of “matter waves” or “de Broglie waves” reflec ts the wave-particle duality of matter.
Formulate the de Broglie relation as an equation
In quantum mechanics, the concept of matter waves (o r de Broglie waves) reflects the wave-particle dualit y of matter. The theory
was proposed by Louis de Broglie in 1924 in his PhD thes is. The de Broglie relations show that the wavelength is inversely
proportional to the momentum of a particle, and is also cal led de Broglie wavelength.
Einstein derived in his theory of special relativity that the energy and momentum of a photon has the following re lationship:
(: energy,: momentum,: speed of light).
He also demonstrated, in his study of photoelectric ef fects, that energy of a photon is directly proporti onal to its frequency, giving
us this equation:
(: Planck constant,: frequency).
Combining the two equations, we can derive a relationship be tween the momentum and wavelength of light:
. Therefore, we arrive at.
De Broglie’s hypothesis is that this relationship, derived for electromagnetic waves, can be adopted to describe matter (e.g.
electron, neutron, etc.) as well.
De Broglie didn’t have any experimental proof at the time of his proposal. It took three years for Clint on Davisson and Lester
Germer to observe diffraction patterns from electrons passing a crystalline metallic target (see). Before t he acceptance of the de
Broglie hypothesis, diffraction was a property thought to be exhibited by waves only. Therefore, the presenc e of any diffraction
effects by matter demonstrated the wave-like nature o f matter. This was a pivotal result in the developmen t of quantum mechanics.
Just as the photoelectric effect demonstrated the par ticle nature of light, the Davisson–Germer experiment s howed the wave-nature
of matter, thus completing the theory of wave-particle du ality.learning objectives

28.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214
Davisson-Germer Experimental Setup: The experiment included an electron gun consisting of a heated filament that released
thermally excited electrons, which were then accelerated t hrough a potential difference (giving them a certain a mount of kinetic
energy towards the nickel crystal). To avoid collisions of the electrons with other molecules on their way towards th e surface, the
experiment was conducted in a vacuum chamber. To measure the number of electrons that were scattered at different angles, an
electron detector that could be moved on an arc path a bout the crystal was used. The detector was designed to acce pt only
elastically scattered electrons.
Experiments with Fresnel diffraction and specular refle ction of neutral atoms confirm the application to a toms of the de Broglie
hypothesis. Further, recent experiments confirm the rel ations for molecules and even macromolecules, normally considered too
large to undergo quantum mechanical effects. In 199 9, a research team in Vienna demonstrated diffraction for molecules as large as
fullerenes. The researchers calculated a De Broglie wavele ngth of the most probable velocity as 2.5 pm.
The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
The uncertainty principle asserts a basic limit to t he precision with which some physical properties of a p article can be known
simultaneously.
Relate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle with the mat ter wave nature of all quantum objects
The uncertainty principle is any of a variety of ma thematical inequalities, asserting a fundamental li mit to the precision with which
certain pairs of physical properties of a particle, such as position and momentum pp or energy and tim e, can be known
simultaneously. The more precisely the position of som e particle is determined, the less precisely its mom entum can be known, and
vice versa. This can be formulated as the following i nequality:, where is the standard deviation of pos ition, σp is the
standard deviation of momentum, and. The uncertain ty principle is inherent in the properties of all wa ve-like systems, and it
arises in quantum mechanics simply due to the matter wa ve nature of all quantum objects. Thus, the uncertai nty principle actually
states a fundamental property of quantum systems, and is not a statement about the observational success of cur rent technology.
The principle is quite counterintuitive, so the ear ly students of quantum theory had to be reassured th at naive measurements to
violate it were bound always to be unworkable. One way i n which Heisenberg originally illustrated the intrins ic impossibility of
violating the uncertainty principle is by using an imag inary microscope as a measuring device.learning objectives

28.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214
Heisenberg Microscope: Heisenberg’s microscope, with cone of light rays focusing on a particle with angle He imagines an
experimenter trying to measure the position and momentum o f an electron by shooting a photon at it.
Example One
If the photon has a short wavelength and therefore a large momentum, the position can be measured accurat ely. But the photon
scatters in a random direction, transferring a large and uncertain amount of momentum to the electron. If the photon has a long
wavelength and low momentum, the collision does not dis turb the electron’s momentum very much, but the sca ttering will
reveal its position only vaguely.
Example Two
If a large aperture is used for the microscope, the electron’s location can be well resolved (see Raylei gh criterion); but by the
principle of conservation of momentum, the transverse m omentum of the incoming photon and hence the new mom entum of
the electron resolves poorly. If a small aperture is us ed, the accuracy of both resolutions is the other way arou nd.
Heisenberg’s Argument
Heisenberg’s argument is summarized as follows. He begins by supposing that an electron is like a classical pa rticle, moving in the
xx direction along a line below the microscope, as in the illustration to the right. Let the cone of ligh t rays leaving the microscope
lens and focusing on the electron makes an angle εε wi th the electron. Let be the wavelength of the light rays. Then, according to
the laws of classical optics, the microscope can only resolve the position of the electron up to an accura cy of When an
observer perceives an image of the particle, it’s bec ause the light rays strike the particle and bounce b ack through the microscope to
their eye. However, we know from experimental evidence th at when a photon strikes an electron, the latter has a recoil with
momentum proportional to, where is Planck’s constant.
It is at this point that Heisenberg introduces objec tive indeterminacy into the thought experiment. He wri tes that “the recoil cannot
be exactly known, since the direction of the scattere d photon is undetermined within the bundle of rays e ntering the microscope”.
In particular, the electron’s momentum in the xx di rection is only determined up to δpx≈hλsin(ε/2)δpx≈h λsin (ε/2). Combining the
relations for and, we thus have that, which is an ap proximate expression of Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle.Example:

28.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Derived and ExplaiHeisenberg Uncertainty Principle Derived and Explai
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Derived and Explained
One of the most-oft quoted results of quantum physics, t his doozie forces us to reconsider what we can know about the universe.
Some things cannot be known simultaneously. In fact, if anything about a system is known perfectly, there is likely another
characteristic that is completely shrouded in uncertaint y. So significant figures ARE important after all!
Philosophical Implications
Since its inception, many counter-intuitive aspects of q uantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical de bates.
Formulate the Copenhagen interpretation of the probabili stic nature of quantum mechanics
Since its inception, many counter-intuitive aspects a nd results of quantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical debates
and many interpretations. Even fundamental issues, su ch as Max Born’s basic rules interpreting as a probab ility density
function took decades to be appreciated by society a nd many leading scientists. Indeed, the renowned physic ist Richard Feynman
once said, “I think I can safely say that nobody underst ands quantum mechanics. ”
The Copenhagen Interpretation
The Copenhagen interpretation—due largely to the Dan ish theoretical physicist Niels Bohr, shown in —remains a quantum
mechanical formalism that is widely accepted amongst physicists, some 75 years after its enunciation. Accordi ng to this
interpretation, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics is not a temporary feature which will even tually be replaced by a
deterministic theory, but instead must be considered a fi nal renunciation of the classical idea of causality.
learning objectives

28.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214
Niels Bohr and Albert Einstein: Niels Bohr (left) and Albert Einstein (right). Despite their pi oneering contributions to the
inception of the quantum mechanics, they disagreed on its interpretation.
The Copenhagen interpretation has philosophical imp lications to the concept of determinism. According to the theory of
determinism, for everything that happens there are co nditions such that, given those conditions, nothing el se could happen.
Determinism and free-will seem to be mutually exclusiv e. If the universe, and any person in it are governed by strict and universal
laws, then that means that a person’s behavior could be predicted based on sufficient knowledge of the ci rcumstances obtained
prior to that person’s behavior. However, the Copenhage n interpretation suggests a universe in which outcome s are not fully
determined by prior circumstances but also by proba bility. This gave thinkers alternatives to strictly bo und possibilities, proposing
a model for a universe that follows general rules but never ha d a predetermined future.
Philosophical Implications
It is also believed therein that any well-defined appl ication of the quantum mechanical formalism must alwa ys make reference to
the experimental arrangement. This is due to the quan tum mechanical principle of wave function collapse. T hat is, a wave function
which is initially in a superposition of several diff erent possible states appears to reduce to a single one of those states after
interaction with an observer. In simplified terms, it i s the reduction of the physical possibilities into a si ngle possibility as seen by
an observer. This raises philosophical questions about wh ether something that is never observed actually exists.
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) Paradox
Albert Einstein (shown in, himself one of the founder s of quantum theory) disliked this loss of determinis m in measurement in the
Copenhagen interpretation. Einstein held that there should be a local hidden variable theory underlyin g quantum mechanics and,
consequently, that the present theory was incomplete. He produced a series of objections to the theory, the m ost famous of which
has become known as the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) p aradox. John Bell showed by Bell’s theorem that this “EPR” paradox
led to experimentally testable differences between qu antum mechanics and local realistic theories. Experi ments have been
performed confirming the accuracy of quantum mechan ics, thereby demonstrating that the physical world c annot be described by
any local realistic theory. The Bohr-Einstein debates provide a vibrant critique of the Copenhagen Inter pretation from an
epistemological point of view.
Quantum Entanglement
One of the most bizarre aspect of the quantum mechani cs is known as quantum entanglement. Quantum entangle ment occurs when
particles interact physically and then become separa ted, while isloated from the rest of the universe to prevent any deterioration of
the quantum state. According to the Copenhagen interp retation of quantum mechanics, their shared state is indefinite until
measured. Once a particle in the entangled state is m easured and its state is determined, the Copenhagen i nterpretation demands

28.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214that the other particles’ state is also determined instantaneously. This bizarre nature of action at a d istance (which seemingly violate
the speed limit on the transmission of information i mplicit in the theory of relativity) is what bothere d Einstein the most.
(According to the theory of relativity, nothing can travel faster than the speed of light in a vacuum. This seemingly puts a limit on
the speed at which information can be transmitted.) Quantum entanglement is the key element in proposals for quantum computers
and quantum teleportation.
Key Points
The energy of the emitted electrons depends only on the frequency of the incident light, and not on the light in tensity.
Einstein explained the photoelectric effect by describi ng light as composed of discrete particles.
Study of the photoelectric effect led to important steps in understanding the quantum nature of light and electro ns, which would
eventually lead to the concept of wave-particle duality.
Electromagnetic radiation is classified according to wa velength, divided into radio waves, microwaves, terahertz (or submillimeter) radiation, infrared, the visible region hum ans perceive as light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma ra ys.
Photon energy is proportional to the frequency of the rad iation.
Most parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are used in sc ience for spectroscopic and other probing interactions as way s to study
and characterize matter.
Energy of photon is proportional to its frequency.
Momentum of photon is proportional to the wave vector.
Photon’s rest mass is 0.
A great number of modern technological inventions are ba sed on quantum mechanics, including the laser, the transis tor, the
electron microscope, and magnetic resonance imaging.
Quantum mechanics is also critically important for under standing how individual atoms combine covalently to form molecules.
The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is kn own as quantum chemistry.
Researchers are currently seeking robust methods of direct ly manipulating quantum states for applications in co mputer and
information science.
All entities in Nature behave as both a particle and a wav e, depending on the specifics of the phenomena under con sideration.
Particle-wave duality is usually hidden in macroscopic ph enomena, conforming to our intuition.
In the double-slit experiment of electrons, individual event displays a particle-like property of localization (or a “dot”). After
many repetitions, however, the image shows an interference p attern, which indicates that each event is in fact govern ed by a
probability distribution.
The wavelength of an electron is given by the de Brogli e equation.
Because of different forms of interaction involved, X-ray, electron, and neutron are suitable for different studies of material
properties.
De Broglie’s idea completed the wave-particle duality.
corresponds to the probability density of finding a p article in a given location x at a given time.
The laws of quantum mechanics (the Schrödinger equation) describe how the wave function evolves over time. The
Schrödinger equation is a type of wave equation, which ex plains the name “wave function”.
A wave function must satisfy a set of mathematical cons traints for the calculations and physical interpretat ion to make sense.
de Broglie relations show that the wavelength is inversel y proportional to the momentum of a particle.
The Davisson-Germer experiment demonstrated the wave-natu re of matter and completed the theory of wave-particle du ality.
Experiments demonstrated that de Broglie hypothesis i s applicable to atoms and macromolecules.
The uncertainty principle is inherent in the propertie s of all wave-like systems, and that it arises in quantum mec hanics is
simply due to the matter wave nature of all quantum obj ects.
The uncertainty principle is not a statement about the observational success of current technology.
The more precisely the position of some particle is det ermined, the less precisely its momentum can be known, an d vice versa.
This can be formulated as the following inequality:.
According to the Copenhagen interpretation, the probabi listic nature of quantum mechanics is intrinsic in our physical universe.
When quantum wave function collapse occurs, physical possi bilities are reduced into a single possibility as seen by an observer.
Once a particle in an entangled state is measured and its state is determined, the Copenhagen interpretation deman ds that the
state of the other entangled particle is also determined instantaneously.

28.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214Key Terms
black body radiation: The type of electromagnetic radiation within or surr ounding a body in thermodynamic equilibrium with
its environment, or emitted by a black body (an opaque an d non-reflective body) held at constant, uniform temper ature.
photoelectron: Electrons emitted from matter by absorbing energy from electromagnetic radiation.
wave-particle duality: A postulation that all particles exhibit both wave a nd particle properties. It is a central concept of
quantum mechanics.
Planck constant: a physical constant that is the quantum of action in quant um mechanics. It has a unit of angular momentum.
The Planck constant was first described as the proportion ality constant between the energy of a photon (unit of el ectromagnetic
radiation) and the frequency of its associated electr omagnetic wave in his derivation of the Planck’s law
Maxwell’s equations: A set of equations describing how electric and magnetic f ields are generated and altered by each other
and by charges and currents.
elementary particle: a particle not known to have any substructure
photoelectric effect: The occurrence of electrons being emitted from matter (m etals and non-metallic solids, liquids, or gases)
as a consequence of their absorption of energy from elec tromagnetic radiation.
cryptography: the practice and study of techniques for secure commu nication in the presence of third parties
relativistic quantum mechanics: a theoretical framework for constructing quantum mecha nical models of fields and manybody systems
string theory: an active research framework in particle physics that atte mpts to reconcile quantum mechanics and general
relativity
black body: An idealized physical body that absorbs all incident ele ctromagnetic radiation, regardless of frequency or angle of
incidence. Although black body is a theoretical concept, y ou can find approximate realizations of black body in nat ure.
grating: Any regularly spaced collection of essentially identic al, parallel, elongated elements.
Schrödinger equation: A partial-differential that describes how the quantum s tate of some physical system changes with time.
It was formulated in late 1925 and published in 1926 by the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger
harmonic oscillator: a system that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring force proportional
to the displacement x
diffraction: The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
wave-particle duality: A postulation that all particles exhibit both wave a nd particle properties. It is a central concept of
quantum mechanics.
matter wave: A concept reflects the wave-particle duality of matter. The theory was proposed by Louis de Broglie.
Rayleigh criterion: The angular resolution of an optical system can be estim ated from the diameter of the aperture and the
wavelength of the light, which was first proposed by Lord Raylei gh.
probability density function: Any function whose integral over a set gives the probabilit y that a random variable has a value in
that set.
Bell’s theorem: A no-go theorem famous for drawing an important line in the sand between quantum mechanics (QM) and the
world as we know it classically. In its simplest form, Bell’s the orem states: No physical theory of local hidden variables c an
ever reproduce all of the predictions of quantum mechani cs.
epistemological: Of or pertaining to epistemology or theory of knowledge, a s a field of study.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
photoelectron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photoelectron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
black body radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/black%20body%20radiation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

28.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214photoelectric effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Photoelectric_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Photoelectric effect.svg. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Photoelectric_effect.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic spectrum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Maxwell's equations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwellu2019s%20equations. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Planck constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck%20constant. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
elementary particle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/elementary%20particle. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
black body radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/black%20body%20radiation. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Military laser experiment.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/a/a0/Military_laser _experiment.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
string theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/string%20theory. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
cryptography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/cryptography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Quantum mechanics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_mechanics%23Applications.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
relativistic quantum mechanics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/relativistic%20quantum%20mechanics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Laser. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser. License: CC BY: Attribution
Particle wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Particle_wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Copenhagen interpretation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen_interpretation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
photoelectric effects. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photoelectric%20effects. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_diffraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
grating. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/grating. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electric diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_diffraction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Gabriela Escalera, Andrew Barron, Neutron Diffraction. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43582/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Schrodinger equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Schrodinger%20equation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
harmonic oscillator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/harmonic%20oscillator. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave function. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_function%23Requirements. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave-particle duality. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave-particle%20duality. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
De Broglie wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Broglie_wavelength. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

28.1.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16214special relatively. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Uncertainty principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty_principle. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Rayleigh criterion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh%20criterion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Heisenberg's microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heisenbergu2019s_microscope.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
matter wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/matter%20wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Heisenberg's microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Heisenbergu2019s_microscope.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Bell's theorem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bellu2019s%20theorem. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
probability density function. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/probability_density_function.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
epistemological. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/epistemological. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Bohr–Einstein debates. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr%E2%80%93Einstein_debates.
License: CC BY: Attribution
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

28.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1622728.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Compare mechanisms of fluorescence and phosphorescence light emission
Fluorescence and Phosphorescence
Fluorescence is the emission of light by a substance th at has absorbed light or other electromagnetic radi ation. It is a form of
photoluminescence. In most cases, the emitted light has a longer wavelength, and therefore lower energy, tha n the absorbed
radiation. However, when the absorbed electromagnetic r adiation is intense, it is possible for one electron to absorb two photons;
this two-photon absorption can lead to emission of radi ation having a shorter wavelength than the absorbed radiation. The emitted
radiation may also be of the same wavelength as the abso rbed radiation, termed “resonance fluorescence”.
Fluorescence occurs when an orbital electron of a mole cule or atom relaxes to its ground state by emitting a photon of light after
being excited to a higher quantum state by some typ e of energy. The most striking examples of fluoresce nce occur when the
absorbed radiation is in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum, and thus invisible to the human eye, an d the emitted light is in the
visible region.
Fluorescence: Fluorescent minerals emit visible light when exposed to u ltraviolet light
Phosphorescence is a specific type of photoluminescence related to fluorescence. Unlike fluorescence, a phosp horescent material
does not immediately re-emit the radiation it absor bs. Excitation of electrons to a higher state is acc ompanied with the change of a
spin state. Once in a different spin state, electrons c annot relax into the ground state quickly because th e re-emission involves
quantum mechanically forbidden energy state transiti ons. As these transitions occur very slowly in certain materials, absorbed
radiation may be re-emitted at a lower intensity for up to several hours after the original excitation.
Fluorescence and Phosphorescence: Energy scheme used to explain the difference between fl uorescence and phosphorescence
Commonly seen examples of phosphorescent materials ar e the glow-in-the-dark toys, paint, and clock dials that glow for some time
after being charged with a bright light such as in any normal reading or room light. Typically the glowing then slowly fades out
within minutes (or up to a few hours) in a dark room.learning objectives

28.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227
Phosphorescence: Phosphorescent material glowing in the dark.
Lasers
A laser is a device that emits monochromatic light th rough a process of optical amplification based on th e stimulated emission of
photons.
Identify process that generates laser emission and the de fining characteristics of laser light
A laser is a device that emits monochromatic light (e lectromagnetic radiation). It does so through a pr ocess of optical amplification
based on the stimulated emission of photons. The ter m “laser” originated as an acronym for Light Amplific ation by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation. Laser is distinct from other li ght sources for its high degree of spatial and tempora l coherence, which means
that laser outputs a narrow beam that maintains its tempo ral-phase relationship.
Principles of laser operation are largely based on qu antum mechanics. (One exception would be free-electron l asers, whose
operation can be explained solely by classical elec trodynamics.) When an electron is excited from a lo wer-energy to a higherenergy level, it will not stay that way forever. An elect ron in an excited state may decay to an unoccupied lower-energy state
according to a particular time constant characteriz ing that transition. When such an electron decays with out external influence, it
emits a photon; this process is called “spontaneous e mission. ” The phase associated with the emitted pho ton is random. A material
with many atoms in an excited state may thus result in radiation that is very monochromatic, but the indiv idual photons would have
no common phase relationship and would emanate in ra ndom directions. This is the mechanism of fluorescenc e and thermal
emission.
However, an external photon at a frequency associated wi th the atomic transition can affect the quantum mec hanical state of the
atom. As the incident photon passes by, the rate of t ransitions of the excited atom can be significantly enhanced beyond that due to
spontaneous emission. This “induced” decay process is called stimulated emission. In stimulated emission, the decaying atom
produces an identical “copy” of the incoming photon. Therefore, after the atom decays, we have two identic al outgoing photons.
Since there was only one incoming photon, we amplified the intensity of light by a factor of 2!learning objectives

28.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227
Stimulated Photon Emission: In stimulated emission process, a photon (with a frequency equal to the atomic transition)
encounters an excited atom, and a new photon identical to th e incoming photon is produced. The result is an atom in th e ground
state with two outgoing photons.
Holography
Holography is an optical technique which enables three-d imensional images to be made.
Explain how holographic images are recorded and their pro perties
Holography is a technique which enables three-dimensio nal images to be made. It involves the use of a laser, interference,
diffraction, light intensity recording and suitable illumination of the recording. The image changes as the position and orientation of
the viewing system changes in exactly the same way as if the object were still present, thus making the imag e appear threedimensional.
Laser: Holograms are recorded using a flash of light t hat illuminates a scene and then imprints on a recor ding medium, much in the
way a photograph is recorded. In addition, however, par t of the light beam must be shone directly onto the recording medium – this
second light beam is known as the reference beam (]). A hologram requires a laser as the sole light sour ce. Laser is required as a
light source to produce an interference pattern on the recording plate. To prevent external light from i nterfering, holograms are
usually taken in darkness, or in low level light of a different color from the laser light used in makin g the hologram. Holography
requires a specific exposure time, which can be contro lled using a shutter, or by electronically timing the lase r
Recording a hologram: Holograms are recorded using a flash of light that illumin ates a scene and then imprints on a recording
medium, much in the way a photograph is recorded. In addit ion, however, part of the light beam must be shone directly o nto the
recording medium – this second light beam is known as the re ference beam.
Apparatus: A hologram can be made by shining part of the light beam directly onto the recording medium, and the other part onto
the object in such a way that some of the scattered light falls onto the recording medium. A more flexi ble arrangement for recording
a hologram requires the laser beam to be aimed throu gh a series of elements that change it in different ways. The first element is a
beam splitter that divides the beam into two identical be ams, each aimed in different directions:
One beam (known as the illumination or object beam) is spread u sing lenses and directed onto the scene using mirrors. Some of
the light scattered (reflected) from the scene then falls onto the recording medium.learning objectives

28.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227The second beam (known as the reference beam) is also spread t hrough the use of lenses, but is directed so that it doesn’t c ome
in contact with the scene, and instead travels directly on to the recording medium.
Reconstructing a hologram: An interference pattern can be considered an encoded v ersion of a scene, requiring a particular key –
the original light source – in order to view its contents. T his missing key is provided later by shining a laser, ident ical to the one
used to record the hologram, onto the developed film. When this beam illuminates the hologram, it is diffracted by the hologram’s
surface pattern. This produces a light field identica l to the one originally produced by the scene and scatt ered onto the hologram
Several different materials can be used as the recor ding medium. One of the most common is a film very sim ilar to photographic
film (silver halide photographic emulsion), but with a much higher concentration of light-reactive grains, making it capable of the
much higher resolution that holograms require. A laye r of this recording medium (e.g. silver halide) is at tached to a transparent
substrate, which is commonly glass, but may also be plastic.
Process: When the two laser beams reach the recording medium, their light waves intersect and interfere wit h each other. It is this
interference pattern that is imprinted on the recor ding medium. The pattern itself is seemingly random, as it represents the way in
which the scene’s light interfered with the original l ight source – but not the original light source itse lf. The interference pattern can
be considered an encoded version of the scene, requirin g a particular key – the original light source – in order to view its contents.
This missing key is provided later by shining a laser, i dentical to the one used to record the hologram, ont o the developed film.
When this beam illuminates the hologram, it is diffr acted by the hologram’s surface pattern. This produces a light field identical to
the one originally produced by the scene and scatte red onto the hologram. The image this effect produce s in a person’s retina is
known as a virtual image.
The Periodic Table of Elements
A periodic table is a tabular display of elements or ganized by their atomic numbers, electron configura tions, and chemical
properties.
Explain how properties of elements vary within groups an d across periods in the periodic table
The periodic table is a tabular display of the chem ical elements. The elements are organized based on th eir atomic numbers,
electron configurations, and recurring chemical prope rties.
In the periodic table, elements are presented in ord er of increasing atomic number (the number of proto ns). The rows of the table
are called periods; the columns of the s- (columns 1- 2 and He), d- (columns 3-12), and p-blocks (columns 13- 18, except He) are
called groups. (The terminology of s-, p-, and d- b locks originate from the valence atomic orbitals the element’s electrons occupy.)
Some groups have specific names, such as the halogens or the noble gases. Since, by definition, a periodic ta ble incorporates
recurring trends, any such table can be used to derive relationships between the properties of the elements and predict the properties
of new, yet-to-be-discovered, or synthesized elements. As a result, the periodic table provides a useful fra mework for analyzing
chemical behavior, and such tables are widely used in chemi stry and other sciences.learning objectives

28.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227
Blocks in the Periodic Table: A diagram of the periodic table, highlighting the dif ferent blocks
History of the Periodic Table
Although precursors exist, Dmitri Mendeleev is generall y credited with the publication, in 1869, of the fir st widely recognized
periodic table. Mendeleev designed the table in such a way that recurring (“periodic”) trends in the prope rties of the elements could
be shown. Using the trends he observed, he even left gap s for those elements that he thought were “missing. ” He even predicted
the properties that he thought the missing elements wo uld have when they were discovered. Many of these eleme nts were indeed
later discovered, and Mendeleev’s predictions were prove d to be correct.
Groups
Agroup, or family, is a vertical column in the perio dic table. Groups usually have more significant period ic trends than do periods
and blocks, which are explained below. Modern quantum m echanical theories of atomic structure explain group trends by
proposing that elements in the same group generally have the same electron configurations in their vale nce (or outermost, partially
filled) shell. Consequently, elements in the same gro up tend to have shared chemistry and exhibit a clea r trend in properties with
increasing atomic number. However, in some parts of the periodic table, such as the d-block and the f-block, h orizontal similarities
can be as important as, or more pronounced than, vertical similarities.
Periods
A period is a horizontal row in the periodic table. Alt hough groups generally have more significant periodi c trends, there are
regions where horizontal trends are more significant t han vertical group trends, such as in the f-block, where the lanthanides and
actinides form two substantial horizontal series of e lements. Elements in the same period show trends in at omic radius, ionization
energy, and electron affinity. Atomic radius usually d ecreases from left to right across a period. This occur s because each
successive element has an added proton and electron, which causes the electron to be drawn closer to the n ucleus, decreasing the
radius.

28.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227The periodic table: Here is the complete periodic table with atomic numbers, gr oups, and periods. Each entry on the periodic table
represents one element, and compounds are made up of sever al of these elements.
X-Rays
X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation and hav e wavelengths in the range of 0.01 to 10 nanometers.
Describe the properties of X-rays and how can be generated
X-radiation (composed of x-rays) is a form of electrom agnetic radiation. X-rays have wavelengths in the ran ge of 0.01 to 10
nanometers, which corresponds to frequencies in the ra nge of 30 petahertz to 30 exahertz (3·10 Hz to 3·10 Hz) and energies in
the of range 100 eV to 100 keV.
X-Ray Spectrum and Applications: X-rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum, with wave lengths shorter than those of
visible light. Different applications use different part s of the X-ray spectrum.
X-rays can be generated by an x-ray tube, a vacuum tu be that uses high voltage to accelerate the electro ns released by a hot cathode
to a high velocity. The high-velocity electrons col lide with a metal target, the anode, creating the x-ra ys. The maximum energy of
the produced x-ray photon is limited by the energy of the incident electron, which is equal to the volta ge on the tube times the
electron charge, so an 80-kV tube cannot create x-ra ys with an energy greater than 80 keV. When the elec trons hit the target, x-rays
are created through two different atomic processes:
1. X-ray fluorescence, if the electron has enough energy that it can knock an orbital electron out of the inner e lectron shell of a
metal atom. As a result, electrons from higher energy level s fill up the vacancy, and x-ray photons are emitted. This pr ocess
produces an emission spectrum of x-rays at a few discrete freq uencies, sometimes referred to as the spectral lines. The spec tral
lines generated depend on the target (anode) element used and therefore are called characteristic lines. Usual ly these are
transitions from upper shells into the K shell (called K l ines), or the L shell (called L lines), and so on.
2. Bremsstrahlung, literally meaning braking radiation. Bremsstrahlung is radiation given off by the electrons as they are scat tered
by the strong electric field near the high- Z (proton number) nuclei. These x-rays have a continuous s pectrum. The intensity of
the x-rays increases linearly with decreasing frequency, from zero at the energy of the incident electrons, the vol tage on the xray tube.
Both of these x-ray production processes are ineffici ent, with a production efficiency of only about one percent. Therefore, to
produce a usable flux of x-rays, most of the electr ic power consumed by the tube is released as heat waste. The x-ray tube must be
designed to dissipate this excess heat.
A specialized source of x-rays that is becoming wide ly used in research is synchrotron radiation, which is g enerated by particle
accelerators. Its unique features are x-ray outputs ma ny orders of magnitude greater than those of x-ray tu bes, wide x-ray spectra,
excellent collimation, and linear polarization.
Quantum-Mechanical View of Atoms
Atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a nuc leus surrounded by negatively charged electron clou d, commonly called atomic
orbitals.learning objectives
16 19

28.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227Identify major contributions to the understanding of a tomic structure that were made by Niels Bohr, Erwin Schrödi nger,
and Werner Heisenberg
The atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electro ns. The atomic nucleus
contains a mix of positively charged protons and el ectrically neutral neutrons. The electrons of an atom are bound to the nucleus by
the electromagnetic (Coulomb) force. Atoms are minuscul e objects with diameters of a few tenths of a nanomet er and tiny masses
proportional to the volume implied by these dimensio ns. Atoms in solid states (or, to be precise, their electro n clouds) can be
observed individually using special instruments such as t he scanning tunneling microscope.
Hydrogen-1 (one proton + one electron) is the simples t form of atoms, and not surprisingly, our quantum me chanical understanding
of atoms evolved with the understanding of this specie s. In 1913, physicist Niels Bohr suggested that the ele ctrons were confined
into clearly defined, quantized orbits, and could jump between these, but could not freely spiral inward or o utward in intermediate
states. An electron must absorb or emit specific amoun ts of energy to transition between these fixed orbits. Bohr’s model
successfully explained spectroscopic data of hydroge n very well, but it adopted a semiclassical approach wh ere electron was still
considered a (classical) particle.
Adopting Louis de Broglie’s proposal of wave-particle duality, Erwin Schrödinger, in 1926, developed a mathe matical model of the
atom that described the electrons as three-dimensiona l waveforms rather than point particles. A consequence of using waveforms to
describe particles is that it is mathematically impo ssible to obtain precise values for both the position and momentum of a particle
at the same time; this became known as the uncertaint y principle, formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1926. Thereafter, the
planetary model of the atom was discarded in favor of one that described atomic orbital zones around the nucleus where a given
electron is most likely to be observed.
Illustration of the Helium Atom: This is an illustration of the helium atom, depicting the nucleus (pink) and the electron cloud
distribution (black). The nucleus (upper right) in h elium-4 is in reality spherically symmetric and closely resembles the electron
cloud, although for more complicated nuclei this is not a lways the case. The black bar is one angstrom (10-10 m, or 100 pm).
Modern quantum mechanical view of hydrogen has evolved further after Schrödinger, by taking relativistic co rrection terms into
account. Quantum electrodynamics (QED), a relativistic quantum field theory describing the interaction of electrically charged
particles, has successfully predicted minuscule corr ections in energy levels. One of the hydrogen’s atom ic transitions (n=2 to n=1,
n: principal quantum number) has been measured to an extraordinary precision of 1 part in a hundred tri llion. This kind of
spectroscopic precision allows physicists to refine q uantum theories of atoms, by accounting for minuscule discrepancies between
experimental results and theories.learning objectives

28.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227Key Points
The emitted light usually has a longer wavelength, and t herefore lower energy, than the absorbed radiation.
Fluorescence occurs when an orbital electron of a molecule or atom relaxes to its ground state by emitting a photon of light
after being excited to a higher quantum state by some type of energy.
In a phosphorescence, excitation of electrons to a higher state is accompanied with the change of a spin state. Relaxat ion is a
slow process since it involves energy state transitions “for bidden” in quantum mechanics.
Principles of laser operation are largely based on quant um mechanics, most importantly on the process of the stimu lated
emission of photons.
Spontaneous emission is a random decaying process. The phase associated with the emitted photon is also random.
Atomic transition can be stimulated by the presence of an in coming photon at a frequency associated with the atomic tra nsition.
This process leads to optical amplification as an identical p hoton is emitted along with the incoming photon.
When the two laser beams reach the recording medium, thei r light waves intersect and interfere with each other. It is t his
interference pattern that is imprinted on the recording m edium.
When a reconstruction beam illuminates the hologram, it is diffracted by the hologram’s surface pattern. This pro duces a light
field identical to the one originally produced by the sce ne and scattered onto the hologram.
Holographic image changes as the position and orientation of the viewing system changes in exactly the same way as if th e
object were still present, thus making the image appear thr ee-dimensional.
A periodic table is a useful framework for analyzing c hemical behavior. Such tables are widely used in chemistry and other
sciences.
A group, or family, is a vertical column in the periodic t able. Groups usually have more significant periodic trend s than do
periods and blocks.
A period is a horizontal row in the periodic table. Eleme nts in the same period show trends in atomic radius, ionizat ion energy,
electron affinity, and electronegativity.
X-rays can be generated by an x-ray tube, a vacuum tube, o r a particle accelerator.
X-ray fluorescence and Bremsstrahlung are processes thr ough which x-rays are produced.
Synchrotron radiation is generated by particle accelera tors. Its unique features are x-ray outputs many orders of mag nitude
greater than those of x-ray tubes, wide x-ray spectra, ex cellent collimation, and linear polarization.
Niels Bohr suggested that the electrons were confined into c learly defined, quantized orbits, and could jump between these, but
could not freely spiral inward or outward in intermediate st ates.
Erwin Schrödinger, in 1926, developed a mathematical mode l of the atom that described the electrons as three-dime nsional
waveforms rather than point particles.
Modern quantum mechanical view of hydrogen has evolved fu rther after Schrödinger, by taking relativistic correctio n terms
into account. This is referred to a quantum electrodyna mics (QED).
Key Terms
spin: A quantum angular momentum associated with subatomic particles; it also creates a magnetic moment.
photon: The quantum of light and other electromagnetic energ y, regarded as a discrete particle having zero rest mass, n o
electric charge, and an indefinitely long lifetime.
ground state: the stationary state of lowest energy of a particle or sys tem of particles
free-electron laser: a laser that use a relativistic electron beam as the las ing medium, which moves freely through a magnetic
structure
monochromatic: Describes a beam of light with a single wavelength (i.e., of one specific color or frequency).
coherence: an ideal property of waves that enables stationary (i.e., temp orally and spatially constant) interference
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
laser: A device that produces a monochromatic, coherent bea m of light.
silver halide: The light-sensitive chemicals used in photographic fi lm and pape
atomic orbital: The quantum mechanical behavior of an electron in an at om describing the probability of the electron’s
particular position and energy.
electron affinity: the amount of energy released when an electron is added t o a neutral atom or molecule to form a negative ion

28.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227ionization energy: the amount of energy required to remove an electron f rom an atom or molecule in the gas phase
photon: The quantum of light and other electromagnetic energ y, regarded as a discrete particle having zero rest mass, n o
electric charge, and an indefinitely long lifetime.
particle accelerator: A device that accelerates electrically charged partic les to extremely high speeds, for the purpose of
inducing high-energy reactions or producing high-energ y radiation.
wave-particle duality: A postulation that all particles exhibit both wave a nd particle properties. It is a central concept of
quantum mechanics.
scanning tunneling microscope: An instrument for imaging surfaces at the atomic leve l.
semiclassical approach: A theory in which one part of a system is described qua ntum-mechanically whereas the other is treated
classically.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ground state. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ground_state. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
spin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Laser. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser%23Types_and_operating_principles. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Laser. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser%23Gain_medium_and_cavity. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
coherence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/coherence. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
free-electron laser. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/free-electron%20laser. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/monochromatic.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulated_emission. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

28.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227laser. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/laser. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
silver halide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/silver%20halide. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulated_emission. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Periodic Table: Groups and Periods. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38760/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electron affinity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/electron%20affinity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
ionization energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionization_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
atomic orbital. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atomic_orbital. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulated_emission. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic_table.svg. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-ray. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
particle accelerator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/particle_accelerator. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulated_emission. License: CC BY:
Attribution

28.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16227Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic_table.svg. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Quantum electrodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_electrodynamics.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Theodor W. Hu00e4nsch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodor_W._H%C3%A4nsch.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
scanning tunneling microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/scanning%20tunneling%20microscope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave-particle duality. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave-particle%20duality. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
semiclassical approach. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/semiclassical%20approach. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorescence%23Physical_principles. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Phosphorescence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphorescence. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulated_emission. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Holography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography. License: CC BY: Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic_table.svg. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table. License: CC BY: Attribution
X-rays. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/X-rays. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
29: Atomic Physics
29: Atomic Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.29.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
29.5: Multielectron AtomsTopic hierarchy

29.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1623129.1: Overview
Identify assumption made by Max Planck to describe the elect romagnetic radiation emitted by a black body
A black body in thermal equilibrium (i.e. at a consta nt temperature) emits electromagnetic radiation call ed black body radiation.
Black body radiation has a characteristic, continuou s frequency spectrum that depends only on the body’s t emperature. Max
Planck, in 1901, accurately described the radiation by assuming that electromagnetic radiation was emitt ed in discrete packets (or
quanta). Planck’s quantum hypothesis is a pioneering work, he ralding advent of a new era of modern physics and quantum theory.
Explaining the properties of black-body radiation wa s a major challenge in theoretical physics during th e late nineteenth century.
Predictions based on classical theories failed to expl ain black body spectra observed experimentally, especi ally at shorter
wavelength. The puzzle was solved in 1901 by Max Planck i n the formalism now known as Planck’s law of black-body r adiation.
Contrary to the common belief that electromagnetic radiation can take continuous values of energy, Plan ck introduced a radical
concept that electromagnetic radiation was emitted i n discrete packets (or quanta) of energy. Although Pl anck’s derivation is
beyond the scope of this section (it will be covered in Qu antum Mechanics), Planck’s law may be written:
where BB is the spectral radiance of the surface of th e black body, TT is its absolute temperature, λλ is wav elength of the radiation,
kBkB is the Boltzmann constant, hh is the Planck constan t, and cc is the speed of light. This equation explai ns the black body
spectra shown below. Planck’s quantum hypothesis is one o f the breakthroughs in the modern physics. It is not a surprise that he
introduced Planck constant for the first time in his der ivation of the Planck’s law.
UV VISIBLE INFRARED
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3Spectral radiance (kW · sr ⁻¹ · m ⁻² · nm ⁻¹)
Wavelength (μm)5000 K
4000 K
3000 KClassical theory (5000 K)
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3Spectral radiance (kW · sr ⁻¹ · m ⁻² · nm ⁻¹)
Wavelength (μm)5000 K
4000 K
3000 KClassical theory (5000 K)
Black body radiation spectrum: Typical spectrum from a black body at different temper atures (shown in blue, green and red
curves). As the temperature decreases, the peak of the blac k-body radiation curve moves to lower intensities and lo nger
wavelengths. Black line is a prediction of a classical the ory for an object at 5,000K, showing catastropic discrepanc y at shorter
wavelengh.
Note that the spectral radiance depends on two variabl es, wavelength and temperature. The radiation has a specific spectrum and
intensity that depends only on the temperature of t he body. Despite its simplicity, Planck’s law describes r adiation properties of
objects (e.g. our body, planets, stars) reasonably well.
Key Points
A black body in thermal equilibrium emits electromagn etic radiation called black body radiation.
The radiation has a specific spectrum and intensity that depends only on the temperature of the body.
Max Planck, in 1901, accurately described the radiation by assuming that electromagnetic radiation was emitted in disc rete
packets (or quanta). Planck’s quantum hypothesis is a pi oneering work, heralding advent of a new era of modern phys ics andlearning objectives

29.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16231quantum theory.
Key Terms
spectral radiance: measures of the quantity of radiation that passes thro ugh or is emitted from a surface and falls within a
given solid angle in a specified direction.
black body: An idealized physical body that absorbs all incident ele ctromagnetic radiation, regardless of frequency or angle of
incidence. Although black body is a theoretical concept, y ou can find approximate realizations of black body in nat ure.
Planck constant: a physical constant that is the quantum of action in quant um mechanics. It has a unit of angular momentum.
The Planck constant was first described as the proportion ality constant between the energy of a photon (unit of el ectromagnetic
radiation) and the frequency of its associated electr omagnetic wave in his derivation of the Planck’s law
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Blackbody radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blackbody_radiation%23Planck.27s_law_of_black-body _radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Planck constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_constant. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Planck's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Planck constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck%20constant. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/black-body. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
spectral radiance. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/spectral%20radiance. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Black body. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_body. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
29.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

29.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1623229.2: The Early Atom
Discuss experiments that led to discovery of the electron a nd the nucleus
Though originally viewed as a particle that cannot be cut into smaller particles, modern scientific usag e denotes the atom as
composed of various subatomic particles. The constitue nt particles of an atom (each discovered independent ly) are: the electron,
the proton and the neutron. (The hydrogen-1 atom, however, has no neutrons, and a positive hydrogen ion has no electro ns.)
Classical Atomic Model: Atomic model before the advent of Quantum Mechanics.
Electron
The German physicist Johann Wilhelm Hittorf undertook the study of electrical conductivity in rarefied ga ses. In 1869, he
discovered a glow emitted from the cathode that incr eased in size with decrease in gas pressure. In 1896, th e British physicist J. J.
Thomson performed experiments demonstrating that cath ode rays were unique particles, rather than waves, atoms or molecules, as
was believed earlier. Thomson made good estimates of b oth the charge ee and the mass mm, finding that catho de ray particles
(which he called “corpuscles”) had perhaps one thousan dth the mass of hydrogen, the least massive ion known. He showed that
their charge to mass ratio (e/m) was independent of cathode m aterial. (Fig 1 shows a beam of deflected electrons.)
Electron Beam: A beam of electrons deflected in a circle by a magnet ic field.
Proton
In 1917 (in experiments reported in 1919), Rutherfor d proved that the hydrogen nucleus is present in ot her nuclei, a result usually
described as the discovery of the proton. Earlier, Ru therford learned to create hydrogen nuclei as a type of radiation produced as a
yield of the impact of alpha particles on hydrogen gas; these nuclei were recognized by their unique pen etration signature in air and
their appearance in scintillation detectors. These experiments began when Rutherford noticed that when al pha particles were shot
into air (mostly nitrogen), his scintillation detect ors displayed the signatures of typical hydrogen nu clei as a product. After
experimentation Rutherford traced the reaction to t he nitrogen in air, and found that the effect was lar ger when alphas were
produced into pure nitrogen gas. Rutherford determi ned that the only possible source of this hydrogen was the nitrogen, and
therefore nitrogen must contain hydrogen nuclei. One hydrogen nucleus was knocked off by the impact of t he alpha particle,
producing oxygen-17 in the process. This was the first r eported nuclear reaction,.learning objectives

29.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Neutron
In 1920, Ernest Rutherford conceived the possible ex istence of the neutron. In particular, Rutherford exam ined the disparity found
between the atomic number of an atom and its atomic m ass. His explanation for this was the existence of a n eutrally charged
particle within the atomic nucleus. He considered the n eutron to be a neutral double consisting of an elec tron orbiting a proton. In
1932, James Chadwick showed uncharged particles in the radiation he used. These particles had a similar mass as protons, but did
not have the same characteristics as protons. Chadwick fo llowed some of the predictions of Rutherford, the fi rst to work in this
then unknown field.
Early Models of the Atom
Dalton believed that that matter is composed of discret e units called atoms — indivisible, ultimate particles of m atter.
Describe postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory and the atomi c theories of ancient Greek philosophers
The atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a dense central nucleus surrounded by a cloud of n egatively charged electrons.
The atomic nucleus contains a mix of positively charg ed protons and electrically neutral neutrons (excep t in the case of hydrogen1, which is the only stable nuclide with no neutrons). The electrons of an atom are bound to the nucleus by the electromagnetic
force. We have a detailed (and accurate) model of the a tom now, but it took a long time to come up with the correct answer.
Illustration of the Helium Atom: This is an illustration of the helium atom, depicting the nucleus (pink) and the electron cloud
distribution (black). The nucleus (upper right) in h elium-4 is in reality spherically symmetric and closely resembles the electron
cloud, although for more complicated nuclei this is not always the case. The black bar is one angstrom (10−1010− 10 m, or 100
pm).
People have long speculated about the structure of ma tter and the existence of atoms. The earliest signif icant ideas to survive are
from the ancient Greeks in the fifth century BC, espec ially from the philosophers Leucippus and Democritus. (There is some
evidence that philosophers in both India and China made similar speculations at about the same time.) They considered the
question of whether a substance can be divided without limit into ever smaller pieces. There are only a few possible answers to this
question. One is that infinitesimally small subdivisi on is possible. Another is what Democritus in particula r believed — that there is
a smallest unit that cannot be further subdivided. Demo critus called this the atom. We now know that atoms t hemselves can be
subdivided, but their identity is destroyed in the process, so the Greeks were correct in a respect. The Gree ks also felt that atoms
were in constant motion, another correct notion.
The Greeks and others speculated about the properties of atoms, proposing that only a few types existed and that all matter was
formed as various combinations of these types. The fa mous proposal that the basic elements were earth, air, fire, and water waslearning objectives

29.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232brilliant but incorrect. The Greeks had identified the most common examples of the four states of matter (solid, gas, plasma, and
liquid) rather than the basic chemical elements. More than 2000 years passed before observations could be ma de with equipment
capable of revealing the true nature of atoms.
Over the centuries, discoveries were made regarding the properties of substances and their chemical reaction s. Certain systematic
features were recognized, but similarities between co mmon and rare elements resulted in efforts to transm ute them (lead into gold,
in particular) for financial gain. Secrecy was common place. Alchemists discovered and rediscovered many fact s but did not make
them broadly available. As the Middle Ages ended, the practice of alchemy gradually faded, and the scienc e of chemistry arose. It
was no longer possible, nor considered desirable, to kee p discoveries secret. Collective knowledge grew, and b y the beginning of
the 19 century, an important fact was well established: the masses of reactants in specific chemical reactio ns always have a
particular mass ratio. This is very strong indirect e vidence that there are basic units (atoms and molecu les) that have these same
mass ratios. English chemist John Dalton (1766-1844) di d much of this work, with significant contributions by the Italian physicist
Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856). It was Avogadro who develo ped the idea of a fixed number of atoms and molecul es in a mole.
This special number is called Avogadro’s number in his hon or ().
Dalton believed that matter is composed of discrete u nits called atoms, as opposed to the obsolete notion th at matter could be
divided into any arbitrarily small quantity. He also believed that atoms are the indivisible, ultimate p articles of matter. However,
this belief was overturned near the end of the 19 century by Thomson, with his discovery of electrons.
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory – Intro: Rutherford, Thomson, electrons, nuclei, and plums. I don ’t mean to be a bohr, but
do you think pudding should have a role in serious scienti fic inquiry?th
th

29.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232The Thomson Model
Thomson proposed that the atom is composed of electr ons surrounded by a soup of positive charge to balanc e the electrons’
negative charges.
Describe model of an atom proposed by J. J. Thomson.
J. J. Thomson, who discovered the electron in 1897, pr oposed the plum pudding model of the atom in 1904 b efore the discovery of
the atomic nucleus in order to include the electron in the atomic model. In Thomson’s model, the atom is composed of electrons
(which Thomson still called “corpuscles,” though G. J. Ston ey had proposed that atoms of electricity be called electrons in 1894)
surrounded by a soup of positive charge to balance t he electrons’ negative charges, like negatively char ged “plums” surrounded by
positively charged “pudding”. The electrons (as we k now them today) were thought to be positioned througho ut the atom in
rotating rings. In this model the atom was also sometimes desc ribed to have a “cloud” of positive charge.
Plum pudding model of the atom: A schematic presentation of the plum pudding model of th e atom; in Thomson’s mathematical
model the “corpuscles” (in modern language, electrons) wer e arranged non-randomly, in rotating rings.
With this model, Thomson abandoned his earlier “nebula r atom” hypothesis, in which the atom was composed of immaterial
vortices. Now, at least part of the atom was to be compo sed of Thomson’s particulate negative corpuscles, alt hough the rest of the
positively charged part of the atom remained somewhat n ebulous and ill-defined.
The 1904 Thomson model was disproved by the 1909 gold foil experiment performed by Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden. This
gold foil experiment was interpreted by Ernest Ruthe rford in 1911 to suggest that there is a very small nucleus of the atom that
contains a very high positive charge (in the case of gold, enough to balance the collective negative ch arge of about 100 electrons).
His conclusions led him to propose the Rutherford model o f the atom.learning objectives

29.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory – The Thomson Model: Rutherford, Thomson, electrons, nuclei, and plums. I don ’t mean
to be a bohr, but do you think pudding should have a role in serious scientific inquiry?
The Rutherford Model
Rutherford confirmed that the atom had a concentrated center of positive charge and relatively large mass.
Describe gold foil experiment performed by Geiger and Ma rsden under directions of Rutherford and its implication s for the
model of the atom
The Rutherford model is a model of the atom named a fter Ernest Rutherford. Rutherford directed the fam ous Geiger-Marsden
experiment in 1909, which suggested, according to Ruthe rford’s 1911 analysis, that J. J. Thomson’s so-called “plum pudding
model” of the atom was incorrect. Rutherford’s new mod el for the atom, based on the experimental results, c ontained the new
features of a relatively high central charge concen trated into a very small volume in comparison to th e rest of the atom. This central
volume also contained the bulk of the atom’s mass. This r egion would later be named the “nucleus. ”
learning objectives

29.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232
Atomic Planetary Model: Basic diagram of the atomic planetary model; electron s are in green, and the nucleus is in red
In 1911, Rutherford designed an experiment to furthe r explore atomic structure using the alpha particle s emitted by a radioactive
element. Following his direction, Geiger and Marsden shot alpha particles with large kinetic energies toward a thin foil of gold.
Measuring the pattern of scattered particles was expec ted to provide information about the distribution of charge within the atom.
Under the prevailing plum pudding model, the alpha p articles should all have been deflected by, at most, a few degrees. However,
the actual results surprised Rutherford. Although many of the alpha particles did pass through as expected, many others were
deflected at small angles while others were reflected back to the alpha source.
From purely energetic considerations of how far partic les of known speed would be able to penetrate toward a central charge of 100
e, Rutherford was able to calculate that the radius o f his gold central charge would need to be less than 3.4⋅10−143.4 ⋅10−14 meters.
This was in a gold atom known to be about 10−1010−10 m eters in radius; a very surprising finding, as it i mplied a strong central
charge less than 1300013000 of the diameter of the ato m.
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'Intro to the History of Atomic Theory | MC Hammer'
……th

29.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Intro to the History of Atomic Theory – The Rutherford Model: Rutherford, Thomson, electrons, nuclei, and plums. I don ’t
mean to be a bohr, but do you think pudding should have a r ole in serious scientific inquiry?
The Bohr Model of the Atom
Bohr suggested that electrons in hydrogen could have certai n classical motions only when restricted by a quantum rule.
Describe model of atom proposed by Niels Bohr.
The Bohr Model of the Atom
The great Danish physicist Niels Bohr (1885–1962,) ma de immediate use of Rutherford’s planetary model of the atom. Bohr
became convinced of its validity and spent part of 1 912 at Rutherford’s laboratory. In 1913, after return ing to Copenhagen, he
began publishing his theory of the simplest atom, hydrog en, based on the planetary model of the atom.
Niels Bohr: Niels Bohr, Danish physicist, used the planetary model of the atom to explain the atomic spectrum and size of the
hydrogen atom. His many contributions to the developme nt of atomic physics and quantum mechanics; his personal in fluence on
many students and colleagues; and his personal integrit y, especially in the face of Nazi oppression, earned him a pr ominent place in
history. (credit: Unknown Author, via Wikimedia Commons)
For decades, many questions had been asked about atomi c characteristics. From their sizes to their spectra, m uch was known about
atoms, but little had been explained in terms of the laws of physics. Bohr’s theory explained the atomic sp ectrum of hydrogen,
made him instantly famous, and established new and broadly applicable principles in quantum mechanics.
One big puzzle that the planetary-model of atom had was the following. The laws of classical mechanics pred ict that the electron
should release electromagnetic radiation while orbiti ng a nucleus (according to Maxwell’s equations, accelera ting charge should
emit electromagnetic radiation). Because the electr on would lose energy, it would gradually spiral inwards, collapsing into the
nucleus. This atom model is disastrous, because it pred icts that all atoms are unstable. Also, as the electron spirals inward, the
learning objectives

29.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232emission would gradually increase in frequency as the o rbit got smaller and faster. This would produce a contin uous smear, in
frequency, of electromagnetic radiation. However, late 19th century experiments with electric discharges hav e shown that atoms
will only emit light (that is, electromagnetic radiatio n) at certain discrete frequencies.
To overcome this difficulty, Niels Bohr proposed, in 1 913, what is now called the Bohr model of the atom. He s uggested that
electrons could only have certain classical motions:
1. Electrons in atoms orbit the nucleus.
2. The electrons can only orbit stably, without radiat ing, in certain orbits (called by Bohr the “stationary o rbits”): at a certain
discrete set of distances from the nucleus. These orbits are associated with definite energies and are also called energy shells or
energy levels. In these orbits, the electron’s acceleratio n does not result in radiation and energy loss as required b y classical
electrodynamics.
3. Electrons can only gain and lose energy by jumping fro m one allowed orbit to another, absorbing or emitting elec tromagnetic
radiation with a frequency νν determined by the energy diff erence of the levels according to the Planck relation:
where is Planck’s constant and is the frequency of the radiation.
Semiclassical Model
The significance of the Bohr model is that the laws o f classical mechanics apply to the motion of the elect ron about the nucleus
only when restricted by a quantum rule. Therefore, his atomic model is called a semiclassical m odel.
Basic Assumptions of the Bohr Model
Bohr explained hydrogen’s spectrum successfully by a dopting a quantization condition and by introducing the Planck constant in
his model.
Describe basic assumptions that were applied by Niels Bohr t o the planetary model of an atom
In previous modules, we have seen puzzles from classic al atomic theories (e.g., the Rutherford model). Most importantly, classical
electrodynamics predicts that an atom described by a (classical) planetary model would be unstable. To e xplain the puzzle, Bohr
proposed what is now called the Bohr model of the atom in 1913. He suggested that electrons could only have certain classical
motions:
1. Electrons in atoms orbit the nucleus.
2. The electrons can only orbit stably, without radiat ing, in certain orbits (called by Bohr the “stationary o rbits”) at a certain
discrete set of distances from the nucleus. These orbits are associated with definite energies and are also called energy shells or
energy levels. In these orbits, the electron’s acceleratio n does not result in radiation and energy loss as required b y classical
electrodynamics.
3. Electrons can only gain and lose energy by jumping fro m one allowed orbit to another, absorbing or emitting elec tromagnetic
radiation with a frequency νν determined by the energy diff erence of the levels according to the Planck relation:
, where is the Planck constant. In addition, Bohr also assu med that the angular momentum is restricted to be an i nteger
multiple of a fixed unit:, where is called the princi pal quantum number, and.
We have seen that Planck adopted a new condition of e nergy quantization to explain the black body radiat ion, where he introduced
the Planck constant hh for the first time. Soon after, E instein resorted to this new concept of energy quant ization and used the
Planck constant again to explain the photoelectric ef fects, in which he assumed that electromagnetic radiat ion interact with matter
as particles (later named “photons”). Here, Bohr explain ed the atomic hydrogen spectrum successfully for the first time by adopting
a quantization condition and by introducing the Plan ck constant in his atomic model. Over the period of r adical development in the
early 20 century, physicists began to realize that it was essential to introduce the notion of “quantization ” to explain microscopic
worlds.learning objectives
th

29.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232
Rutherford-Bohr model: The Rutherford–Bohr model of the hydrogen atom () or a hydrogen-like ion (), where the
negatively charged electron confined to an atomic shell encircles a small, positively charged atomic nucleus, and where an electron
jump between orbits is accompanied by an emitted or abso rbed amount of electromagnetic energy (hνhν). The orbits i n which the
electron may travel are shown as gray circles; their radius increases as, where is the principal quantum number. The
transition depicted here produces the first line of the Balmer series, and for hydrogen () it results in a photon of wavelength
656 nm (red light).
Bohr Orbits
According to Bohr, electrons can only orbit stably, in certain orbits, at a certain discrete set of distances from the nucleus.
Explain relationship between the “Bohr orbits” and the qua ntization effect
Danish Physicist Neils Bohr was clever enough to discov er a method of calculating the electron orbital ene rgies in hydrogen. As
we’ve seen in the previous module “The Bohr Model of At om,” Bohr assumed that the electrons can only orbit stably, without
radiating, in certain orbits (named by Bohr as “sta tionary orbits”), at a certain discrete set of distan ces from the nucleus. These
“Bohr orbits” have a very important feature of quant ization as shown in the following. This was an importan t first step that has
been improved upon, but it is well worth repeating her e, as it correctly describes many characteristics of h ydrogen. Assuming
circular orbits, Bohr proposed that the angular mom entum LL of an electron in its orbit is quantized, that is, has only specific,
discrete values. The value for LL is given by the formula:
where LL is the angular momentum, meme is the electro n’s mass, rnrn is the radius of the nn-th orbit, and hh is Planck’s constant.
Note that angular momentum is. For a small object at a radi us and, so that:
Quantization says that this value of mvrmvr can only have discrete values. At the time, Bohr himself did n ot know why angular
momentum should be quantized, but using this assumptio n he was able to calculate the energies in the hydrog en spectrum,
something no one else had done at the time.
Below is an energy-level diagram, which is a convenien t way to display energy states—the allowed energy lev els of the electron
(as relative to our discussion). Energy is plotted ve rtically with the lowest or ground state at the bottom and with excited states
above. Given the energies of the lines in an atomic spectrum, it is possible (although sometimes very diff icult) to determine the
energy levels of an atom. Energy-level diagrams are u sed for many systems, including molecules and nuclei. A theory of the atom
or any other system must predict its energies based on th e physics of the system.learning objectives

29.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232
Energy-Level Diagram Plot: An energy-level diagram plots energy vertically and is u seful in visualizing the energy states of a
system and the transitions between them. This diagram is for the hydrogen-atom electrons, showing a transition between two orbits
having energies and.
Energy of a Bohr Orbit
Based on his assumptions, Bohr derived several important p roperties of the hydrogen atom from the classical physic s.
Apply proper equation to calculate energy levels and t he energy of an emitted photon for a hydrogen-like atom
From Bohr’s assumptions, we will now derive a number of im portant properties of the hydrogen atom from the cl assical physics.
We start by noting the centripetal force causing th e electron to follow a circular path is supplied by the Coulomb force. To be more
general, we note that this analysis is valid for any single-electron atom. So, if a nucleus has ZZ protons (Z=1Z=1 for hydrogen,
Z=2Z=2 for helium, etc.) and only one electron, that ato m is called a hydrogen-like atom.
The spectra of hydrogen-like ions are similar to hydr ogen, but shifted to higher energy by the greater at tractive force between the
electron and nucleus. The magnitude of the centripeta l force is m2evrnmev2rn, while the Coulomb force is Zkee2r2Zkee2r2. The
tacit assumption here is that the nucleus is more massi ve than the stationary electron, and the electron or bits about it. This is
consistent with the planetary model of the atom. Equating these:
This equation determines the electron’s speed at any r adius:
It also determines the electron’s total energy at any radius:
The total energy is negative and inversely proportio nal to rr. This means that it takes energy to pull the orbiting electron away from
the proton. For infinite values of rr, the energy is zero, c orresponding to a motionless electron infinitely far fro m the proton.
Now, here comes the Quantum rule: As we saw in the previo us module, the angular momentum L=mervL=merv is an in teger
multiple of ℏℏ:learning objectives

29.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Substituting the expression in the equation for speed above gives an equation for rr in terms of nn:
The allowed orbit radius at any n is then:
The smallest possible value of rr in the hydrogen at om is called the Bohr radius and is equal to 0.053 nm. The energy of the nn-th
level for any atom is determined by the radius and quant um number:
Using this equation, the energy of a photon emitted by a hydrogen atom is given by the difference of two hydrogen e nergy levels:
Which is the Rydberg formula describing all the hydr ogen spectrum and RR is the Rydberg constant. Bohr’s m odel predicted
experimental hydrogen spectrum extremely well.
Fig 1: A schematic of the hydrogen spectrum shows several ser ies named for those who contributed most to their determina tion.
Part of the Balmer series is in the visible spectrum, while the Lyman series is entirely in the UV, and the Paschen series and others
are in the IR. Values of nf and ni are shown for some of the lines.
Hydrogen Spectra
The observed hydrogen-spectrum wavelengths can be calcu lated using the following formula:.
Explain difference between Lyman, Balmer, and Paschen seri es
For decades, many questions had been asked about atomi c characteristics. From their sizes to their spectra, m uch was known about
atoms, but little had been explained in terms of th e laws of physics. Atomic and molecular emission and abso rption spectra have
been known for over a century to be discrete (or qua ntized). Maxwell and others had realized that there mu st be a connection
between the spectrum of an atom and its structure, som ething like the resonant frequencies of musical instru ments. But, despite
years of efforts by many great minds, no one had a worka ble theory. (It was a running joke that any theory o f atomic and molecular
spectra could be destroyed by throwing a book of dat a at it, so complex were the spectra.) Following Einstei n’s proposal of photons
with quantized energies directly proportional to the ir wavelengths, it became even more evident that ele ctrons in atoms can exist
only in discrete orbits.
In some cases, it had been possible to devise formulas that described the emission spectra. As you might expec t, the simplest atom
—hydrogen, with its single electron—has a relatively si mple spectrum. The hydrogen spectrum had been observ ed in the infrared
(IR), visible, and ultraviolet (UV), and several seri es of spectral lines had been observed. The observed hydrogen-spectrum
wavelengths can be calculated using the following formula:learning objectives

29.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232where is the wavelength of the emitted EM radiation and is the Rydberg constant, determined by the exp eriment to be
, and are positive integers associated with a specific serie s.
These series are named after early researchers who studie d them in particular depth. For the Lyman series, fo r the Balmer
series,; for the Paschen series,; and so on. The Lyma n series is entirely in the UV, while part of the Balm er series is
visible with the remainder UV. The Paschen series and a ll the rest are entirely IR. There are apparently an unlimited number of
series, although they lie progressively farther into t he infrared and become difficult to observe as nfnf increases. The constant nini is
a positive integer, but it must be greater than. Thu s, for the Balmer series, and. Note that nini can ap proach
infinity.
Electron transitions and their resulting wavelengths for hydrogen.: Energy levels are not to scale.
While the formula in the wavelengths equation was just a recipe designed to fit data and was not based on p hysical principles, it did
imply a deeper meaning. Balmer first devised the for mula for his series alone, and it was later found to d escribe all the other series
by using different values of nfnf. Bohr was the first to comprehend the deeper meaning. Again, we see the inte rplay between
experiment and theory in physics. Experimentally, th e spectra were well established, an equation was found to fit the experimental
data, but the theoretical foundation was missing.
de Broglie and the Bohr Model
By assuming that the electron is described by a wave a nd a whole number of wavelengths must fit, we derive Boh r’s quantization
assumption.
Describe reinterpretation of Bohr’s condition by de Brog lie
Bohr’s condition, that the angular momentum is an in teger multiple of ℏℏ, was later reinterpreted in 1924 by de Broglie as a
standing wave condition. The wave-like properties of m atter were subsequently confirmed by observations of electron interference
when scattered from crystals. Electrons can exist on ly in locations where they interfere constructively. How does this affect
electrons in atomic orbits? When an electron is bound to an atom, its wavelength must fit into a small spac e, something like a
standing wave on a string.
learning objectives

29.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Waves on a String: (a) Waves on a string have a wavelength related to the length of the string, allowing them to interfere
constructively. (b) If we imagine the string bent into a closed circle, we get a rough idea of how electrons in circular orbits can
interfere constructively. (c) If the wavelength does n ot fit into the circumference, the electron interfe res destructively; it cannot
exist in such an orbit.
Allowed orbits are those in which an electron construct ively interferes with itself. Not all orbits produce c onstructive interference
and thus only certain orbits are allowed (i.e., the o rbits are quantized). By assuming that the electron is described by a wave and a
whole number of wavelengths must fit along the circumfere nce of the electron’s orbit, we have the equation:
Substituting de Broglie’s wavelength of hphp reproduces Bohr ’s rule. Since λ=h/mevλ=h/mev, we now have:
Rearranging terms, and noting that L=mvrL=mvr for a circular orbit, we obtain the quantization of angula r momentum as the
condition for allowed orbits:
As previously stated, Bohr was forced to hypothesize this r ule for allowed orbits. We now realize this as the cond ition for
constructive interference of an electron in a circular or bit.
Accordingly, a new kind of mechanics, quantum mechanic s, was proposed in 1925. Bohr’s model of electrons tr aveling in
quantized orbits was extended into a more accurate m odel of electron motion. The new theory was proposed by We rner Heisenberg.
By different reasoning, another form of the same the ory, wave mechanics, was discovered independently by Aust rian physicist
Erwin Schrödinger. Schrödinger employed de Broglie’s ma tter waves, but instead sought wave solutions of a thre e-dimensional
wave equation. This described electrons that were constr ained to move about the nucleus of a hydrogen-like atom by being trapped
by the potential of the positive nuclear charge.
de Broglie' s Matter Waves Justify Bohr' s Magic Elec t de Broglie' s Matter Waves Justify Bohr' s Magic Elec t

29.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232de Broglie’s Matter Waves Justify Bohr’s Magic Electron Or bital Radii: I include a summary of the hydrogen atom’s electroni c
structure and explain how an electron can interfere with itself in an orbit just like it can in a double-slit expe riment.
X-Rays and the Compton Effect
Compton explained the X-ray frequency shift during t he X-ray/electron scattering by attributing particle- like momentum to
“photons”.
Describe Compton effects between electrons and x-ray ph otons
By the early 20th century, research into the interac tion of X-rays with matter was well underway. It was obse rved that when X-rays
of a known wavelength interact with atoms, the X-rays a re scattered through an angle θθ and emerge at a di fferent wavelength
related to θθ. Although classical electromagnetism pred icted that the wavelength of scattered rays should be equal to the initial
wavelength, multiple experiments had found that the wa velength of the scattered rays was longer (correspond ing to lower energy)
than the initial wavelength.
In 1923, Compton published a paper in the Physical R eview which explained the X-ray shift by attributing p article-like momentum
to “photons,” which Einstein had invoked in his Nobel prize winning explanation of the photoelectric effe ct. First postulated by
Planck, these “particles” conceptualized “quantized” e lements of light as containing a specific amount of e nergy depending only on
the frequency of the light. In his paper, Compton de rived the mathematical relationship between the shift in wavelength and the
scattering angle of the X-rays by assuming that each scattered X-ray photon interacted with only one elect ron. His paper concludes
by reporting on experiments which verified his derived rela tion:
where λ\lambda is the initial wavelength, λ′\lambda’ is the wavelength after scattering, is the Planck const ant, is the Electron
rest mass, is the speed of light, and θ\theta is th e scattering angle. The quantity is known as the Comp ton wavelength of the
electron; it is equal to m. The wavelength shift is at least zero (for) and at most twice the Compton
wavelength of the electron (for). (The derivation of Com pton’s formula is a bit lengthy and will not be covered here.)
learning objectives

29.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232A Photon Colliding with a Target at Rest: A photon of wavelength λλ comes in from the left, col lides with a target at rest, and a
new photon of wavelength λ‘λ‘ emerges at an angle θθ.
Because the mass-energy and momentum of a system must both be conserved, it is not generally possible for the electron simply to
move in the direction of the incident photon. The i nteraction between electrons and high energy photons (comparable to the rest
energy of the electron, 511 keV) results in the electr on being given part of the energy (making it recoil), and a photon containing
the remaining energy being emitted in a different d irection from the original, so that the overall mome ntum of the system is
conserved. If the scattered photon still has enough e nergy left, the Compton scattering process may be re peated. In this scenario,
the electron is treated as free or loosely bound. Phot ons with an energy of this order of magnitude are in the x-ray range of the
electromagnetic radiation spectrum. Therefore, you can sa y that Compton effects (with electrons) occur with x-ray pho tons.
If the photon is of lower energy, but still has suffic ient energy (in general a few eV to a few keV, correspo nding to visible light
through soft X-rays), it can eject an electron from it s host atom entirely (a process known as the photoelec tric effect), instead of
undergoing Compton scattering. Higher energy photons (1.022 MeV and above, in the gamma ray range) may b e able to bombard
the nucleus and cause an electron and a positron to b e formed, a process called pair production.
X-Ray Spectra: Origins, Diffraction by Crystals, and Importance
X-ray shows its wave nature when radiated upon atomic/molecula r structures and can be used to study them.
Describe interactions between X-rays and atoms
In a previous Atom on X-rays, we have seen that there are two processes by which x-rays are produced in the a node of an x-ray
tube. In one process, the deceleration of electrons p roduces x-rays, and these x-rays are called Bremsstrahlung, or braking
radiation. The second process is atomic in nature and produces characteristic x-rays, so called because the y are characteristic of the
anode material. The x-ray spectrum in is typical of what is produced by an x-ray tube, showing a broad curve of Bremsstrahlung
radiation with characteristic x-ray peaks on it.
X-Ray Spectrum: X-ray spectrum obtained when energetic electrons strike a material, such as in the anode of a CRT. The smooth
part of the spectrum is bremsstrahlung radiation, while th e peaks are characteristic of the anode material. A diffe rent anode material
would have characteristic x-ray peaks at different fre quencies.
Since x-ray photons are very energetic, they have rel atively short wavelengths. For example, the 54.4-keV Kα x-ray, for example,
has a wavelength nm. Thus, typical x-ray photons act l ike rays when they encounter macroscopic objects, like
teeth, and produce sharp shadows. However, since atoms a nd atomic structures have a typical size on the orde r of 0.1 nm, x-ray
shows its wave nature with them. The process is called x -ray diffraction because it involves the diffraction and interference of xrays to produce patterns that can be analyzed for informa tion about the structures that scattered the x-rays.
Shown below, Bragg’s Law gives the angles for coherent a nd incoherent scattering of light from a crystal lattic e, which happens
during x-ray diffraction. When x-ray are incident on an atom, they make the electronic cloud move as an electromagnetic wave.
The movement of these charges re-radiate waves with th e same frequency. This is called Rayleigh Scattering, whi ch you should
remember from a previous atom. A similar thing happen s when neutron waves from the nuclei scatter from inte raction with anlearning objectives

29.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232unpaired electron. These re-emitted wave fields inter fere with each other either constructively or destru ctively, and produce a
diffraction pattern that is captured by a sensor or fil m. This is called the Braggs diffraction, and is the basis f or x-ray diffraction.
X-Ray Diffraction: Bragg’s Law of diffraction: illustration of how x-rays interact with crystal lattice.
Perhaps the most famous example of x-ray diffraction is the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953. Using x-ray
diffraction data, researchers were able to discern the structure of DNA shows a diffraction pattern produced by the scattering of xrays from a crystal of protein. This process is known as x-ray crystallography because of the information it can yield about crystal
structure. Not only do x-rays confirm the size and shap e of atoms, they also give information on the atomic arrangements in
materials. For example, current research in high-tempe rature superconductors involves complex materials who se lattice
arrangements are crucial to obtaining a superconducti ng material. These can be studied using x-ray crystallo graphy.
X-Ray Diffraction: X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a protein, hen egg lysozyme, produced this interference pattern. Analysis
of the pattern yields information about the structure of the protein.
The Compton Effect
The Compton Effect is the phenomenon of the decrease in energy of photon when scattered by a free charged partic le.
Explain why Compton scattering is an inelastic scattering.
Compton scattering is an inelastic scattering of a pho ton by a free charged particle (usually an electron). It results in a decrease in
energy (increase in wavelength) of the photon (which m ay be an X-ray or gamma ray photon), called the Compt on Effect. Part of
the energy of the photon is transferred to the scatte ring electron. Inverse Compton scattering also exists, and happens when a
charged particle transfers part of its energy to a photon.learning objectives

29.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232
Scattering in the Compton Effect: The Compton Effect is the name given to the scattering of a photon by an electron. Energy and
momentum are conserved, resulting in a reduction of both f or the scattered photon. Studying this effect, Compton ver ified that
photons have momentum.
Compton scattering is an example of inelastic scatt ering because the wavelength of the scattered light i s different from the incident
radiation. Still, the origin of the effect can be co nsidered as an elastic collision between a photon and an electron. The amount of
change in the wavelength is called the Compton shift. Although nuclear Compton scattering exists, Compton sca ttering usually
refers to the interaction involving only the electrons o f an atom.
The Compton effect is important because it demonstrat es that light cannot be explained purely as a wave ph enomenon. Thomson
scattering, the classical theory of an electromagne tic wave scattered by charged particles, cannot explai n low intensity shifts in
wavelength: classically, light of sufficient intensity for the electric field to accelerate a charged part icle to a relativistic speed will
cause radiation-pressure recoil and an associated Dopp ler shift of the scattered light. However, the effect will become arbitrarily
small at sufficiently low light intensities regardless of wavelength. Light must behave as if it consists of particles to explain the
low-intensity Compton scattering. Compton’s experimen t convinced physicists that light can behave as a s tream of particle-like
objects (quanta) whose energy is proportional to the frequ ency.
Key Points
The British physicist J. J. Thomson performed experiments st udying cathode rays and discovered that they were unique
particles, later named electrons.
Rutherford proved that the hydrogen nucleus is present in o ther nuclei.
In 1932, James Chadwick showed that there were uncharged par ticles in the radiation he was using. These particles, later called
neutrons, had a similar mass of the protons but did not hav e the same characteristics as protons.
The atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a de nse central nucleus surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons.
Scattered knowledge discovered by alchemists over the Middle Ages contributed to the discovery of atoms.
Dalton established his atomic theory based on the fact that t he masses of reactants in specific chemical reactions always have a
particular mass ratio.
J. J. Thomson, who discovered the electron in 1897, proposed the plum pudding model of the atom in 1904 before the disco very
of the atomic nucleus in order to include the electron in the atomic model.
In Thomson’s model, the atom is composed of electrons surrounded by a soup of positive charge to balance the elec trons’
negative charges, like negatively charged “plums” surro unded by positively charged “pudding”.
The 1904 Thomson model was disproved by Hans Geiger’s and Erne st Marsden’s 1909 gold foil experiment.
Rutherford overturned Thomson’s model in 1911 with his well-known gold foil experiment, in which he demonstrate d that the
atom has a tiny, high- mass nucleus.
In his experiment, Rutherford observed that many alpha particles were deflected at small angles while others were reflected
back to the alpha source.
This highly concentrated, positively charged region is na med the “nucleus” of the atom.
According to Bohr: 1) Electrons in atoms orbit the nucl eus, 2) The electrons can only orbit stably, without ra diating, in certain
orbits, and 3) Electrons can only gain and lose energy by jum ping from one allowed orbit to another.

29.2.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232The significance of the Bohr model is that the laws of cla ssical mechanics apply to the motion of the electron about the nucleus
only when restricted by a quantum rule. Therefore, his ato mic model is called a semiclassical model.
The laws of classical mechanics predict that the electron sh ould release electromagnetic radiation while orbiting a nucleus,
suggesting that all atoms should be unstable!
Classical electrodynamics predicts that an atom describe d by a (classical) planetary model would be unstable.
To explain the hydrogen spectrum, Bohr had to make a few as sumptions that electrons could only have certain classical
motions.
After the seminal work by Planck, Einstein, and Bohr, physici sts began to realize that it was essential to introduce t he notion of
” quantization ” to explain microscopic worlds.
The “Bohr orbits” have a very important feature of qu antization: that the angular momentum L of an electron i n its orbit is
quantized, that is, it has only specific, discrete values. This leads to the equation.
At the time of proposal, Bohr himself did not know why angular momentum should be quantized, but using this assumption he
was able to calculate the energies in the hydrogen spectrum.
A theory of the atom or any other system must predict it s energies based on the physics of the system, which the Bo hr model
was able to do.
According to Bohr, allowed orbit radius at any is. The sm allest possible value of rr in the hydrogen atom is called
the Bohr radius and is equal to 0.053 nm.
The energy of the nn-th level for any atom is.
The energy of a photon emitted by a hydrogen atom is give n by the difference of two hydrogen energy levels:
, which is known as Rydberg formula.
Atomic and molecular emission and absorption spectra ha ve been known for over a century to be discrete (or quant ized).
Lyman, Balmer, and Paschen series are named after early researchers who studied them in particular depth.
Bohr was the first one to provide a theoretical explanation of the hydrogen spectra.
Bohr’s condition, that the angular momentum is an integ er multiple of ℏℏ, was later reinterpreted in 1924 by de Broglie as a
standing wave condition.
For what Bohr was forced to hypothesize as the rule for allowed orbits, de Broglie’s matter wave concept explains it as t he
condition for constructive interference of an electron i n a circular orbit.
Bohr’s model was only applicable to hydrogen-like atoms. In 19 25, more general forms of description (now called quantum
mechanics) emerged, thanks to Heisenberg and Schrodinge r.
Compton derived the mathematical relationship between t he shift in wavelength and the scattering angle of the X-rays.
Compton effects (with electrons) usually occur with x-ray phot ons.
If the photon is of lower energy, in the visible light thro ugh soft X-rays range, photoelectric effects are observed. Hi gher energy
photons, in the gamma ray range, may lead to pair product ion.
X rays are relatively high- frequency EM radiation. They ar e produced by transitions between inner-shell electron le vels, which
produce x rays characteristic of the atomic element, or b y accelerating electrons.
x-ray diffraction is a technique that provides the det ailed information about crystallographic structure o f natural and
manufactured materials.
Current research in material science and physics involves c omplex materials whose lattice arrangements are crucial t o obtaining
a superconducting material, which can be studied using x -ray crystallography.
Key Terms
scintillation: A flash of light produced in a transparent material by th e passage of a particle.
alpha particle: A positively charged nucleus of a helium-4 atom (consi sting of two protons and two neutrons), emitted as a
consequence of radioactivity.
cathode: An electrode through which electric current flows out of a polarized electrical device.
electromagnetic force: a long-range fundamental force that acts between charged bodies, mediated by the exchange of photons
Avogadro’s number: the number of constituent particles (usually atoms or molecules) in one mole of a given substance. It has
dimensions of reciprocal mol and its value is equal to
nucleus: the massive, positively charged central part of an atom, m ade up of protons and neutrons

29.2.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Maxwell’s equations: A set of equations describing how electric and magnetic f ields are generated and altered by each other
and by charges and currents.
semiclassical: a theory in which one part of a system is described quantum -mechanically whereas the other is treated
classically.
black body: An idealized physical body that absorbs all incident ele ctromagnetic radiation, regardless of frequency or angle of
incidence. Although black body is a theoretical concept, y ou can find approximate realizations of black body in nat ure.
photoelectric effect: The occurrence of electrons being emitted from matter (m etals and non-metallic solids, liquids, or gases)
as a consequence of their absorption of energy from elec tromagnetic radiation.
quantization: The process of explaining a classical understanding of physical phenomena in terms of a newer understanding
known as quantum mechanics.
centripetal: Directed or moving towards a center.
photon: The quantum of light and other electromagnetic energ y, regarded as a discrete particle having zero rest mass, n o
electric charge, and an indefinitely long lifetime.
spectrum: A condition that is not limited to a specific set of va lues but can vary infinitely within a continuum. The word saw its
first scientific use within the field of optics to describe the rainbow of colors in visible light when separated us ing a prism.
standing wave: A wave form which occurs in a limited, fixed medium in s uch a way that the reflected wave coincides with the
produced wave. A common example is the vibration of the strings on a musical stringed instrument.
matter wave: A concept reflects the wave-particle duality of matter. The theory was proposed by Louis de Broglie.
gamma ray: A very high frequency (and therefore very high energy) electromagnetic radiation emitted as a consequence of
radioactivity.
photoelectric effects: In photoelectric effects, electrons are emitted from ma tter (metals and non-metallic solids, liquids or
gases) as a consequence of their absorption of energy fro m electromagnetic radiation.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Gabriela Escalera, Andrew Barron, Neutron Diffraction. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43582/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Proton. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Proton. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Neutron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Neutron. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
cathode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cathode. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
scintillation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/scintillation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
alpha particle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/alpha_particle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Atomic theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_theory. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Discovery of the Atom. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42589/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

29.2.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Avogadro's number. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Avogadro's%20number. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromagnetic force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electromagnetic_force. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum pudding model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Plum_pudding_model. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
alpha particle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/alpha_particle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

29.2.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. Se ptember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
semiclassical. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/semiclassical. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Maxwell's equations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell's%20equations. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/photoelectric-effect.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/black-body. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

29.2.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. Se ptember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
quantization. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/quantization. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
centripetal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/centripetal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

29.2.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. Se ptember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
spectrum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spectrum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_atom.svg/ 1024px-Plum_pudding_atom.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen spectral series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_spectral_series. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
matter wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/matter%20wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
standing wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/standing_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

29.2.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_ato m.svg/1024pxPlum_pudding_atom.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen spectral series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_spectral_series. License:
CC BY: Attribution
de Broglie's Matter Waves Justify Bohr's Magic Electron Orbi tal Radii. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=EILGg3HZIK0. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
gamma ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Compton effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
photoelectric effects. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photoelectric%20effects. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_ato m.svg/1024pxPlum_pudding_atom.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger-Marsden_experiment.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

29.2.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen spectral series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_spectral_series. License:
CC BY: Attribution
de Broglie's Matter Waves Justify Bohr's Magic Electron Orbi tal Radii. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=EILGg3HZIK0. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Compton effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications. Sep tember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42599/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
crystallography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/crystallography. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diffraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
double-helix structure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/double-helix%20structure. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_ato m.svg/1024pxPlum_pudding_atom.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/GeigerMarsden_experiment. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen spectral series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_spectral_series. License:
CC BY: Attribution
de Broglie's Matter Waves Justify Bohr's Magic Electron Orbi tal Radii. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=EILGg3HZIK0. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

29.2.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232Compton effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications. Jan uary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42599/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications. Jan uary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42599/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c0/Bragg_diffra ction_2.svg/640pxBragg_diffraction_2.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Compton effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
inelastic scattering. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/inelastic%20scattering. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Thomson scattering. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomson%20scattering. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Doppler shift. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler%20shift. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron%23Discovery. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom - Grade 10 [CAPS]. January 27, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38126/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Atom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - Intro. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLU4dntonhE. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Plum_pudding_atom.png. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Plum_pudding_ato m.svg/1024pxPlum_pudding_atom.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Thomson Model. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rutherford model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_model. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Geiger-Marsden experiment. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/GeigerMarsden_experiment. License: CC BY: Attribution
Intro to the History of Atomic Theory - The Rutherford Mod el. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=VLU4dntonhE. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bohr model. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohr_model. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Bohru2019s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom. J anuary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42596/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Hydrogen spectral series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrogen_spectral_series.
License: CC BY: Attribution
de Broglie's Matter Waves Justify Bohr's Magic Electron Orbi tal Radii. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=EILGg3HZIK0. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Compton effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_effect. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications. Jan uary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42599/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

29.2.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16232OpenStax College, X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications. Jan uary 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42599/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c0/Bragg_diffra ction_2.svg/640pxBragg_diffraction_2.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Photon Momentum. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42568/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
29.2: The Early Atom is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

29.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1623429.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
Explain relationship between the wave nature of matter and the quantization of energy levels in bound systems
To consider why wave nature of matter in bound systems leads to quantization, let’s consider an example in classical mechanics.
We will look at a basic string “instrument” (a string pulled tight and fixed at both ends). If a string was free and not attached to
anything, we know that it could oscillate at any drive n frequency. However, the string in this example (with fi xed ends and specific
length) can only produce a very specific set of pitc hes because only waves of a certain wavelength can “f it” on the string of a given
length with fixed ends. Once the string becomes a “bound system” with specific boundary restrictions, it allows waves with only a
discrete set of frequencies.
This is the exact mechanism that causes quantization in atoms. The wave nature of matter is responsible for the quantization of
energy levels in bound systems. Just like a free stri ng, the matter wave of a free electron can have any wa velength, determined by
its momentum. However, once an electron is “bound” by a Coulomb potential of a nucleus, it can no longer ha ve an arbitrary
wavelength as the wave needs to satisfy a certain bound ary condition. Only those states where matter interfere s constructively
(leading to standing waves) exist, or are “allowed” (see illu stration in.
Fig 2: The third and fourth allowed circular orbits have three and four wavelengths, respectively, in their circumferen ces.
Assuming that an integral multiple of the electron’s wavel ength equals the circumference of the orbit, we have:
Substituting, this becomes:
The angular momentum is, therefore we obtain the quantiz ation of angular momentum:
As previously discussed, Bohr was forced to hypothesize th is as the rule for allowed orbits. We now realize thi s as a condition for
constructive interference of an electron in a (bound) ci rcular orbit.
Photon Interactions and Pair Production
Pair production refers to the creation of an elementary particle and its antiparticle, usually when a photon inte racts with a nucleus.
Describe process of pair production as the result of photo n interaction with nucleus
Below is an illustration of pair production, which refer s to the creation of an elementary particle and its a ntiparticle, usually when a
photon interacts with a nucleus. For example, an elect ron and its antiparticle, the positron, may be creat ed. This is allowed,learning objectives
learning objectives

29.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16234provided there is enough energy available to create the pair (i.e., the total rest mass energy of the two pa rticles) and that the
situation allows both energy and momentum to be cons erved. Some other conserved quantum numbers such as ang ular momentum,
electric charge, etc., must sum to zero as well. The probability of pair production in photon-matter int eractions increases with
increasing photon energy, and also increases with atomic num ber () of the nucleus approximately as.
Pair Production: Feynman diagram for pair production. A photon decays int o an electron-positron pair.
In nuclear physics, this reaction occurs when a high- energy photon (gamma rays) interacts with a nucleu s. The energy of this
photon can be converted into mass through Einstein’s equation where is energy, mm is mass and is the s peed of light.
The photon must have enough energy to create the mass of an electron plus a positron. The mass of an elec tron is kg
(equivalent to 0.511 MeV in energy), the same as a positr on.
Without a nucleus to absorb momentum, a photon deca ying into electron-positron pair (or other pairs for that matter) can never
conserve energy and momentum simultaneously. The nucle us in the process carries away (or provides) access momentum.
The reverse process is also possible. The electron an d positron can annihilate and produce two 0.511 MeV ga mma photons. If all
three gamma rays, the original with its energy reduced by 1.022 MeV and the two annihilation gamma rays, ar e detected
simultaneously, then a full energy peak is observed.
These interactions were first observed in Patrick Black ett’s counter-controlled cloud chamber, leading him to receive the 1948
Nobel Prize in Physics.
Key Points
Strings in musical instruments (guitar, for example) can onl y produce a very specific set of pitches because only waves of a
certain wavelength can “fit” on the string of a given l ength with fixed ends.
Similarly, once an electron is bound by a Coulomb potentia l of a nucleus, it no longer can have any arbitrary wavelengt h
because the wave should satisfy a certain boundary condit ion.
Bohr’s quantization assumption can be derived from th e condition for constructive intereference of an electr on matter wave in a
circular orbit.
The probability of pair production in photon -matter in teractions increases with increasing photon energy, and als o increases
with atomic number of the nucleus approximately as.
Energy and momentum should be conserved through the pair production process. Some other conserved quantum numbers su ch
as angular momentum, electric charge, etc., must sum to zer o as well.
Nucleus is needed in the pair production of electron and p ositron to satisfy the energy and momentum conservati on laws.
Key Terms
quantization: The process of explaining a classical understanding of physical phenomena in terms of a newer understanding
known as quantum mechanics.
angular momentum: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the momentum of the
particle, and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its circular motion.
matter wave: A concept reflects the wave-particle duality of matter. The theory was proposed by Louis de Broglie.

29.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16234gamma ray: A very high frequency (and therefore very high energy) electromagnetic radiation emitted as a consequence of
radioactivity.
positron: The antimatter equivalent of an electron, having th e same mass but a positive charge.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
quantization. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/quantization. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
matter wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/matter%20wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-momentum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pair production. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_production. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
positron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/positron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gamma ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantizati on. January 29, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42606/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pair production. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_production. License: CC BY: Attribution
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

29.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1623929.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
We have seen that under certain circumstances partic les behave like waves. This idea is used in the elect ron microscope which is a
type that uses electrons to create an image of the tar get. It has much higher magnification or resolving p ower than a normal light
microscope. It can achieve better than 50 pm resolut ion and magnifications of up to about 10,000,000 tim es, whereas ordinary,
nonconfocal light microscopes are limited by diffract ion to about 200 nm resolution and useful magnificatio ns below 2000 times.
Electron Microscope Image: An image of an ant in a scanning electron microscope.
Let’s first review how a regular optical microscope wo rks. A beam of light is shone through a thin target a nd the image is then
magnified and focused using objective and ocular le nses. The amount of light which passes through the tar get depends on its
densities, since the less dense regions allow more lig ht to pass through than the denser regions. This means that the beam of light
which is partially transmitted through the target carries information about the inner structure of the target.
Optical and Electron Microscopes: Diagram of the basic components of an optical microscope and an electron microscope.
The original form of electron microscopy, transmissi on electron microscopy, works in a similar manner us ing electrons. In the
electron microscope, electrons which are emitted by a cathode are formed into a beam using magnetic lenses (usually
electromagnets). This electron beam is then passed t hrough a very thin target. Again, the regions in the target with higher densities
stop the electrons more easily. So, the number of el ectrons which pass through the different regions of t he target depends on their
densities. This means that the partially transmitted b eam of electrons carries information about the dens ities of the inner structure of
the target.
The spatial variation in this information (the “ima ge”) is then magnified by a series of magnetic lenses and it is recorded by hitting
a fluorescent screen, photographic plate, or light-s ensitive sensor such as a CCD (charge-coupled device) camera. The image
detected by the CCD may be displayed in real time on a moni tor or computer.
Electron microscopes are very useful as they are able to magnify objects to a much higher resolution. Th is is because their de
Broglie wavelengths are so much smaller than that of visible light. You hopefully remember that light is diffracted by objects which
are separated by a distance of about the same size a s the wavelength of the light. This diffraction then pr events you from being able
to focus the transmitted light into an image.

29.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16239Therefore, the sizes at which diffraction occurs for a beam of electrons is much smaller than those for vis ible light. This is why you
can magnify targets to a much higher order of magnifi cation using electrons rather than visible light.
Lasers
A laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to supply ene rgy to it, and something to provide optical feedback.
Describe basic parts of laser
When lasers were invented in 1960, they were called “ a solution looking for a problem. ” Nowadays, lasers are ubiquitous, finding
utility in thousands of highly varied applications i n every section of modern society, including consume r electronics, information
technology, science, medicine, industry, law enforcement, entertainment, and the military.
Having examined stimulated emission and optical amplif ication process in the “Lasers, Applications of Quantum Me chanics”
section, this atom looks at how lasers are built.
A laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to suppl y energy to it, and something to provide optical fe edback (usually an
optical cavity). When a gain medium is placed in an opti cal cavity, a laser can then produce a coherent beam of photons.
The gain medium is where the optical amplification p rocess occurs. It is excited by an external source of energy into an excited
state (called “population inversion”), ready to be fi red when a photon with the right frequency enters the medium. In most lasers,
this medium consists of a population of atoms which h ave been excited by an outside light source or an el ectrical field which
supplies energy for atoms to absorb in order to be tr ansformed into excited states. There are many types of lasers depending on the
gain media and mode of operation. Gas and semiconductor s are commonly used gain media.
Pulse
energyCW
power
1 J 1 W
1 kJ 1 kW1 mJ 1 mW1 J 1 W1 kJ 1 kW
1 mJ 1 mW
Ne-Cu
248-270 nm+
DF chemical
3.6-4.0 µm
HF chemical
2.6-3.0 µmFosterite
1.13-1.36 µmTi:sapphire
670-1130 nmGaAlAs
750-850 nmPb salts
3.3-27 µm
AlGaIn/AsSb
1.87-2.2 µmInGaAs
1.27-1.33 µm
1.43-1.57 µm InGaN
370-493 nmDyes (doubled)
0.2-0.4 µmDyes
0.38-1.0 µm
CO
9.2-11.4 µm2He-Au
282-292 nm+CO (doubled)
4.6-5.8 µm2
CO
5-7 µmCO
Dyes (Raman shifted)
0.9-4.5 µmAlexandrite
(doubled)
360-400 nmTi:sapphire
(tripled)
235-330 nmTi:sapphire
(doubled)
360-460 nm
Xe-HeXe-He
2-4 µm2-4 µmXe-He
2-4 µm
AlexandriteAlexandrite
700-800 nm700-800 nmAlexandrite
700-800 nmInGaAs
904-1065 nm
Cr fluorideCr fluoride
780-850 nm780-850 nmCr fluoride
780-850 nmInGaAlPInGaAlP
630-685 nm630-685 nmInGaAlP
630-685 nmDyes in
polymer
550-700 nm
He-Ne 611.9 nmHe-Ne 632.8 nmRuby (doubled) 347 nm
Nd:YAG 1064 nm(other hosts 1047-1079 nm)Nd:YAG (doubled) 532 nm
Ruby 694.3 nm
Er:glass 1.54 µmNd:YAG 1319 nm
Er:YAG 2.90, 2.94 µmEr:YSGG 2.79 µmTm:YAG 2.01 µm
Ho:YAG 2.08 µmNd:YAG 946 nm
He-Ne 3.391 µmHe-Ne 1523 nmHe-Ne 1152 nmHe-Ne 594.1 nmHe-Cd 441.6 nm
Iodine 1315 nmNitrogen 337.1 nm
Copper vapor 578.2 nm
Gold vapor 628 nmCopper vapor 510.5 nm
Methylamine 147.8 µmMethyl fluoride 496 µmMethanol 571, 699 µmMethanol 37.9, 70.5, 96.5, 118 µmHe-Cd 325 nm
He-Ne 543.5 nmXeF excimer 351 nmXeCl excimer 308 nmKrF excimer 248 nmArF excimer 193 nmF excimer 157 nm2
CO 10.6 µm2Ar 351 nm
Xe 539.5 nm3+2+
Kr 647.1 nm+Ar 488.0 nm+
Ar 514.5 nm+Ne 332.4 nm+He-Ag 224.3 nm+
Nd:YAG (tripled) 355 nmthNd:YAG (5 harmonic) 213 nm
KrCl excimer 222 nm
thNd:YAG (4 harmonic) 266 nm
FAR-IR
200 nm 300 nm 400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm 800 nm 900 nm 10 µm 1 mm 1 µm 100 nmX-RAYS
VISIBLE MID-INFRARED NEAR-INFRARED ULTRA VIOLET
30 µm 3 µm 1
GaN
515-520 nm
Wavelengths of Commercially Available Lasers: Laser types with distinct laser lines are shown above t he wavelength bar, while
below are shown lasers that can emit in a wavelength rang e. The height of the lines and bars gives an indication of th e maximal
power/pulse energy commercially available, while the colo r codifies the type of laser material.
The most common type of laser uses feedback from an op tical cavity–a pair of highly reflective mirrors on either end of the gain
medium. A single photon can bounce back and forth bet ween the mirrors many times, passing through the gain medium and being
amplified each time. Typically one of the two mirror s, the output coupler, is partially transparent. Some of the light escapes through
this mirror, producing a laser beam that is visible to the naked eye.learning objectives

29.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16239Key Points
Electron microscopes are very useful as they are able to magnify objects to a much higher resolution than optic al ones.
Higher resolution can be achieved with electron microscopes because the de Broglie wavelengths for electrons are s o much
smaller than that of visible light.
In electron microscopes, electromagnets can be used as magnetic lenses to manipulate electron beams.
The gain medium is where the optical amplification process occurs. Gas and semiconductors are commonly used gain medi a.
The most common type of laser uses feedback from an optical c avity–a pair of highly reflective mirrors on either end o f the
gain medium. A single photon can bounce back and forth between the mirrors many times, passing through the gain medi um
and being amplified each time.
Lasers are ubiquitous, finding utility in thousands of h ighly varied applications in every section of modern soci ety.
Key Terms
CCD: A charge-coupled device (CCD) is a device for the movem ent of electrical charge, usually from within the device to an
area where the charge can be manipulated, for example c onversion into a digital value. The CCD is a major technolo gy required
for digital imaging.
de Broglie wavelength: The wavelength of a matter wave is inversely proportiona l to the momentum of a particle and is called
a de Broglie wavelength.
stimulated emission: The process by which an atomic electron (or an excited mo lecular state) interacting with an
electromagnetic wave of a certain frequency may drop to a lower energy level, transferring its energy to that field.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Electron microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_microscope%23cite_note-erni1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Wave Nature of Matt er: Electron Microscopes. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39574/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
CCD. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/CCD. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
de Broglie wavelength. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/de%20Broglie%20wavelength.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Wave Nature of Matt er: Electron Microscopes. January 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39574/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electron microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_microscope%23cite_note-erni1. License: CC BY: Attribution
Laser. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser%23Uses. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
stimulated emission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/stimulated%20emission. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Wave Nature of Matt er: Electron Microscopes. January 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39574/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Electron microscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_microscope%23cite_note-erni1. License: CC BY: Attribution
List of laser types. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_laser_types. License: CC BY:
Attribution
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

29.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624029.5: Multielectron Atoms
Describe atomic structure and shielding in multielectron atoms
Multielectron Atoms
Atoms with more than one electron, such as Helium (He) a nd Nitrogen (N), are referred to as multielectron atom s. Hydrogen is the
only atom in the periodic table that has one electron in the orbitals under ground state.
In hydrogen-like atoms (those with only one electron), the net force on the electron is just as large as t he electric attraction from the
nucleus. However, when more electrons are involved, eac h electron (in the nn-shell) feels not only the ele ctromagnetic attraction
from the positive nucleus, but also repulsion force s from other electrons in shells from ‘1’ to ‘nn‘. T his causes the net force on
electrons in the outer electron shells to be signific antly smaller in magnitude. Therefore, these electro ns are not as strongly bonded
to the nucleus as electrons closer to the nucleus. T his phenomenon is often referred to as the Orbital Pe netration Effect. The
shielding theory also explains why valence shell electrons a re more easily removed from the atom.
Electron Shielding Effect: A multielectron atom with inner electrons shielding outside electrons from the positively charged
nucleus
The size of the shielding effect is difficult to cal culate precisely due to effects from quantum mechani cs. As an approximation, the
effective nuclear charge on each electron can be es timated by:, where is the number of protons in the nucleus
and σ\sigma is the average number of electrons betwe en the nucleus and the electron in question. σ\sigm a can be found by using
quantum chemistry and the Schrodinger equation or by using Slater’s empirical formula.
For example, consider a sodium cation, a fluorine anion, and a neutral neon atom. Each has 10 electrons, and the number of
nonvalence electrons is two (10 total electrons minu s eight valence electrons), but the effective nuclear charge varies because each
has a different number of protons:
As a consequence, the sodium cation has the largest effect ive nuclear charge and, therefore, the smallest atomic ra dius.
The Periodic Table
A periodic table is the arrangement of chemical ele ments according to their electron configurations an d recurring chemical
properties.
Explain how elements are arranged in the Periodic Table.
A periodic table is a tabular display of the chemic al elements, organized on the basis of their atomic num bers, electron
configurations, and recurring chemical properties. El ements are presented according to their atomic numbe rs (number of protons)learning objectives
learning objectives

29.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16240in increasing order. The standard form of the table comprises an eighteen by seven grid or main body of elements, positioned above
a smaller double row of elements. The table can also be deconstructed into four rectangular blocks: the s-block to the left, the pblock to the right, the d-block in the middle, and the f-block below that. The rows of the table are calle d periods. The columns of
the s-, d-, and p-blocks are called groups, some of which ha ve names such as the halogens or the noble gases.
Since, by definition, a periodic table incorporates r ecurring trends, any such table can be used to deriv e relationships between the
properties of the elements and predict the propertie s of new elements that are yet to be discovered or sy nthesized. As a result, a
periodic table, in the standard form or some other v ariant, provides a useful framework for analyzing che mical behavior. Such
tables are widely used in chemistry and other sciences.
Periodic Table of Elements: The standard form of the periodic table, where the col ors represent different categories of elements
The Specifics of the Periodic Table
All versions of the periodic table include only chem ical elements, rather than mixtures, compounds, or sub atomic particles. Each
chemical element has a unique atomic number represe nting the number of protons in its nucleus. Most elemen ts have differing
numbers of neutrons among different atoms: these varia nts are referred to as isotopes. For example, carbon ha s three naturally
occurring isotopes. All of its atoms have six protons and most have six neutrons as well, but about one percent have seven neutrons,
and a very small fraction have eight neutrons. Isot opes are never separated in the periodic table. They a re always grouped together
under a single element. Elements with no stable isotopes hav e the atomic masses of their most stable isotopes listed i n parentheses.
All elements from atomic numbers ‘1’ (hydrogen) to ‘11 8’ (ununoctium) have been discovered or synthesized. Of these, elements
up through californium exist naturally; the rest have only been synthesized in laboratories. The producti on of elements beyond
ununoctium is being pursued. The question of how the periodic table may need to be modified to accommoda te any such additions
is a matter of ongoing debate. Numerous synthetic radio nuclides of naturally occurring elements have also be en produced in
laboratories.
Although precursors exist, Dmitri Mendeleev is generall y credited with the publication of the first widely re cognized periodic table
in 1869. He developed his table to illustrate periodi c trends in the properties of the elements known at t he time. Mendeleev also
predicted some properties of then-unknown elements th at were expected to fill gaps in the table. Most of his p redictions were
proved correct when the elements in question were subse quently discovered. Mendeleev’s periodic table has si nce been expanded
and refined with the discovery or synthesis of more n ew elements and the development of new theoretical mo dels to explain
chemical behavior.

29.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16240
Mendeleev’s 1869 Periodic Table: Mendeleev’s 1869 periodic table presents the periods verti cally and the groups horizontally.
Dmitri Mendeleev: Dmitri Mendeleev is known for publishing a widely recognized periodic table.
Electron Configurations
The electron configuration is the distribution of elec trons of an atom or molecule in atomic or molecular orbita ls.

29.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16240Explain the meaning of electron configurations
The electron configuration is the distribution of e lectrons of an atom or molecule in atomic or molecu lar orbitals. Electron
configurations describe electrons as each moving independe ntly in an orbital, in an average field created by all other orbitals.
In atoms, electrons fill atomic orbitals according to the Aufbau principle (shown in), stated as: a maxim um of two electrons are put
into orbitals in the order of increasing orbital ene rgy—the lowest-energy orbitals are filled before elec trons are placed in higherenergy orbitals. As an example, the electron configura tion of the neon atom is 1s 2s 2p or [He]2s 2p, as di agramed in. In
molecules, the situation becomes more complex, as e ach molecule has a different orbital structure. The molecular orbitals are
labelled according to their symmetry, rather than th e atomic orbital labels used for atoms and monoatomi c ions: hence, the electron
configuration of the diatomic oxygen molecule, O, is 1σ 1σ 2σ 2σ 1π 3σ 1π 2.
Electron Configuration of Neon Atom: Electron configuration of neon atom showing only outer e lectron shell.
Aufbau Principle: In the Aufbau Principle, as electrons are added to atom s, they are added to the lowest orbitals first.
According to the laws of quantum mechanics, for systems with only one electron, an energy is associated with ea ch electron
configuration and, upon certain conditions, electrons are able to move from one configuration to another by emission or absorption
of a quantum of energy, in the form of a photon.
For atoms or molecules with more than one electron, the motion of electrons are correlated and such picture is no longer exact. An
infinite number of electronic configurations are ne eded to exactly describe any multi-electron system, an d no energy can be
associated with one single configuration. However, the electronic wave function is usually dominated by a ver y small number of
configurations and therefore the notion of electronic conf iguration remains essential for multi-electron systems.
Electronic configuration of polyatomic molecules can ch ange without absorption or emission of photon through vib ronic couplings.
Knowledge of the electron configuration of different atoms is useful in understanding the structure of the periodic table of
elements. The outermost electron shell is often referr ed to as the valence shell and (to a first approxima tion) determines the
chemical properties. It should be remembered that the similarities in the chemical properties were remarke d more than a century
before the idea of electron configuration. The conce pt of electron configuration is also useful for desc ribing the chemical bonds that
hold atoms together. In bulk materials this same idea he lps explain the peculiar properties of lasers and semico nductors.learning objectives
2 2 6 2 6
2 g2u2g2u2u4g2g

29.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16240Key Points
Hydrogen is the only atom in the periodic table that has one electron in the orbitals under ground state.
In multielectron atoms, the net force on electrons in th e outer shells is reduced due to shielding.
The effective nuclear charge on each electron can be appr oximated as: Zeff=Z−σZeff=Z−σ, where ZZ is the number of p rotons
in the nucleus and σσ is the average number of electrons between the nucleus and the electron in question.
A periodic table provides a useful framework for analyzing t he chemical behavior of elements.
A periodic table includes only chemical elements with e ach chemical element assigned a unique atomic number rep resenting the
number of protons in its nucleus.
Dmitri Mendeleev is credited with the publication of the first widely recognized periodic table in 1869.
Electrons fill atomic orbitals according to the Aufbau p rinciple in atoms.
For systems with only one electron, an energy is associated wi th each electron configuration and electrons are abl e to move
from one configuration to another by emission or absorptio n of a quantum of energy, in the form of a photon.
For atoms or molecules with more than one electron, an i nfinite number of electronic configurations are neede d to exactly
describe any multi-electron system, and no energy can b e associated with one single configuration.
Key Terms
hydrogen-like: having a single electron
electron shell: The collective states of all electrons in an atom hav ing the same principal quantum number (visualized as an
orbit in which the electrons move).
valence shell: the outermost shell of electrons in an atom; these elect rons take part in bonding with other atoms
periodic table: A tabular chart of the chemical elements according to their atomic numbers so that elements with similar
properties are in the same column.
element: Any one of the simplest chemical substances that cannot be decomposed in a chemical reaction or by any chemica l
means and made up of atoms all having the same number of p rotons.
atomic number: The number, equal to the number of protons in an ato m that determines its chemical properties. Symbol: Z
atomic orbital: The quantum mechanical behavior of an electron in an at om describing the probability of the electron’s
particular position and energy.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
electron shell. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electron_shell. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Effective nuclear charge. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Effective_nuclear_charge. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron shielding. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_shielding. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
hydrogen-like. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/hydrogen-like. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
valence shell. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/valence_shell. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Effective_Nucle ar_Charge.svg/350pxEffective_Nuclear_Charge.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
atomic number. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atomic_number. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Periodic table. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

29.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16240element. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/element. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
periodic table. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/periodic_table. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Effective_Nucle ar_Charge.svg/350pxEffective_Nuclear_Charge.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Periodic_tabl e.svg/790px-Periodic_table.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Medeleeff_by_re pin.jpg/482px-Medeleeff_by_repin.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Mendeleev's_1869 _periodic_table.png/487pxMendeleev's_1869_periodic_table.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electronic configuration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_configuration. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron configuration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron_configuration. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electron shell. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electron_shell. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
atomic orbital. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atomic_orbital. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Effective_Nucle ar_Charge.svg/350pxEffective_Nuclear_Charge.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Periodic_tabl e.svg/790px-Periodic_table.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Medeleeff_by_re pin.jpg/482px-Medeleeff_by_repin.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Mendeleev's_1869 _periodic_table.png/487pxMendeleev's_1869_periodic_table.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Aufbau principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Aufbau_principle. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/Electron_shell_010_ Neon__no_label.svg/600px-Electron_shell_010_Neon_-_no_label.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
29.5: Multielectron Atoms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
3.2: Vectors
3.3: Projectile Motion
3.4: Multiple Velocities
This page titled 3: Two-Dimensional Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144453.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
Constant Velocity
An object moving with constant velocity must have a const ant speed in a constant direction.
Examine the terms for constant velocity and how they apply to acceleration
Motion with constant velocity is one of the simplest fo rms of motion. This type of motion occurs when an an object is moving (or
sliding) in the presence of little or negligible fr iction, similar to that of a hockey puck sliding acro ss the ice. To have a constant
velocity, an object must have a constant speed in a c onstant direction. Constant direction constrains the o bject to motion to a
straight path.
Newton’s second law () suggests that when a force is app lied to an object, the object would experience accele ration. If the
acceleration is 0, the object shouldn’t have any exte rnal forces applied on it. Mathematically, this can be shown a s the following:
If an object is moving at constant velocity, the gra ph of distance vs. time (vs.) shows the same chang e in position over each
interval of time. Therefore the motion of an object at constant velocity is represented by a straight li ne:, where is the
displacement when (or at the y-axis intercept).
Motion with Constant Velocity: When an object is moving with constant velocity, it does not change direction nor speed and
therefore is represented as a straight line when graphed as distance over time.
You can also obtain an object’s velocity if you kno w its trace over time. Given a graph as in, we can calcul ate the velocity from the
change in distance over the change in time. In grap hical terms, the velocity can be interpreted as the slope of the line. The velocity
can be positive or negative, and is indicated by the sign of our slope. This tells us in which direction the object moves.
Constant Acceleration
Analyzing two-dimensional projectile motion is done by break ing it into two motions: along the horizontal and vertical axes.
Analyze a two-dimensional projectile motion along horizon tal and vertical axes
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown, or projected, into the air, subject only to the forc e of gravity. The object is
called a projectile, and its path is called its traje ctory. The motion of falling objects is a simple one-d imensional type of projectile
motion in which there is no horizontal movement. In two-dimensional projectile motion, such as that of a f ootball or other thrown
object, there is both a vertical and a horizontal compon ent to the motion.learning objectives
learning objectives

3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14445
Projectile Motion: Throwing a rock or kicking a ball generally produces a pr ojectile pattern of motion that has both a vertical and
a horizontal component.
The most important fact to remember is that motion along perpendicular axes are independent and thus ca n be analyzed separately.
The key to analyzing two-dimensional projectile motio n is to break it into two motions, one along the horiz ontal axis and the other
along the vertical. To describe motion we must deal with velocity and acceleration, as well as with displacement.
We will assume all forces except for gravity (such as ai r resistance and friction, for example) are negligib le. The components of
acceleration are then very simple: (we assume that t he motion occurs at small enough heights near the su rface of
the earth so that the acceleration due to gravity i s constant). Because the acceleration due to gravit y is along the vertical direction
only,. Thus, the kinematic equations describing the motion along the and directions respectively, can be used:
We analyze two-dimensional projectile motion by break ing it into two independent one-dimensional motions along the vertical and
horizontal axes. The horizontal motion is simple, beca use and is thus constant. The velocity in the verti cal direction
begins to decrease as an object rises; at its highest point, the vertical velocity is zero. As an object fal ls towards the Earth again, the
vertical velocity increases again in magnitude but points in the opposite direction to the initial ver tical velocity. The xx and yy
motions can be recombined to give the total velocity at any given point on the trajectory.
Key Points
Constant velocity means that the object in motion is m oving in a straight line at a constant speed.
This line can be represented algebraically as:, where represents the position of the object at, and the slope of
the line indicates the object’s speed.
The velocity can be positive or negative, and is indicat ed by the sign of our slope. This tells us in which direction the object
moves.
Constant acceleration in motion in two dimensions generall y follows a projectile pattern.
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projec ted into the air, subject to only the (vertical) accele ration due to
gravity.
We analyze two-dimensional projectile motion by breaking it into two independent one-dimensional motions along the vertical
and horizontal axes.
Key Terms
constant velocity: Motion that does not change in speed nor direction.
kinematic: of or relating to motion or kinematics
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY

3.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14445Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constant-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceleration. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42042/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinematic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42042/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144463.2: Vectors
Components of a Vector
Vectors are geometric representations of magnitude and di rection and can be expressed as arrows in two or three dimensi ons.
Contrast two-dimensional and three-dimensional vectors
Vectors are geometric representations of magnitude an d direction which are often represented by straight a rrows, starting at one
point on a coordinate axis and ending at a differen t point. All vectors have a length, called the magnitu de, which represents some
quality of interest so that the vector may be compar ed to another vector. Vectors, being arrows, also hav e a direction. This
differentiates them from scalars, which are mere numbers wi thout a direction.
A vector is defined by its magnitude and its orient ation with respect to a set of coordinates. It is often useful in analyzing vectors to
break them into their component parts. For two-dimens ional vectors, these components are horizontal and ve rtical. For three
dimensional vectors, the magnitude component is the sa me, but the direction component is expressed in terms o f xx, yy and zz.
Decomposing a Vector
To visualize the process of decomposing a vector int o its components, begin by drawing the vector from t he origin of a set of
coordinates. Next, draw a straight line from the origin along the x-axis until the line is even with the tip of the original vector. This
is the horizontal component of the vector. To find the vertical component, draw a line straight up from the end of the horizontal
vector until you reach the tip of the original vect or. You should find you have a right triangle such t hat the original vector is the
hypotenuse.
Decomposing a vector into horizontal and vertical com ponents is a very useful technique in understanding p hysics problems.
Whenever you see motion at an angle, you should thi nk of it as moving horizontally and vertically at t he same time. Simplifying
vectors in this way can speed calculations and help to keep track of the motion of objects.
Scalars and V ectorsScalars and V ectorslearning objectives

3.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446Scalars and Vectors: Mr. Andersen explains the differences between scalar and vec tors quantities. He also uses a demonstration to
show the importance of vectors and vector addition.
Components of a Vector: The original vector, defined relative to a set of axes. The horizontal component stretches from the start
of the vector to its furthest x-coordinate. The vertica l component stretches from the x-axis to the most verti cal point on the vector.
Together, the two components and the vector form a right triangle.
Scalars vs. Vectors
Scalars are physical quantities represented by a single number, and vectors are represented by both a number and a direction.
Distinguish the difference between the quantities scalar s and vectors represent
Physical quantities can usually be placed into two cate gories, vectors and scalars. These two categories are typi fied by what
information they require. Vectors require two pieces of information: the magnitude and direction. In contrast, scalars require only
the magnitude. Scalars can be thought of as numbers, whereas vectors must be thought of more like arrows poi nting in a specific
direction.
learning objectives

3.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446A Vector: An example of a vector. Vectors are usually represented by arrows with their length representing the magnitude and t heir
direction represented by the direction the arrow points.
Vectors require both a magnitude and a direction. Th e magnitude of a vector is a number for comparing o ne vector to another. In
the geometric interpretation of a vector the vector is represented by an arrow. The arrow has two parts tha t define it. The two parts
are its length which represents the magnitude and its direction with respect to some set of coordinate axes. The greater the
magnitude, the longer the arrow. Physical concepts su ch as displacement, velocity, and acceleration are a ll examples of quantities
that can be represented by vectors. Each of these quant ities has both a magnitude (how far or how fast) and a direction. In order to
specify a direction, there must be something to whic h the direction is relative. Typically this reference point is a set of coordinate
axes like the x-y plane.
Scalars differ from vectors in that they do not have a direction. Scalars are used primarily to represent ph ysical quantities for which
a direction does not make sense. Some examples of these are: mass, height, length, volume, and area. Talking about the direction of
these quantities has no meaning and so they cannot be e xpressed as vectors.
The difference betw een V ectors and Scalars, IntrodThe difference betw een V ectors and Scalars, Introd

3.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics: This video introduces the difference between scalars and
vectors. Ideas about magnitude and direction are introdu ced and examples of both vectors and scalars are given.
Adding and Subtracting Vectors Graphically
Vectors may be added or subtracted graphically by laying t hem end to end on a set of axes.
Distinguish the difference between the quantities scalar s and vectors represent
Adding and Subtracting Vectors
One of the ways in which representing physical quantiti es as vectors makes analysis easier is the ease with whi ch vectors may be
added to one another. Since vectors are graphical visual izations, addition and subtraction of vectors can be done graphically.
The graphical method of vector addition is also kno wn as the head-to-tail method. To start, draw a set of coordinate axes. Next,
draw out the first vector with its tail (base) at the origin of the coordinate axes. For vector addition it does not matter which vector
you draw first since addition is commutative, but for s ubtraction ensure that the vector you draw first is t he one you are subtracting
from. The next step is to take the next vector and draw i t such that its tail starts at the previous vector’ s head (the arrow side).
Continue to place each vector at the head of the pr eceding one until all the vectors you wish to add are joined together. Finally,
draw a straight line from the origin to the head of the final vector in the chain. This new line is the v ector result of adding those
vectors together.
Graphical Addition of Vectors: The head-to-tail method of vector addition requires t hat you lay out the first vector along a set of
coordinate axes. Next, place the tail of the next vector o n the head of the first one. Draw a new vector from the origin to the head of
the last vector. This new vector is the sum of the origin al two.
learning objectives

3.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446
V ector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to T ail Additio n V ector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to T ail Additio n
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Method: This video gets viewers started with vector addition and
subtraction. The first lesson shows graphical addition whil e the second video takes a more mathematical approach an d shows
vector addition by components.
To subtract vectors the method is similar. Make sure that the first vector you draw is the one to be subtract ed from. Then, to
subtract a vector, proceed as if adding the opposite of that vector. In other words, flip the vector to b e subtracted across the axes and
then join it tail to head as if adding. To flip the vect or, simply put its head where its tail was and its tail where its he ad was.
Adding and Subtracting Vectors Using Components
It is often simpler to add or subtract vectors by using the ir components.
Demonstrate how to add and subtract vectors by components
learning objectives

3.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446Using Components to Add and Subtract Vectors
Another way of adding vectors is to add the components. Previously, we saw that vectors can be expressed in terms of their
horizontal and vertical components. To add vectors, merely express both of them in terms of their horizo ntal and vertical
components and then add the components together.
Vector with Horizontal and Vertical Components: The vector in this image has a magnitude of 10.3 units and a direction of 29.1
degrees above the x-axis. It can be decomposed into a hori zontal part and a vertical part as shown.
For example, a vector with a length of 5 at a 36.9 deg ree angle to the horizontal axis will have a horizon tal component of 4 units
and a vertical component of 3 units. If we were to add this to another vector of the same magnitude and di rection, we would get a
vector twice as long at the same angle. This can be s een by adding the horizontal components of the two v ectors and the two
vertical components (). These additions give a new ve ctor with a horizontal component of and a vertical component of
. To find the resultant vector, simply place the tail of the vertical component at the head (arrow side) o f the horizontal
component and then draw a line from the origin to th e head of the vertical component. This new line is th e resultant vector. It
should be twice as long as the original, since both of its co mponents are twice as large as they were previously.
To subtract vectors by components, simply subtract th e two horizontal components from each other and do t he same for the vertical
components. Then draw the resultant vector as you did in the previous part.

3.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446
V ector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add V ectors bV ector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add V ectors b
Vector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add Vectors by Components: This video gets viewers started with vector addition using
a mathematical approach and shows vector addition by compo nents.
Multiplying Vectors by a Scalar
Multiplying a vector by a scalar changes the magnitude of t he vector but not the direction.
Summarize the interaction between vectors and scalars
Overview
Although vectors and scalars represent different typ es of physical quantities, it is sometimes necessary f or them to interact. While
adding a scalar to a vector is impossible because of their different dimensions in space, it is possible to multiply a vector by a
scalar. A scalar, however, cannot be multiplied by a vec tor.
To multiply a vector by a scalar, simply multiply th e similar components, that is, the vector’s magnitude by the scalar’s magnitude.
This will result in a new vector with the same direction bu t the product of the two magnitudes.
learning objectives

3.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446For example, if you have a vector A with a certain mag nitude and direction, multiplying it by a scalar a with magnitude 0.5 will
give a new vector with a magnitude of half the origina l. Similarly if you take the number 3 which is a pure and unit-less scalar
and multiply it to a vector, you get a version of the original vector which is 3 times as long. As a more phy sical example take
the gravitational force on an object. The force is a vector with its magnitude depending on the scalar known as mass and its
direction being down. If the mass of the object is doubled, the force of gravity is doubled as well.
Multiplying vectors by scalars is very useful in phys ics. Most of the units used in vector quantities are i ntrinsically scalars
multiplied by the vector. For example, the unit of me ters per second used in velocity, which is a vector, is made up of two
scalars, which are magnitudes: the scalar of length i n meters and the scalar of time in seconds. In order to make this conversion
from magnitudes to velocity, one must multiply the unit ve ctor in a particular direction by these scalars.
Scalar Multiplication: (i) Multiplying the vector by the scalar yields the vec tor which is half as long. (ii)
Multiplying the vector by 3 triples its length. (iii) Doub ling the mass (scalar) doubles the force (vector) of gra vity.
Unit Vectors and Multiplication by a Scalar
Multiplying a vector by a scalar is the same as multiplying it s magnitude by a number.
Predict the influence of multiplying a vector by a scalar
In addition to adding vectors, vectors can also be multiplied by constants known as scalars. Scalars are di stinct from vectors in that
they are represented by a magnitude but no direction. Ex amples of scalars include an object’s mass, height, or volume.
Scalar Multiplication: (i) Multiplying the vector by the scalar yields the vec tor which is half as long. (ii) Multiplying
the vector by 3 triples its length. (iii) Doubling the ma ss (scalar) doubles the force (vector) of gravity.
When multiplying a vector by a scalar, the direction of the vector is unchanged and the magnitude is mul tiplied by the magnitude of
the scalar. This results in a new vector arrow pointin g in the same direction as the old one but with a lon ger or shorter length. You
can also accomplish scalar multiplication through th e use of a vector’s components. Once you have the vecto r’s components,
multiply each of the components by the scalar to get th e new components and thus the new vector.Example:
learning objectives

3.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446A useful concept in the study of vectors and geometry is the concept of a unit vector. A unit vector is a vector with a length or
magnitude of one. The unit vectors are different for different coordinates. In Cartesian coordinates the directions are x and y usually
denoted and. With the triangle above the letters re ferred to as a “hat”. The unit vectors in Cartesian coordinates describe a circle
known as the “unit circle” which has radius one. This ca n be seen by taking all the possible vectors of length one at all the possible
angles in this coordinate system and placing them on the coordinates. If you were to draw a line around conn ecting all the heads of
all the vectors together, you would get a circle of radius o ne.
Position, Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration as Vectors
Position, displacement, velocity, and acceleration can all be shown vectors since they are defined in terms o f a magnitude and a
direction.
Examine the applications of vectors in analyzing physica l quantities
Use of Vectors
Vectors can be used to represent physical quantities. Mo st commonly in physics, vectors are used to represe nt displacement,
velocity, and acceleration. Vectors are a combinati on of magnitude and direction, and are drawn as arrows. The length represents
the magnitude and the direction of that quantity is the direction in which the vector is pointing. Becaus e vectors are constructed this
way, it is helpful to analyze physical quantities (with b oth size and direction) as vectors.
Applications
In physics, vectors are useful because they can visua lly represent position, displacement, velocity and acceleration. When drawing
vectors, you often do not have enough space to draw them to the scale they are representing, so it is impo rtant to denote somewhere
what scale they are being drawn at. For example, when dr awing a vector that represents a magnitude of 100, on e may draw a line
that is 5 units long at a scale of. When the inverse o f the scale is multiplied by the drawn magnitude, it should equal the actual
magnitude.
Position and Displacement
Displacement is defined as the distance, in any dire ction, of an object relative to the position of anot her object. Physicists use the
concept of a position vector as a graphical tool to visualize displacements. A position vector expresses the position of an object
from the origin of a coordinate system. A position vector can also be used to show the position of an object in rela tion to a reference
point, secondary object or initial position (if ana lyzing how far the object has moved from its original location). The position vector
is a straight line drawn from the arbitrary origin t o the object. Once drawn, the vector has a length and a direction relative to the
coordinate system used.
Velocity
Velocity is also defined in terms of a magnitude and direction. To say that something is gaining or losin g velocity one must also say
how much and in what direction. For example, an airpla ne flying at 200 to the northeast can be represente d by an vector
pointing in the northeast direction with a magnitude of 200. In drawing the vector, the magnitude is only important as a way to
compare two vectors of the same units. So, if there were another airplane flying 100 to the southwest, the ve ctor arrow should
be half as long and pointing in the direction of southwest.
Acceleration
Acceleration, being the time rate of change of veloci ty, is composed of a magnitude and a direction, and is drawn with the same
concept as a velocity vector. A value for accelerat ion would not be helpful in physics if the magnitude and direction of this
acceleration was unknown, which is why these vectors are important. In a free body diagram, for example, of a n object falling, it
would be helpful to use an acceleration vector near the object to denote its acceleration towards the gr ound. If gravity is the only
force acting on the object, this vector would be pointin g downward with a magnitude of 9.81 of 32.2 learning objectives

3.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446
Vector Diagram: Here is a man walking up a hill. His direction of travel is defined by the angle theta relative to the vertical ax is
and by the length of the arrow going up the hill. He is also bei ng accelerated downward by gravity.
Key Points
Vectors can be broken down into two components: magnitude and direction.
By taking the vector to be analyzed as the hypotenuse, the horizontal and vertical components can be found by c ompleting a
right triangle. The bottom edge of the triangle is the h orizontal component and the side opposite the angle is the ver tical
component.
The angle that the vector makes with the horizontal ca n be used to calculate the length of the two components.
Scalars are physical quantities represented by a single number and no direction.
Vectors are physical quantities that require both magnitud e and direction.
Examples of scalars include height, mass, area, and volume. E xamples of vectors include displacement, velocity, and
acceleration.
To add vectors, lay the first one on a set of axes with its tail at the origin. Place the next vector with its tail at th e previous
vector’s head. When there are no more vectors, draw a straig ht line from the origin to the head of the last vector. This line is the
sum of the vectors.
To subtract vectors, proceed as if adding the two vector s, but flip the vector to be subtracted across the axes and t hen join it tail
to head as if adding.
Adding or subtracting any number of vectors yields a resultant vector.
Vectors can be decomposed into horizontal and vertical com ponents.
Once the vectors are decomposed into components, the compo nents can be added.
Adding the respective components of two vectors yields a vec tor which is the sum of the two vectors.
A vector is a quantity with both magnitude and direction.
A scalar is a quantity with only magnitude.
Multiplying a vector by a scalar is equivalent to multiplyi ng the vector’s magnitude by the scalar. The vector leng thens or
shrinks but does not change direction.
A unit vector is a vector of magnitude (length) 1.
A scalar is a physical quantity that can be represente d by a single number. Unlike vectors, scalars do not have d irection.
Multiplying a vector by a scalar is the same as multiplying th e vector’s magnitude by the number represented by the scalar.
Vectors are arrows consisting of a magnitude and a directio n. They are used in physics to represent physical quantiti es that also
have both magnitude and direction.
Displacement is a physics term meaning the distance of a n object from a reference point. Since the displacement contains two
pieces of information: the distance from the reference po int and the direction away from the point, it is well repre sented by a
vector.
Velocity is defined as the rate of change in time of the displacement. To know the velocity of an object one mus t know both
how fast the displacement is changing and in what directio n. Therefore it is also well represented by a vector.
Acceleration, being the rate of change of velocity also r equires both a magnitude and a direction relative to som e coordinates.
When drawing vectors, you often do not have enough space to draw them to the scale they are representing, so it is imp ortant to
denote somewhere what scale they are being drawn at.

3.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446Key Terms
coordinates: Numbers indicating a position with respect to some axis. Ex: and coordinates indicate position relative to x x
and yy axes.
axis: An imaginary line around which an object spins or is symm etrically arranged.
magnitude: A number assigned to a vector indicating its length.
Coordinate axes: A set of perpendicular lines which define coordinates relative to an origin. Example: x and y coordinate axes
define horizontal and vertical position.
origin: The center of a coordinate axis, defined as being th e coordinate 0 in all axes.
Component: A part of a vector. For example, horizontal and vertical components.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
magnitude: A number assigned to a vector indicating its length.
scalar: A quantity that has magnitude but not direction; compa re vector.
unit vector: A vector of magnitude 1.
velocity: The rate of change of displacement with respect to cha nge in time.
displacement: The length and direction of a straight line between two objects.
acceleration: the rate at which the velocity of a body changes with time
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Components of a Vector. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14519/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Euclidean vector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_vector. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
axis. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/axis. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
coordinates. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/coordinates. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
magnitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Scalar (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Euclidean vector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_vector. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/coordinate-axes.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vector.sv g/220pxPosition_vector.svg.png. License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

3.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/coordinate-axes.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
origin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/origin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vect or.svg/220px-Position_vector.svg.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_03.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Metho d. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7puxbu24AM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/component. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vect or.svg/220px-Position_vector.svg.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_03.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Metho d. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7puxbu24AM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_06a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add Vectors by Componen ts. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=tvrynGECJ7k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
scalar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scalar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution

3.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vect or.svg/220px-Position_vector.svg.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_03.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Metho d. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7puxbu24AM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_06a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add Vectors by Componen ts. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=tvrynGECJ7k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. March 12, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/vm2a.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Unit vector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_vector. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Scalar (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
scalar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scalar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
unit vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/unit_vector. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vect or.svg/220px-Position_vector.svg.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_03.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Metho d. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7puxbu24AM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_06a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add Vectors by Componen ts. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=tvrynGECJ7k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. March 12, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/vm2a.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/vm2a.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Displacement (vector). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Displacement_(vector). License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
displacement. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/displacement. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

3.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14446acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5101a2b3e4b04253d8aba44b/ve ctordecomp.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Position_vect or.svg/220px-Position_vector.svg.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
The difference between Vectors and Scalars, Introduction and Basics. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=bap6XjDDE3k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_03.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 1 of 2: Head to Tail Addition Metho d. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7puxbu24AM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Me thods. January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42127/latest/Figure_03_02_06a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector Addition Lesson 2 of 2: How to Add Vectors by Componen ts. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=tvrynGECJ7k. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. March 12, 2014. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/vm2a.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/vm2a.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/510a0e5de4b0f11e4bcb01ad/Ma n_walking_up_a_hill.png. License: CC BY:
Attribution
This page titled 3.2: Vectors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

3.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144473.3: Projectile Motion
Basic Equations and Parabolic Path
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in parabolic path; the path that the object fo llows is called its
trajectory.
Assess the effect of angle and velocity on the trajecto ry of the projectile; derive maximum height using displa cement
Projectile Motion
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in a bilaterally symmetrical, parabolic path. Th e path that the object
follows is called its trajectory. Projectile motion on ly occurs when there is one force applied at the begi nning on the trajectory, after
which the only interference is from gravity. In a prev ious atom we discussed what the various components of an object in projectile
motion are. In this atom we will discuss the basic equa tions that go along with them in the special case in which the projectile
initial positions are null (i.e. and).
Initial Velocity
The initial velocity can be expressed as x components an d y components:
In this equation, stands for initial velocity magni tude and refers to projectile angle.
Time of Flight
The time of flight of a projectile motion is the tim e from when the object is projected to the time it r eaches the surface. As we
discussed previously, depends on the initial velocity m agnitude and the angle of the projectile:
Acceleration
In projectile motion, there is no acceleration in the horizontal direction. The acceleration,, in the ver tical direction is just due to
gravity, also known as free fall:
Velocity
The horizontal velocity remains constant, but the v ertical velocity varies linearly, because the accele ration is constant. At any time,
, the velocity is:
You can also use the Pythagorean Theorem to find veloc ity:
Displacement
At time, t, the displacement components are:learning objectives

3.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447The equation for the magnitude of the displacement is.
Parabolic Trajectory
We can use the displacement equations in the x and y dire ction to obtain an equation for the parabolic form of a p rojectile motion:
Maximum Height
The maximum height is reached when. Using this we can rearrange the velocity equation to find the time i t will take for the
object to reach maximum height
where stands for the time it takes to reach maximum heigh t. From the displacement equation we can find the maximu m height
Range
The range of the motion is fixed by the condition. Using this we can rearrange the parabolic motion equa tion to find the range
of the motion:
Range of Trajectory: The range of a trajectory is shown in this figure.

3.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447
Projectiles at an Angle - V ery Clear ExplanationProjectiles at an Angle - V ery Clear Explanation
Projectiles at an Angle: This video gives a clear and simple explanation o f how to solve a problem on Projectiles Launched at an
Angle. I try to go step by step through this difficult problem to layout how to solve it in a super clear way. 2D kinematic problems
take time to solve, take notes on the order of how I solved it. Best wishes. Tune into my other videos for more hel p. Peace.
Solving Problems
In projectile motion, an object moves in parabolic pa th; the path the object follows is called its trajectory.
Identify which components are essential in determining pr ojectile motion of an object
We have previously discussed projectile motion and i ts key components and basic equations. Using that info rmation, we can solve
many problems involving projectile motion. Before we do this, let’s review some of the key factors that will go into this problemsolving.
What is Projectile Motion?
Projectile motion is when an object moves in a bilater ally symmetrical, parabolic path. The path that the o bject follows is called its
trajectory. Projectile motion only occurs when there i s one force applied at the beginning, after which the only influence on the
trajectory is that of gravity.
learning objectives

3.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447What are the Key Components of Projectile Motion?
The key components that we need to remember in order to solv e projectile motion problems are:
Initial launch angle,
Initial velocity,
Time of flight,
Acceleration,
Horizontal velocity,
Vertical velocity,
Displacement,
Maximum height,
Range,
How T o Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The THow T o Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The T
How To Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The Toolbox Method): Introducing the “Toolbox” method of solving projecti le
motion problems! Here we use kinematic equations and modify with initial conditions to generate a “toolbox” of eq uations with
which to solve a classic three-part projectile motion pro blem.
Now, let’s look at two examples of problems involving proje ctile motion.
Example:

3.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Example 1
Let’s say you are given an object that needs to clea r two posts of equal height separated by a specific di stance. Refer to for this
example. The projectile is thrown at m/s at an angle of 45°. If the object is to clear both posts, each wi th a height of 30m,
find the minimum: (a) position of the launch on the ground in relation to the posts and (b) the separa tion between the posts. For
simplicity’s sake, use a gravity constant of 10. Probl ems of any type in physics are much easier to solve i f you list the things
that you know (the “givens”).
Diagram for Example 1: Use this figure as a reference to solve example 1. The problem is to make sure the object is able to
clear both posts.
Solution: The first thing we need to do is figure out at what time tt the object reaches the specified heig ht. Since the motion is
in a parabolic shape, this will occur twice: once when traveling upward, and again when the object is travel ing downward. For
this we can use the equation of displacement in the vertical direction,
We substitute in the appropriate variables:
Therefore:
We can use the quadratic equation to find that the roots of this equation are 2s and 3s. This means that th e projectile will reach
30m after 2s, on its way up, and after 3s, on its way down.
Example 2
An object is launched from the base of an incline, wh ich is at an angle of 30°. If the launch angle is 60 ° from the horizontal and
the launch speed is 10 m/s, what is the total flight time? T he following information is given:.
Diagram for Example 2: When dealing with an object in projectile motion on an incline, we first need to use the given
information to reorient the coordinate system in ord er to have the object launch and fall on the same surfac e.:

3.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Solution: In order to account for the incline angle, we have to reorient the coordinate system so that th e points of projection
and return are on the same level. The angle of proj ection with respect to the direction is, and the a cceleration in the
direction is. We replace with and with:
Zero Launch Angle
An object launched horizontally at a height travels a ra nge during a time of flight.
Explain the relationship between the range and the tim e of flight
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in a parabolic path. The path followed by the object is called its
trajectory. Projectile motion occurs when a force is a pplied at the beginning of the trajectory for the l aunch (after this the projectile
is subject only to the gravity).
One of the key components of the projectile motion, and the trajectory it follows, is the initial launch angle. The angle at which the
object is launched dictates the range, height, and ti me of flight the object will experience while in proj ectile motion. shows
different paths for the same object being launched a t the same initial velocity and different launch an gles. As illustrated by the
figure, the larger the initial launch angle and maximum height, the longer the flight time of the object.
Projectile Trajectories: The launch angle determines the range and maximum heig ht that an object will experience after being
launched.This image shows that path of the same object being lau nched at the same speed but different angles.
We have previously discussed the effects of differe nt launch angles on range, height, and time of flight. However, what happens if
there is no angle, and the object is just launched horizontally? It makes sense that the object should be launched at a certain height (
), otherwise it wouldn’t travel very far before hittin g the ground. Let’s examine how an object launched ho rizontally at a height
travels. In our case is when is 0.learning objectives

3.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Y
X
gα
Projectile motion: Projectile moving following a parabola.Initial launch ang le is αα, and the velocity is.
Duration of Flight
There is no vertical component in the initial veloc ity () because the object is launched horizontally. Sin ce the object travels
distance in the vertical direction before it hits the g round, we can use the kinematic equation for the vertical motion:
Here, is the duration of the flight before the object its the ground. Therefore:
Range
In the horizontal direction, the object travels at a constant speed during the flight. Therefore, the ran ge (in the horizontal
direction) is given as:
General Launch Angle
The initial launch angle (0-90 degrees) of an object in p rojectile motion dictates the range, height, and time of flight of that object.
Choose the appropriate equation to find range, maximum hei ght, and time of flight
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in a bilaterally symmetrical, parabolic path. Th e path that the object
follows is called its trajectory. Projectile motion onl y occurs when there is one force applied at the begi nning of the trajectory, after
which the only interference is from gravity.
One of the key components of projectile motion and t he trajectory that it follows is the initial launch a ngle. This angle can be
anywhere from 0 to 90 degrees. The angle at which the o bject is launched dictates the range, height, and ti me of flight it will
experience while in projectile motion. shows different paths for the same object launched at the same initi al velocity at different
launch angles. As you can see from the figure, the larg er the initial launch angle, the closer the object c omes to maximum height
and the longer the flight time. The largest range will be experienced at a launch angle up to 45 degrees.learning objectives

3.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447
Launch Angle: The launch angle determines the range and maximum heig ht that an object will experience after being launched.
This image shows that path of the same object being launched at the same velocity but different angles.
The range, maximum height, and time of flight can be found if you know the initial launch angle and velo city, using the following
equations:
Where R – Range, h – maximum height, T – time of flight, v – initial velocity, θ – initial launch angle, g – gravity.
Now that we understand how the launch angle plays a maj or role in many other components of the trajectory of an object in
projectile motion, we can apply that knowledge to maki ng an object land where we want it. If there is a cert ain distance, d, that you
want your object to go and you know the initial veloc ity at which it will be launched, the initial launch a ngle required to get it that
distance is called the angle of reach. It can be found usi ng the following equation:
Key Points: Range, Symmetry, Maximum Height
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in parabolic path. The path that the object fo llows is called its
trajectory.
Construct a model of projectile motion by including ti me of flight, maximum height, and range
What is Projectile Motion?
Projectile motion is a form of motion where an object moves in a bilaterally symmetrical, parabolic path. Th e path that the object
follows is called its trajectory. Projectile motion on ly occurs when there is one force applied at the begi nning on the trajectory, after
which the only interference is from gravity. In this atom we are going to discuss what the various componen ts of an object in
projectile motion are, we will discuss the basic equati ons that go along with them in another atom, “Basic E quations and Parabolic
Path”
Key Components of Projectile Motion:
Time of Flight, T:
The time of flight of a projectile motion is exactl y what it sounds like. It is the time from when the obj ect is projected to the time it
reaches the surface. The time of flight depends on t he initial velocity of the object and the angle of the projection, θθ. When the
point of projection and point of return are on the same hori zontal plane, the net vertical displacement of the obj ect is zero.i i
learning objectives

3.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Symmetry:
All projectile motion happens in a bilaterally symme trical path, as long as the point of projection and return occur along the same
horizontal surface. Bilateral symmetry means that the motion is symmetrical in the vertical plane. If you were to draw a straight
vertical line from the maximum height of the trajectory, it would mirror itself along this line.
Maximum Height, H:
The maximum height of a object in a projectile traj ectory occurs when the vertical component of velocit y, vyvy, equals zero. As the
projectile moves upwards it goes against gravity, and therefore the velocity begins to decelerate. Event ually the vertical velocity
will reach zero, and the projectile is accelerated do wnward under gravity immediately. Once the projectile reaches its maximum
height, it begins to accelerate downward. This is also the po int where you would draw a vertical line of symmetry.
Range of the Projectile, R:
The range of the projectile is the displacement in the horizontal direction. There is no acceleration in this direction since gravity
only acts vertically. shows the line of range. Like t ime of flight and maximum height, the range of the projectile is a function of
initial speed.
Range: The range of a projectile motion, as seen in this image, i s independent of the forces of gravity.
Key Points
Objects that are projected from, and land on the same ho rizontal surface will have a vertically symmetrical pat h.
The time it takes from an object to be projected and la nd is called the time of flight. This depends on the ini tial velocity of the
projectile and the angle of projection.
When the projectile reaches a vertical velocity of zero, this is the maximum height of the projectile and then gr avity will take
over and accelerate the object downward.
The horizontal displacement of the projectile is calle d the range of the projectile, and depends on the initial velocity of the
object.
When solving problems involving projectile motion, we m ust remember all the key components of the motion and th e basic
equations that go along with them.
Using that information, we can solve many different type s of problems as long as we can analyze the information we ar e given
and use the basic equations to figure it out.
To clear two posts of equal height, and to figure out what the distance between these posts is, we need to remember tha t the
trajectory is a parabolic shape and that there are two di fferent times at which the object will reach the height of the posts.
When dealing with an object in projectile motion on an inc line, we first need to use the given information to reorienta te the
coordinate system in order to have the object launch and fall on the same surface.
For the zero launch angle, there is no vertical componen t in the initial velocity.
The duration of the flight before the object hits the ground is given as.
In the horizontal direction, the object travels at a const ant speed v during the flight. The range R (in the horizon tal direction) is
given as:.
If the same object is launched at the same initial velocit y, the height and time of flight will increase proportiona lly to the initial
launch angle.0

3.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447An object launched into projectile motion will have an in itial launch angle anywhere from 0 to 90 degrees.
The range of an object, given the initial launch angle a nd initial velocity is found with:.
The maximum height of an object, given the initial laun ch angle and initial velocity is found with:.
The time of flight of an object, given the initial laun ch angle and initial velocity is found with:.
The angle of reach is the angle the object must be launc hed at in order to achieve a specific distance:.
Objects that are projected from and land on the same hor izontal surface will have a path symmetric about a vertica l line through
a point at the maximum height of the projectile.
The time it takes from an object to be projected and la nd is called the time of flight. It depends on the initia l velocity of the
projectile and the angle of projection.
The maximum height of the projectile is when the projecti le reaches zero vertical velocity. From this point the ve rtical
component of the velocity vector will point downwards.
The horizontal displacement of the projectile is calle d the range of the projectile and depends on the initial velocity of the
object.
If an object is projected at the same initial speed, bu t two complementary angles of projection, the range of the projectile will be
the same.
Key Terms
trajectory: The path of a body as it travels through space.
symmetrical: Exhibiting symmetry; having harmonious or proportio nate arrangement of parts; having corresponding parts or
relations.
reorientate: to orientate anew; to cause to face a different direction
gravity: Resultant force on Earth’s surface, of the attraction by t he Earth’s masses, and the centrifugal pseudo-force caus ed by
the Earth’s rotation.
bilateral symmetry: the property of being symmetrical about a vertical pla ne
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Projectile motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Projectile_motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
trajectory. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
symmetrical. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/symmetrical. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Projectiles at an Angle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNE3eTVEgo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Projectile Motion on an Incline. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14614/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
reorientate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/reorientate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlikeｈ

3.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Projectiles at an Angle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNE3eTVEgo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Projectile Motion on an Incline. February 2, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14614/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
How To Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The Toolbox Method). Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=M8xCj2VPHas. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. February 2, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Trajectory of a projectile. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Trajectory_of_a_projectile. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Trajectory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
trajectory. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Projectiles at an Angle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNE3eTVEgo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Projectile Motion on an Incline. February 2, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14614/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
How To Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The Toolbox Method). Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=M8xCj2VPHas. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. February 2, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ideal projectile motion for different angles. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ideal_projectile_motion_for_differe nt_angles.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ferde hajitas1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ferde_hajitas1.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Trajectory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Trajectory of a projectile. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Trajectory_of_a_projectile. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
trajectory. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Projectiles at an Angle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNE3eTVEgo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Projectile Motion on an Incline. February 2, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14614/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
How To Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The Toolbox Method). Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=M8xCj2VPHas. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. February 2, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

3.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14447Ideal projectile motion for different angles. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ideal_projectile_motion_for_differe nt_angles.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ferde hajitas1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ferde_hajitas1.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ideal projectile motion for different angles. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ideal_projectile_motion_for_differe nt_angles.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
bilateral symmetry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/bilateral_symmetry. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Projectile motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Projectile_motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
gravity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gravity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
trajectory. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trajectory. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Projectiles at an Angle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4jNE3eTVEgo. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Projectile Motion on an Incline. February 2, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14614/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
How To Solve Any Projectile Motion Problem (The Toolbox Method). Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=M8xCj2VPHas. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. February 2, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ideal projectile motion for different angles. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ideal_projectile_motion_for_differe nt_angles.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Ferde hajitas1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ferde_hajitas1.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ideal projectile motion for different angles. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ideal_projectile_motion_for_dif ferent_angles.svg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Features of Projectile Motion. January 25, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 3.3: Projectile Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

3.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144483.4: Multiple Velocities
Addition of Velocities
Relative velocities can be found by adding the velo city of the observed object to the velocity of the f rame of reference it was
measured in.
As learned in a previous atom, relative velocity is the veloc ity of an object as observed from a certain frame of referen ce.
demonstrates the concept of relative velocity. The gi rl is riding in a sled at 1.0 m/s, relative to an obse rver. When she throws the
snowball forward at a speed of 1.5 m/s, relative to the sled, the velocity of the snowball to the observer is the sum of the velocity of
the sled and the velocity of the snowball relative to th e sled:
If the girl were to throw the snowball behind her at the same speed, the velocity of the ball relative to the observer would be:
The concept of relative velocity can also be demons trated using the example of a boat in a river with a current. The boat is only
trying to move forward, but since the river is in mot ion, it carries the boat sideways while it moves forward. The person on the boat
is only observing the forward motion, while an observe r on the shore will notice that the boat is moving sid eways. In order to
calculate the velocity that the object is moving re lative to earth, it is helpful to remember that veloc ity is a vector. In order to
analytically add these vectors, you need to remember the relationship between the magnitude and direction of the vector and its
components on the x and y axis of the coordinate system:
Magnitude:
Direction:
x-component:
y-component:
Vector Addition: Addition of velocities is simply the addition of vectors.
These components are shown above. The first two equati ons are for when the magnitude and direction are known, but you are
looking for the components. The last two equations ar e for when the components are known, and you are look ing for the magnitude
and direction. The magnitude of the observed velocity from the shore is the square root sum of the squared velocity of the boat and
the squared velocity of the river.
Relative Velocity
Relative velocity is the velocity of an object B measured with respect to the velocity of another object A, denote d as.
Relative velocity is the velocity of an object B, i n the rest frame of another object A. This is denoted as, where A is the
velocity in the rest frame of B.
Galileo observed the concept of relative velocity by using an example of a fly and a boat. He observed th at while you are aboard
the boat, if you see a fly, you can measure its velo city,. You can then go back on land and measure the velocity of the boat,. Is

3.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14448the velocity of the fly,, the actual velocity of th e fly? No, because what you measured was the velocity o f the fly relative to the
velocity of the boat. To obtain the velocity of the fl y relative to the shore,, you can use the vector sum as sh own:
Examples of Relative Velocity
This concept is best explained using examples. Pretend you are sitting in a passenger train that is moving east. If you were to look
out the window and see a man walking in the same direc tion, it would appear the the man is moving much slower than he actually
is. Now imagine you are standing outside and observe t he same man walking next to the train. It will appear t he the man is walking
much faster than it seemed when you were inside the train.
Now, imagine you are on a boat, and you see a man walk ing from one end of the deck to the other. The velo city that you observe
the man walking in will be the same velocity that he would be walking in if you both were on land. Now imagine that you are on
land and see the man on the moving boat, walking fro m one end of the deck to another. It will now appear th at the man is walking
much faster than it appeared when you were on the boat with h im.
Why is this? The concept of relative velocity has t o do with your frame of reference. When you were on th e train, your frame of
reference was moving in the same direction that the man was walking, so it appeared that he was walking slower. But once you
were off the train, you were in a stationary frame of r eference, so you were able to observe him moving at hi s actual speed. When
you were on the boat, you were in a moving frame of re ference, but so was the object you were observing, so yo u were able to
observe the man walking at his actual velocity. Once y ou were back on land, you were in a stationary frame of reference, but the
man was not, so the velocity you saw was his relative veloci ty.
Key Points
In order to find the velocity of an object B that is mo ving on object A that is observed by an observer that i s not moving, add the
velocity of B and A together.
Velocity is a vector quantity, so the relationships betwe en the magnitude, direction, x- axis component and y- axis component
are important.
These vector components can be added analytically or gra phically.
In order to calculate the magnitude and direction, you must know the values of the axis components (either and, or and
) and to calculate the component values, you must know the magnitude and direction.
Relative velocity is the velocity of an object in motion being observed from a frame of reference that is either al so in motion or
stationary.
If the frame of reference is moving in the same direction as the object being observed, it will appear as though the ob ject is
moving slower than it actually is.
If the object being observed is on a moving surface, the veloci ty observed from that surface will be less than the velocit y
observed from a stationary surface looking onto the moving su rface.
In Galileo’s example, the observed velocity of the fly, u u, measured in reference to the velocity of the boat,. In or der to find
the velocity of the fly with respect to the shore, S, he ha d to add the velocity of the boat to the observed velocity of t he fly:
Key Terms
relative: Expressed in relation to another item, rather than in co mplete form.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Velocity-addition formula. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity-addition_formula. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Addition of Velocities. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42045/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
relative. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/relative. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

3.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14448Vector Addition and Scaling. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Velocity-addition formula. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity-addition_formula.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Relative velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Relative_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Relative Velocity in Two Dimensions. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14030/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
relative. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/relative. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Vector Addition and Scaling. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 3.4: Multiple Velocities is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
30: Nuclear Physics and Radioactivity
30: Nuclear Physics and Radioactivity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear PhysicsTopic hierarchy

30.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624230.1: The Nucleus
Explain relationship between nuclear radius, nuclear densi ty, and nuclear size.
Nuclear size is defined by nuclear radius, also called rms charge radius. It can be measured by the scatterin g of electrons by the
nucleus and also inferred from the effects of finite nucl ear size on electron energy levels as measured in atomic spectra.
The problem of defining a radius for the atomic nuc leus is similar to the problem of atomic radius, in t hat neither atoms nor their
nuclei have definite boundaries. However, the nucleus can be modelled as a sphere of positive charge for the interpretation of
electron scattering experiments: because there is no definite boundary to the nucleus, the electrons “se e” a range of cross-sections,
for which a mean can be taken. The qualification of “ rms” (for “root mean square”) arises because it is th e nuclear cross-section,
proportional to the square of the radius, which is determin ing for electron scattering.
The first estimate of a nuclear charge radius was mad e by Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden in 1909, under the d irection of Ernest
Rutherford at the Physical Laboratories of the Univers ity of Manchester, UK. The famous Rutherford gold foil experiment involved
the scattering of α-particles by gold foil, with some of the particles being scattered through angles of more than 90°, that is coming
back to the same side of the foil as the α-source, a s shown in Figure 1. Rutherford was able to put an uppe r limit on the radius of
the gold nucleus of 34 femtometers (fm).
Later studies found an empirical relation between th e charge radius and the mass number,, for heavier n uclei
where is an empirical constant of 1.2–1.5 fm. This gives a charge radius for the gold nucleus (A=197A=197) of about 7.5
fm.
Nuclear density is the density of the nucleus of an at om, averaging about. The nuclear density for a typ ical nucleus
can be approximately calculated from the size of the nucleus:
Nuclear Stability
The stability of an atom depends on the ratio and nu mber of protons and neutrons, which may represent clo sed and filled quantum
shells.
Explain the relationship between the stability of an ato m and its atomic structure.
The stability of an atom depends on the ratio of it s protons to its neutrons, as well as on whether it con tains a “magic number” of
neutrons or protons that would represent closed and f illed quantum shells. These quantum shells correspond t o energy levels within
the shell model of the nucleus. Filled shells, such as the filled shell of 50 protons in the element tin, co nfers unusual stability on the
nuclide. Of the 254 known stable nuclides, only four have b oth an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutro ns:
hydrogen-2 (deuterium)
lithium-6
boron-10
nitrogen-14
Also, only four naturally occurring, radioactive odd-od d nuclides have a half-life greater than a billion years:
potassium-40
vanadium-50
lanthanum-138
tantalum-180mlearning objectives
learning objectives

30.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16242
Alpha Decay: Alpha decay is one type of radioactive decay. An atomic nuc leus emits an alpha particle and thereby transforms
(“decays”) into an atom with a mass number smaller by four and an atomic number smaller by two. Many other types of d ecay are
possible.
Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay because the decay products are even-even and therefore more
strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects.
An atom with an unstable nucleus, called a radionuclide, is characterized by excess energy available either for a newly created
radiation particle within the nucleus or via interna l conversion. During this process, the radionuclide i s said to undergo radioactive
decay. Radioactive decay results in the emission of ga mma rays and/or subatomic particles such as alpha or beta particles, as shown
in. These emissions constitute ionizing radiation. Radionu clides occur naturally but can also be produced artifici ally.
All elements form a number of radionuclides, although the half-lives of many are so short that they are not observed in nature.
Even the lightest element, hydrogen, has a well-known radioisotope: tritium. The heaviest elements (heavi er than bismuth) exist
only as radionuclides. For every chemical element, ma ny radioisotopes that do not occur in nature (due t o short half-lives or the
lack of a natural production source) have been produced artificially.
Binding Energy and Nuclear Forces
Nuclear force is the force that is responsible for binding o f protons and neutrons into atomic nuclei.
Explain how nuclear force varies with distance.
The nuclear force is the force between two or more co mponent parts of an atomic nuclei. The component pa rts are neutrons and
protons, which collectively are called nucleons. Nucle ar force is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons into atomic
nuclei.
Drawing of Atomic Nucleus: A model of the atomic nucleus showing it as a compact bundle of the two types of nucleons: protons
(red) and neutrons (blue).
To disassemble a nucleus into unbound protons and neut rons would require working against the nuclear force. C onversely, energy
is released when a nucleus is created from free nucl eons or other nuclei—known as the nuclear binding en ergy. The binding energy
of nuclei is always a positive number, since all nuclei require net energy to separate into individual pro tons and neutrons. Because
of mass-energy equivalence (i.e., Einstein’s famous fo rmula), releasing this energy causes the mass of the nucleus to be
lower than the total mass of the individual nucleons (leading to “mass deficit”). Binding energy is the e nergy used in nuclear power
plants and nuclear weapons.learning objectives

30.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16242The nuclear force is powerfully attractive between nuc leons at distances of about 1 femtometer (fm) between their centers, but
rapidly decreases to relative insignificance at dis tances beyond about 2.5 fm. At very short distances (less than 0.7 fm) it becomes
repulsive; it is responsible for the physical size of nucle i since the nucleons can come no closer than the force a llows.
The nuclear force is now understood as a residual eff ect of an even more powerful “strong force” or strong interaction. It is the
attractive force that binds together particles known as quarks (to form the nucleons themselves). This mor e powerful force is
mediated by particles called gluons. Gluons hold quark s together with a force like that of an electric char ge (but of far greater
power).
The nuclear forces arising between nucleons are now se en as analogous to the forces in chemistry between neu tral atoms or
molecules (called London forces). Such forces between atoms are much weaker than the attractive electrica l forces that hold
together the atoms themselves (i.e., that bind electr ons to the nucleus), and their range between atoms is sh orter because they arise
from a small separation of charges inside the neutral ato m.
Similarly, even though nucleons are made of quarks i n combinations which cancel most gluon forces (they a re “color neutral”),
some combinations of quarks and gluons leak away from nucleons in the form of short-range nuclear force f ields that extend from
one nucleon to another nucleon in close proximity. These nuclear forces are very weak compared to direct gluon forces (“color
forces” or “strong forces”) inside nucleons, and the nuclear forces extend over only a few nuclear diamete rs, falling exponentially
with distance. Nevertheless, they are strong enough to bind neutrons and protons over short distances, as wel l as overcome the
electrical repulsion between protons in the nucleus. Like London forces, nuclear forces also stop being attractive, and become
repulsive when nucleons are brought too close together.
Key Points
The first estimate of a nuclear charge radius was made by Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden in 1909, under the direction of
Ernest Rutherford, in the gold foil experiment that invol ved the scattering of α-particles by gold foil, as shown in Figure 1.
An empirical relation exists between the charge radius and the mass number,, for heavier nuclei (): where is an
empirical constant of 1.2–1.5 fm.
The nuclear density for a typical nucleus can be appro ximately calculated from the size of the nucleus:
Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay because the decay products are even-even and th erefore
more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects.
An atom with an unstable nucleus is characterized by exces s energy available either for a newly created radiation p article within
the nucleus or via internal conversion.
All elements form a number of radionuclides, although the h alf-lives of many are so short that they are not observed in n ature.
The nuclear force is powerfully attractive at distances of about 1 femtometer (fm), rapidly decreases to insignif icance at
distances beyond about 2.5 fm, and becomes repulsive at very short distances less than 0.7 fm.
The nuclear force is a residual effect of the a strong int eraction that binds together particles called quarks into nucleons.
The binding energy of nuclei is always a positive number while the mass of an atom ‘s nucleus is always less than the su m of
the individual masses of the constituent protons and ne utrons when separated.
Key Terms
α-particle: two protons and two neutrons bound together into a particle identical to a helium nucleus
atomic spectra: emission or absorption lines formed when an electron make s a transition from one energy level of an atom to
another
nucleus: the massive, positively charged central part of an atom, m ade up of protons and neutrons
nuclide: A nuclide (from “nucleus”) is an atomic species chara cterized by the specific constitution of its nucleus — i.e., by its
number of protons (), its number of neutrons (), and its nuc lear energy state.
radionuclide: A radionuclide is an atom with an unstable nucleus, cha racterized by excess energy available to be imparted
either to a newly created radiation particle within the nucle us or via internal conversion.
radioactive decay: any of several processes by which unstable nuclei emit s ubatomic particles and/or ionizing radiation and
disintegrate into one or more smaller nuclei
nucleus: the massive, positively charged central part of an atom, m ade up of protons and neutrons

30.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16242quark: In the Standard Model, an elementary subatomic particle t hat forms matter. Quarks are never found alone in nature, b ut
combine to form hadrons, such as protons and neutrons.
gluon: A massless gauge boson that binds quarks together to for m baryons, mesons and other hadrons; it is associated with the
strong nuclear force.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Nuclear size. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_size. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear density. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_density. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/?-particle. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/de...atomic-spectra. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...esults.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radioactive decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radioactive_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Unstable isotope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Unstable_isotope. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nuclide. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nuclide. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radionuclide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/radionuclide. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
radioactive decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radioactive_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...esults.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Binding energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Binding_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear binding energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_binding_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
nucleus. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleus. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
gluon. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gluon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
quark. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quark. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...esults.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...rawing.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

30.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624230.1: The Nucleus is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

30.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624330.2: Radioactivity
Name major sources of terrestrial radiation.
Radioactive material is found throughout nature. Dete ctable amounts occur naturally in soil, rocks, water, a ir, and vegetation. From
these sources it can be inhaled and ingested into the body. In addition to this internal exposure, humans a lso receive external
exposure from radioactive materials that remain out side the body and from cosmic radiation from space. T he worldwide average
natural dose to humans is about 2.4 millisieverts (mSv) per year. This is four times more than the worldwide av erage artificial
radiation exposure, which in the year 2008 amounted to about 0.6 mSv per year. In some wealthier countrie s, such as the US and
Japan, artificial exposure is, on average, greater th an the natural exposure, due to greater access to med ical imaging. In Europe, the
average natural background exposure by country rang es from under 2 mSv annually in the United Kingdom to more than 7 mSv
annually in Finland, as shown in.
Natural Radiation Atlas of Europe: Bar chart of average annual dosages from natural radiati on sources for major European
countries
Natural Background Radiation
The biggest source of natural background radiation i s airborne radon, a radioactive gas that emanates fro m the ground. Radon and
its isotopes, parent radionuclides, and decay products a ll contribute to an average inhaled dose of 1.26 mSv /a. Radon is unevenly
distributed and variable with weather, such that much h igher doses occur in certain areas of the world. In the se areas it can
represent a significant health hazard. Concentrations over 500 times higher than the world average have be en found inside
buildings in Scandinavia, the United States, Iran, and t he Czech Republic. Radon is a decay product of urani um, which is relatively
common in the Earth’s crust but more concentrated in ore-bearing rocks scattered around the world. Radon seeps out of these ores
into the atmosphere or into ground water; it can also infiltrate into buildings. It can be inhaled into the lungs, along with its decay
products, where it will reside for a period of time after e xposure.
Radiation from Outer Space
In addition, the earth, and all living things on it, are constantly bombarded by radiation from outer sp ace. This radiation primarily
consists of positively charged ions ranging from pr otons to iron and larger nuclei derived from source s outside of our solar system.
This radiation interacts with atoms in the atmosphere to create an air shower of secondary radiation, includin g x-rays, muons,
protons, alpha particles, pions, electrons, and neut rons. The immediate dose from cosmic radiation is la rgely from muons, neutrons,
and electrons, and this dose varies in different part s of the world based on the geomagnetic field and alti tude. This radiation is
much more intense in the upper troposphere (around 10 km in altitude) and is therefore of particular c oncern for airline crews and
frequent passengers, who spend many hours per year in this environment. An airline crew typically gets an e xtra dose on the order
of 2.2 mSv (220 mrem) per year.Learning objectives

30.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Terrestrial Radiation
Terrestrial radiation only includes sources that re main external to the body. The major radionuclides of concern are potassium,
uranium, and thorium and their decay products. Some of these decay products, like radium and radon, are int ensely radioactive but
occur in low concentrations. Most of these sources ha ve been decreasing, due to radioactive decay since t he formation of the earth,
because there is no significant source of replaceme nt. Because of this, the present activity on Earth fro m uranium-238 is only half
as much as it originally was because of its 4.5-billion -year half-life. Potassium-40 (with a half-life of 1. 25 billion years) is at about
eight percent of its original activity. However, the ef fects on humans of the actual diminishment (due to decay) of these isotopes is
minimal. This is because humans evolved too recently for the difference in activity over a fraction of a hal f-life to be significant.
Put another way, human history is so short in compariso n to a half-life of a billion years that the activit y of these long-lived
isotopes has been effectively constant throughout our ti me on this planet.
Many shorter-half-life and therefore more intensely r adioactive isotopes have not decayed out of the terr estrial environment
because they are still being produced. Examples of t hese are radium-226 (a decay product of uranium-238) and radon-222 (a decay
product of radium-226).
Radiation Detection
A radiation detector is a device used to detect, track, or identify high-energy particles.
Explain difference between major types of radiation dete ctors.
A radiation detector is a device used to detect, tra ck, or identify high- energy particles, such as those produced by nuclear decay,
cosmic radiation, and reactions in a particle accel erator. Modern detectors are also used as calorimeters to measure the energy of
detected radiation. They may be also used to measure other attributes, such as momentum, spin, and charge of the particles.
Different types of radiation detectors exist; gaseou s ionization detectors, semiconductor detectors, and scintillation detectors are the
most common.
Different Types of Radiation Detectors: different types of radiation detectors (counters)
Gaseous Ionization Detectors
Gaseous ionization detectors use the ionizing effect of radiation upon gas-filled sensors. If a particle h as enough energy to ionize a
gas atom or molecule, the resulting electrons and ions ca use a current flow, which can be measured.
Semiconductor Detectors
A semiconductor detector uses a semiconductor (usua lly silicon or germanium) to detect traversing char ged particles or the
absorption of photons. When these detectors’ sensiti ve structures are based on single diodes, they are c alled semiconductor diode
detectors. When they contain many diodes with different functions, the more general term “semiconductor detec tor” is used.Learning objectives

30.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Semiconductor detectors have had various application s in recent decades, in particular in gamma and x-r ay spectrometry and as
particle detectors.
Scintillation Detectors
A scintillation detector is created by coupling a sc intillator — a material that exhibits luminescence when excited by ionizing
radiation — to an electronic light sensor, such as a photomultiplier tube (PMT) or a photodiode. PMTs absor b the light emitted by
the scintillator and re-emit it in the form of elec trons via the photoelectric effect. The subsequent mu ltiplication of those electrons
(sometimes called photo-electrons) results in an ele ctrical pulse, which can then be analyzed. The pulse yields meaningful
information about the particle that originally struck the scintillator.
Scintillators are used by the American government, pa rticularly Homeland Security, as radiation detectors. Sci ntillators can also be
used in neutron and high-energy particle physics exp eriments, new energy resource exploration, x-ray secu rity, nuclear cameras,
computed tomography, and gas exploration. Other appli cations of scintillators include CT scanners and gamm a cameras in medical
diagnostics, screens in computer monitors, and television sets.
Radioactive Decay Series: Introduction
Radioactive decay series describe the decay of differen t discrete radioactive decay products as a chained seri es of transformations.
Describe importance of radioactive decay series for deca y process.
Radioactive decay series, or decay chains, describe the radioactive decay of different discrete radioactiv e decay products as a
chained series of transformations. Most radioactive elements do not decay directly to a stable state; ra ther, they undergo a series of
decays until eventually a stable isotope is reached.
Radioactive Decay Series Diagram: This diagram provides examples of four decay series: th orium (in blue), radium (in red),
actinium (in green), and neptunium (in purple).
Decay stages are referred to by their relationship to previous or subsequent stages. A parent isotope is one that undergoes decay to
form a daughter isotope. The daughter isotope may be stable, or it may itself decay to form a daughter i sotope of its own. The
daughter of a daughter isotope is sometimes called a gr anddaughter isotope.
The time it takes for a single parent atom to decay t o an atom of its daughter isotope can vary widely, not only for different parentdaughter chains, but also for identical pairings of parent and daughter isotopes. While the decay of a single atom occurs
spontaneously, the decay of an initial population of identical atoms over time, tt, follows a decaying ex ponential distribution,
e−te−t, where λλis called the decay constant. Becaus e of this exponential nature, one of the properties of an isotope is its half-life,
the time by which half of an initial number of ident ical parent radioisotopes have decayed to their dau ghters. Half-lives have been
determined in laboratories for thousands of radioisoto pes (radionuclides). These half-lives can range from nearly nonexistent spans
of time to as much as years or more.
The intermediate stages often emit more radioactivit y than the original radioisotope. When equilibrium i s achieved, a
granddaughter isotope is present in proportion to its half-life. But, since its activity is inversely propor tional to its half-life, any
nuclide in the decay chain finally contributes as m uch as the head of the chain. For example, natural ura nium is not significantly
radioactive, but pitchblende, a uranium ore, is 13 ti mes more radioactive because of the radium and othe r daughter isotopes itLearning objectives

30.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243contains. Not only are unstable radium isotopes signifi cant radioactivity emitters, but as the next stage i n the decay chain they also
generate radon, a heavy, inert, naturally occurring r adioactive gas. Rock containing thorium and/or uraniu m (such as some granites)
emits radon gas, which can accumulate in enclosed pla ces such as basements or underground mines. Radon exp osure is considered
the leading cause of lung cancer in non-smokers.
Alpha Decay
In alpha decay an atomic nucleus emits an alpha part icle and transforms into an atom with smaller mass (b y four) and atomic
number (by two).
Describe the process, penetration power, and effects of a lpha radiation
Alpha decay is a type of radioactive decay in which a n atomic nucleus emits an alpha particle that consists of two protons and two
neutrons, as shown in. As the result of this process, the parent atom transforms (“decays”) into a new atom with a mass number
smaller by four and an atomic number smaller by two.
Alpha Decay: Alpha decay is one type of radioactive decay. An atomic nuc leus emits an alpha particle and thereby transforms
(“decays”) into an atom with a mass number smaller by four and an atomic number smaller by two. Many other types of d ecay are
possible.
For example:
Because an alpha particle is the same as a helium-4 nu cleus, which has mass number 4 and atomic number 2, thi s can also be
written as:
The alpha particle also has charge +2, but the charg e is usually not written in nuclear equations, which de scribe nuclear reactions
without considering the electrons. This convention is not me ant to imply that the nuclei necessarily occur in neutr al atoms.
Alpha decay is by far the most common form of cluste r decay, in which the parent atom ejects a defined d aughter collection of
nucleons, leaving another defined product behind (i n nuclear fission, a number of different pairs of da ughters of approximately
equal size are formed). Alpha decay is the most commo n cluster decay because of the combined extremely h igh binding energy and
relatively small mass of the helium-4 product nucleus (th e alpha particle).
Alpha decay typically occurs in the heaviest nuclide s. In theory it can occur only in nuclei somewhat heav ier than nickel (element
28), in which overall binding energy per nucleon is no longer a minimum and the nuclides are therefore unstable toward
spontaneous fission-type processes. The lightest known a lpha emitters are the lightest isotopes (mass numbe rs 106-110) of
tellurium (element 52).
Alpha particles have a typical kinetic energy of 5 MeV (approximately 0.13 percent of their total energy, i.e., 110 TJ/kg) and a
speed of 15,000 km/s. This corresponds to a speed of ar ound 0.05 c. There is surprisingly small variation in t his energy, due to the
heavy dependence of the half-life of this process on the energy produced.Learning objectives

30.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Because of their relatively large mass, +2 electric charge, and relatively low velocity, alpha particles are very likely to interact with
other atoms and lose their energy, so their forward motio n is effectively stopped within a few centimeters of air.
Most of the helium produced on Earth (approximately 9 9 percent of it) is the result of the alpha decay of underground deposits of
minerals containing uranium or thorium. The helium is bro ught to the surface as a byproduct of natural gas producti on.
Beta Decay
Beta decay is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta particle (an electron or a positron) is emitted from an a tomic nucleus.
Explain difference between beta minus and beta plus dec ays.
Beta decay is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta particle (an electron or a positron) is emitt ed from an atomic nucleus, as
shown in. Beta decay is a process that allows the atom to obtai n the optimal ratio of protons and neutrons.
Beta Decay: β decay in an atomic nucleus (the accompanying antineut rino is omitted). The inset shows beta decay of a free ne utron
There are two types of beta decay. Beta minus (β) lead s to an electron emission (e); beta plus (β+) leads t o a positron emission
(e). In electron emission an electron antineutrino i s also emitted, while positron emission is accompanied by an electron neutrino.
Beta decay is mediated by the weak force.
Emitted beta particles have a continuous kinetic ene rgy spectrum, ranging from 0 to the maximal availab le energy (Q), that depends
on the parent and daughter nuclear states that part icipate in the decay. The continuous energy spectra o f beta particles occur
because Q is shared between a beta particle and a neu trino. A typical Q is around 1 MeV, but it can range f rom a few keV to a
several tens of MeV. Since the rest mass energy of the electron is 511 keV, the most energetic beta partic les are ultrarelativistic,
with speeds very close to the speed of light.
Since the proton and neutron are part of an atomic n ucleus, beta decay processes result in transmutatio n of one chemical element
into another. For example:
Beta decay does not change the number of nucleons, A, in the nucleus; it changes only its charge, Z. Therefore the set of all
nuclides with the same A can be introduced; these isobaric nuclides may turn in to each other via beta decay.
A beta-stable nucleus may undergo other kinds of radi oactive decay (for example, alpha decay). In nature, most isotopes are betastable, but there exist a few exceptions with half-lives so long that they have not had enough time to decay since the moment of
their nucleosynthesis. One example is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide 40 K, which undergoes both types o f beta decay with a
half-life of 1.277 ·10 years.Learning objectives

30.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Beta Decay 1/2Beta Decay 1/2
Beta Decay 1/2: In this video I introduce Beta decay and discuss it fr om an basic level to a perhaps second or third year Univers ity
level.

30.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Beta Decay 2/2Beta Decay 2/2
Beta Decay 2/2: In this video I introduce Beta decay and discuss it fr om an basic level to a perhaps second or third year Univers ity
level.
Gamma Decay
Gamma decay is a process of emission of gamma rays th at accompanies other forms of radioactive decay, such as alpha and beta
decay.
Explain relationship between gamma decay and other forms o f nuclear decay.
Gamma radiation, also known as gamma rays and denoted a s γγ, is electromagnetic radiation of high frequency a nd therefore high
energy. Gamma rays typically have frequencies above 10 exahertz (>1019>1019 Hz) and therefore have energ ies above 100 keV
and wavelengths less than 10 picometers (less than the diameter of an atom). However, this is not a strict definition; rather, it is a
rule-of-thumb description for natural processes. Gam ma rays from radioactive decay are defined as gamma rays no matter what
their energy, so there is no lower limit to gamma ene rgy derived from radioactive decay. Gamma decay comm only produces
energies of a few hundred keV and usually less than 10 MeV.
Learning objectives

30.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Cobalt-60 Decay Scheme: Path of decay of Co-60 to Ni-60. Excited levels for Ni-60 th at drop to ground state via emission of
gamma rays are indicated
Gamma decay accompanies other forms of decay, such as alpha and beta decay; gamma rays are produced after the other types of
decay occur. When a nucleus emits an α or β particle, the daughter nucleus is usually left in an excited state. It can then move to a
lower energy state by emitting a gamma ray, in much t he same way that an atomic electron can jump to a lowe r energy state by
emitting a photon. For example, cobalt-60 decays to e xcited nickel-60 by beta decay through emission of an electron of 0.31 MeV.
Next, the excited nickel-60 drops down to the ground st ate by emitting two gamma rays in succession (1.17 MeV, then 1.33 MeV),
as shown in. Emission of a gamma ray from an excited nuclear state typically requires only 10−1210−12 s econds: it is nearly
instantaneous. Gamma decay from excited states may als o follow nuclear reactions such as neutron capture, nuclear fission, or
nuclear fusion.
In certain cases, the excited nuclear state following the emission of a beta particle may be more stable than average; in these cases
it is termed a metastable excited state if its decay is 100 to 1000 times longer than the average 10−121 0−12 seconds. Such nuclei
have half-lives that are easily measurable; these are termed nuclear isomers. Some nuclear isomers are abl e to stay in their excited
state for minutes, hours, or days, or occasionally fa r longer, before emitting a gamma ray. This phenomeno n is called isomeric
transition. The process of isomeric transition is the refore similar to any gamma emission; it differs onl y in that it involves the
intermediate metastable excited states of the nuclei.
Half-Life and Rate of Decay; Carbon-14 Dating
Carbon-14 dating is a radiometric dating method that uses the radioisotope carbon-14 (14C) to estimate the age of o bject.
Identify the age of materials that can be approximately de termined using radiocarbon dating
Radiocarbon dating (usually referred to simply as ca rbon-14 dating) is a radiometric dating method. It u ses the naturally occurring
radioisotope carbon-14 (14C) to estimate the age of car bon-bearing materials up to about 58,000 to 62,000 year s old.
Carbon has two stable, nonradioactive isotopes: carbo n-12 (12C) and carbon-13 (13C). There are also trace amounts of the unstable
radioisotope carbon-14 (14C) on Earth. Carbon-14 has a relatively short half-life of 5,730 years, meaning that the fraction of
carbon-14 in a sample is halved over the course of 5,730 years due to radioactive decay to nitrogen-14. Th e carbon-14 isotope
would vanish from Earth’s atmosphere in less than a mi llion years were it not for the constant influx of co smic rays interacting with
molecules of nitrogen (N) and single nitrogen atoms (N) in the stratosphere. Both processes of formation and decay of carbon-14
are shown in.Learning objectives

30.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Formation and Decay of Carbon-14: Diagram of the formation of carbon-14 (1), the decay of carbon-14 (2), and equations
describing the carbon-12:carbon-14 ratio in living and d ead organisms
When plants fix atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO) int o organic compounds during photosynthesis, the resulti ng fraction of the
isotope 14C in the plant tissue will match the fracti on of the isotope in the atmosphere. After plants die o r are consumed by other
organisms, the incorporation of all carbon isotopes, in cluding 14C, stops. Thereafter, the concentration (f raction) of 14C declines at
a fixed exponential rate due to the radioactive dec ay of 14C. (An equation describing this process is sho wn in.) Comparing the
remaining 14C fraction of a sample to that expected from atmospheric 14C allows us to estimate the age of the sample.
Raw (i.e., uncalibrated) radiocarbon ages are usually reported in radiocarbon years “Before Present” (BP), with “present” defined
as CE 1950. Such raw ages can be calibrated to give ca lendar dates. One of the most frequent uses of radioca rbon dating is to
estimate the age of organic remains from archaeological sites.
The technique of radiocarbon dating was developed by Willard Libby and his colleagues at the University of Chicago in 1949.
Emilio Segrè asserted in his autobiography that Enric o Fermi suggested the concept to Libby at a seminar in Chicago that year.
Libby estimated that the steady-state radioactivity c oncentration of exchangeable carbon-14 would be abou t 14 disintegrations per
minute (dpm) per gram. In 1960, Libby was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for this work. He demonstrated t he accuracy of
radiocarbon dating by accurately estimating the age of wood from a series of samples for which the age was kn own, including an
ancient Egyptian royal barge dating from 1850 BCE.2

30.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Half-life (2 of 16) An ExplanationHalf-life (2 of 16) An Explanation
Half-life: Describes radioactive half life and how to do some simple cal culations using half life.
Calculations Involving Half-Life and Decay-Rates
The half-life of a radionuclide is the time taken for ha lf the radionuclide’s atoms to decay.
Explain what is a half-life of a radionuclide.
The half-life of a radionuclide is the time taken f or half of the radionuclide’s atoms to decay. Taking λλ to be the decay rate
(number of disintegrations per unit time), and ττ the av erage lifetime of an atom before it decays, we have:
The half-life is related to the decay constant by substi tuting the condition and solving for:
A half-life must not be thought of as the time require d for exactly half of the atoms to decay.
Learning objectives

30.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Radioactive decay simulation: A simulation of many identical atoms undergoing radi oactive decay, starting with four atoms (left)
and 400 atoms (right). The number at the top indicates how many half-lives have elapsed
The following figure shows a simulation of many identic al atoms undergoing radioactive decay. Note that afte r one half-life there
are not exactly one-half of the atoms remaining; the re are only approximately one-half left because of the random variation in th e
process. However, with more atoms (the boxes on the right), the overall decay is smoother and less random-look ing than with
fewer atoms (the boxes on the left), in accordance with the law of large numbers.
The relationship between the half-life and the decay constant shows that highly radioactive substances are q uickly spent while
those that radiate weakly endure longer. Half-lives o f known radionuclides vary widely, from more than 10 years, such as for the
very nearly stable nuclide 209 Bi, to 10 seconds for high ly unstable ones.
The factor of ln(2) in the above equations results fr om the fact that the concept of “half-life” is mere ly a way of selecting a different
base other than the natural base e for the lifetime expression. The time constant τis the e-life, the time until only 1/ e remains —
about 36.8 percent, rather than the 50 percent in t he half-life of a radionuclide. Therefore, τis longer than t. The following
equation can be shown to be valid:
Since radioactive decay is exponential with a constant probability, each process could just as easily be d escribed with a different
constant time period that (for example) gave its 1/ 3-life (how long until only 1/3 is left), or its 1/10 -life (how long until only 1/10 is
left), and so on. Therefore, the choice of τand t for marker-times is only for convenience and for the sake of uploading
convention. These marker-times reflect a fundamental principle only in that they show that the same propo rtion of a given
radioactive substance will decay over any time period you c hoose.
Mathematically, the nth life for the above situation would be found by the same process shown above — by setting and
substituting into the decay solution, to obtain:19
−23
-1

30.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243
Joy phy sics probs 27- Half-lifeJoy phy sics probs 27- Half-life
Half-life: Part of a series of videos on physics problem-solving. T he problems are taken from “The Joy of Physics. ” This one d eals
with radioactive half-life. The viewer is urged to pause t he video at the problem statement and work the problem b efore watching
the rest of the video.
Key Points
The biggest source of natural background radiation is ai rborne radon, a radioactive gas that emanates from the grou nd.
The earth is constantly bombarded by radiation from out er space that consists of positively charged ions ranging fr om protons
to iron and larger nuclei from sources outside of our solar sy stem.
Terrestrial radiation includes sources that remain ext ernal to the body. The major radionuclides of concern are potassium,
uranium, and thorium and their decay products.
Gaseous ionization detectors use the ionizing effect of r adiation upon gas-filled sensors.
A semiconductor detector uses a semiconductor (usually si licon or germanium) to detect traversing charged particl es or the
absorption of photons.
A scintillation detector is created by coupling a scin tillator to an electronic light sensor.
Most radioactive elements do not decay directly to a sta ble state; rather, they undergo a series of decays until ev entually a stable
isotope is reached.
Half-lives of radioisotopes range from nearly nonexistent spans of time to as much as 1019 years or more.
The intermediate stages of radioactive decay series often e mit more radioactivity than the original radioisotope.
An alpha particle is the same as a helium-4 nucleus, which has m ass number 4 and atomic number 2.
Because of their relatively large mass, +2 electric char ge, and relatively low velocity, alpha particles are ver y likely to interact
with other atoms and lose their energy, so their forward motion is effectively stopped within a few centimeters of air.

30.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Most of the helium produced on Earth (approximately 99 per cent of it) is the result of the alpha decay of undergrou nd deposits
of minerals containing uranium or thorium.
There are two types of beta decay: beta minus, which leads to an electron emission, and beta plus, which leads to a positron
emission.
Beta decay allows the atom to obtain the optimal ratio o f protons and neutrons.
Beta decay processes transmute one chemical element into another.
Gamma decay accompanies other forms of decay, such as alpha and beta decay; gamma rays are produced after the other typ es
of decay occur.
Although emission of gamma ray is a nearly instantaneous pro cess, it can involve intermediate metastable excited sta tes of the
nuclei.
Gamma rays are generally the most energetic form of elect romagnetic radiation.
Carbon-14 dating can be used to estimate the age of carbo n-bearing materials up to about 58,000 to 62,000 years old.
The carbon-14 isotope would vanish from Earth’s atmosph ere in less than a million years were it not for the constant influx of
cosmic rays interacting with atmospheric nitrogen.
One of the most frequent uses of radiocarbon dating is to e stimate the age of organic remains from archaeological si tes.
The half-life is related to the decay constant as follows:.
The relationship between the half-life and the decay c onstant shows that highly radioactive substances are quickly spent while
those that radiate weakly endure longer.
Half-lives of known radionuclides vary widely, from more than 10 years, such as for the very nearly stable nuclide 2 09 Bi, to
10 seconds for highly unstable ones.
Key Terms
radionuclide: A radionuclide is an atom with an unstable nucleus, cha racterized by excess energy available to be imparted
either to a newly created radiation particle within the nucle us or via internal conversion.
radon: a radioactive chemical element (symbol Rn, formerly Ro) with atomic number 86; one of the noble gases
sievert: in the International System of Units, the derived unit of rad iation dose; the dose received in one hour at a distance o f 1
cm from a point source of 1 mg of radium in a 0.5 mm thick p latinum enclosure; symbol: Sv
scintillator: any substance that glows under the action of photons or othe r high-energy particles
diode: an electronic device that allows current to flow in one dir ection only; a valve
semiconductor: A substance with electrical properties intermediate between a good conductor and a good insulator.
half-life: the time required for half of the nuclei in a sample of a specific isotope to undergo radioactive decay
radioisotope: a radioactive isotope of an element
decay: to change by undergoing fission, by emitting radiation, or by capturing or losing one or more electrons
alpha particle: A positively charged nucleus of a helium-4 atom (consi sting of two protons and two neutrons), emitted as a
consequence of radioactivity; α-particle.
radioactive decay: any of several processes by which unstable nuclei emit s ubatomic particles and/or ionizing radiation and
disintegrate into one or more smaller nuclei
beta decay: a nuclear reaction in which a beta particle (electron or p ositron) is emitted
positron: The antimatter equivalent of an electron, having th e same mass but a positive charge.
transmutation: the transformation of one element into another by a nu clear reaction
electromagnetic radiation: radiation (quantized as photons) consisting of oscillat ing electric and magnetic fields oriented
perpendicularly to each other, moving through space
gamma ray: A very high frequency (and therefore very high energy) electromagnetic radiation emitted as a consequence of
radioactivity.
radiometric dating: Radiometric dating is a technique used to date objects b ased on a comparison between the observed
abundance of a naturally occurring radioactive isotop e and its decay products using known decay rates.
carbon-14: carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon with a nu cleus containing 6 protons and 8 neutrons.
radionuclide: A radionuclide is an atom with an unstable nucleus, cha racterized by excess energy available to be imparted
either to a newly created radiation particle within the nucle us or via internal conversion.19
-23

30.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Natural radioactivity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_radioactivity. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radon. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radionuclide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/radionuclide. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
sievert. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sievert. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Gaseous ionization detector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaseous...ation_detector. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Scintillation detector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scintillation_detector. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Semiconductor detector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_detector. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiation detector. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation_detector. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
scintillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scintillator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
diode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diode. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
semiconductor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/semiconductor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Radioactive decay series. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radioactive_decay_series. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decay. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
half-life. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/half-life. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radioisotope. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radioisotope. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...iagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
alpha particle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/alpha_particle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Alpha decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpha_decay. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
radioactive decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radioactive_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

30.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...iagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_decay. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_decay. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transmutation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transmutation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
positron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/positron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
beta decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/beta_decay. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...iagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 2/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r2Q6xdsGYfE. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 1/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Et47PE288U. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Gamma decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_d...ray_production. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
gamma ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electr...etic_radiation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...iagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 2/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r2Q6xdsGYfE. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

30.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Beta Decay 1/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Et47PE288U. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...Scheme.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Carbon-14. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbon-14. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Radiocarbon dating. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiocarbon_dating. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
radiometric dating. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/radiometric%20dating. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radioisotope. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radioisotope. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
carbon-14. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/carbon-14. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._summary_3.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...iagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 2/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r2Q6xdsGYfE. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 1/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Et47PE288U. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...Scheme.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Half-life. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4UPmy_XofMo. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Radioactive decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radioac...ay%23Half-life. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Decay rate. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Decay_rate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Half-life. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Half-life. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
half-life. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/half-life. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
radionuclide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/radionuclide. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._of_Europe.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c0/Detectors_summary_ 3.png/800px-Detectors_summary_3.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/62/Radioactive_decay_c hains_diagram.svg/800pxRadioactive_decay_chains_diagram.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

30.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16243Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Alpha_Decay.svg/250pxAlpha_Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Beta Decay 2/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r2Q6xdsGYfE. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._Decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Beta Decay 1/2. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Et47PE288U. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...Scheme.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._decay.svg.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Half-life. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4UPmy_XofMo. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Half-life. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Half-life. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Half-life. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zYNpxqkRYlM. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
30.2: Radioactivity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

30.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624430.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
Identify factors that affect the tunneling probability
Imagine throwing a ball at a wall and having it disap pear the instant before it makes contact and appear on the other side. The wall
remains intact; the ball did not break through it. Believe it or not, there is a finite (if extremely small) probability that this event
would occur. This phenomenon is called quantum tunnelin g.
While the possibility of tunneling is essentially ig norable at macroscopic levels, it occurs regularly on the nanoscale level.
Consider, for example, a p-orbital in an atom. Betwee n the two lobes there is a nodal plane. By definition there is precisely 0
probability of finding an electron anywhere along th at plane, and because the plane extends infinitely i t is impossible for an
electron to go around it. Yet, electrons commonly c ross from one lobe to the other via quantum tunnelin g. They never exist in the
nodal area (this is forbidden); instead they travel th rough imaginary space.
P-Orbital: The red and blue lobes represent the volume in which there is a 90 percent probability of finding an electron at an y
given time if the orbital is occupied.
Imaginary space is not real, but it is explicitly r eferenced in the time-dependent Schrödinger equation, which has a component of ii
(the square root of −1−1, an imaginary number):
And because all matter has a wave component (see the to pic of wave-particle duality), all matter can in the ory exist in imaginary
space. But what accounts for the difference in proba bility of an electron tunneling over a nodal plane and a ball tunneling through a
brick wall? The answer is a combination of the tunnel ing object’s mass (mm) and energy (EE) and the energ y height (U0U0) of the
barrier through which it must travel to get to the oth er side.
When it reaches a barrier it cannot overcome, a part icle’s wave function changes from sinusoidal to expo nentially diminishing in
form. The solution for the Schrödinger equation in such a m edium is:
where:
Therefore, the probability of an object tunneling th rough a barrier decreases with the object’s increasi ng mass and with the
increasing gap between the energy of the object and the energy of the barrier. And although the wave funct ion never quite reaches 0
(as can be determined from the e−xe−x functionality), this explains how tunneling is frequent on nanosc ale but negligible at the
macroscopic level.learning objectives

30.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16244Conservation of Nucleon Number and Other Laws
Through radioactive decay, nuclear fusion and nuclea r fission, the number of nucleons (sum of protons and neutrons) is always
held constant.
Define the Law of Conservation of Nuclear Number
In physics and chemistry there are many conservation laws—among them, the Law of Conservation of Nucleon Number, which
states that the total number of nucleons (nuclear particl es, specifically protons and neutrons) cannot change by any nuclear reaction.
Radioactive Decay
Consider the three modes of decay. In gamma decay, a n excited nucleus releases gamma rays, but its proton (Z) and neutron (A-Z)
count remain the same:
Nuclear fission of U-235: If U-235 is bombarded with a neutron (light blue small c irce), the resulting U-236 produced is unstable
and undergoes fission. The resulting elements (shown here as Kr -92 and Ba-141) do not contain as many nucleons as U-236, wit h
the remaining three neutrons being released as high-ene rgy particles, able to bombard another U-235 atom and m aintain a chain
reaction.
In beta decay, a nucleus releases energy and either an electron or a positron. In the case of an elect ron being released, atomic mass
(A) remains the same as a neutron is converted into a proto n, raising atomic number by 1:
In the case of a positron being released, atomic mass remains constant as a proton is converted to a neutr on, lowering atomic
number by 1:
Electron capture has the same effect on the number of pro tons and neutrons in a nucleus as positron emission.
Alpha decay is the only type of radioactive decay tha t results in an appreciable change in an atom ‘s ato mic mass. However, rather
than being destroyed, the two protons and two neutrons an a tom loses in alpha decay are released as a helium nucle us.learning objectives

30.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16244Nuclear Fission
Chain reactions of nuclear fission release a tremend ous amount of energy, but follow the Law of Conservati on of Nucleon Number.
Consider, for example, the multistep reaction that occur s when a U-235 nucleus accepts a neutron, as in:
In each step, the total atomic mass of all species is a c onstant value of 236. This is the same with all fission re actions.
Nuclear Fusion
Finally, nuclear fusion follows the Law of Conservation of Nucleon Number. Consider the fusion of deuterium an d tritium (both
hydrogen isotopes):
It is well understood that the tremendous amounts of energy released by nuclear fission and fusion can be attributed to the
conversion of mass to energy. However, the mass that is co nverted to energy is rather small compared to any s ample, and never
includes the conversion of a proton or neutron to e nergy. Thus, the number of nucleons before and after f ission and fusion is always
constant.
Key Points
Quantum tunneling applies to all objects facing any barr ier. However, the probability of its occurrence is essenti ally negligible
for macroscopic purposes; it is only ever observed to any ap preciable degree on the nanoscale level.
Quantum tunneling is explained by the imaginary componen t of the Schrödinger equation. Because the wave function of any
object contains an imaginary component, it can exist in imaginary space.
Tunneling decreases with the increasing mass of the object that must tunnel and with the increasing gap between the o bject’s
energy and the energy of the barrier it must overcome.
The law of Conservation of Nuclear Number states that the sum of protons and neutrons among species before and afte r a
nuclear reaction will be the same.
In radioactive decay, a proton can be converted to a n eutron and a neutron can be converted to a proton (beta-dec ay).
Nuclear fusion and fission involve the conversion of matt er to energy, but the matter that is converted is never a full nucleon.
Key Terms
tunneling: the quantum-mechanical passing of a particle through an energy barrier
fusion: A nuclear reaction in which nuclei combine to form more massive nuclei with the concomitant release of energy.
fission: The process of splitting the nucleus of an atom into sm aller particles; nuclear fission.
nucleon: One of the subatomic particles of the atomic nucleus (i.e., a proton or a neutron).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Quantum tunnelling. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_tunnelling. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
tunneling. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tunneling. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
P2M0. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:P2M0.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Nuclear fission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fission. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear fusion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fusion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

30.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16244Radioactive decay. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radioactive_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fusion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fusion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleon. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
fission. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fission. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
P2M0. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:P2M0.png. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
File:Nuclear fission.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclope dia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?...ion.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

30.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1624530.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
The nuclear medicine whole body bone scan is generally used in evaluations of various bone related pathol ogy, such as for
bone pain, stress fracture, nonmalignant bone lesions, bone i nfections, or the spread of cancer to the bone.
Radiation therapy involves the application of ioniz ing radiation to treat conditions such as hyperthyr oidism, thyroid cancer, and
blood disorders. Radiation therapy is particularly effective as a treatment of a number of types of can cer if they are localized to one
area of the body. It may also be used as part of cu rative therapy, to prevent tumor recurrence after sur gery, or to remove a primary
malignant tumor. Radiation therapy is synergistic wit h chemotherapy and has been used before, during, and after chemotherapy in
susceptible cancers.
Ionizing radiation works by damaging the DNA of exposed tissue, leading to cellular death. When external beam therapy is used,
shaped radiation beams are aimed from several angle s of exposure to intersect at the tumor, providing a much larger absorbed dose
there than in the surrounding, healthy tissue.
External Beam Therapy: Radiation therapy of the pelvis. Lasers and a mold under th e legs are used for precise positioning
Brachytherapy is another form of radiation therapy, in which a therapeutic radioisotope is injected into the body to chemically
localize to the tissue that requires destruction. A key feature of brachytherapy is that the irradiatio n affects only a very localized
area around the radiation sources. Exposure to radi ation of healthy tissues further away from the sources is therefore reduced in this
technique.
Radiation therapy is in itself painless. Many low-do se palliative treatments (for example, radiation the rapy targeting bony
metastases) cause minimal or no side effects, although short-term pain flare-ups can be experienced in the days following treatment
due to edemas compressing nerves in the treated are a. Higher doses can cause varying side effects during t reatment (acute), in the
months or years following treatment (long-term), or af ter re-treatment (cumulative). The nature, severity, a nd longevity of side
effects depend on the organs that receive the radia tion, the treatment itself (type of radiation, dose, fractionation, concurrent
chemotherapy), and the individual patient.
Dosimetry
Radiation dosimetry is the measurement and calculation of the absorbed dose resulting from the exposure to ioniz ing radiation.Example:

30.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Explain difference between absorbed dose and dose equivale nt.
Radiation dosimetry is the measurement and calculat ion of the absorbed dose in matter and tissue result ing from the exposure to
indirect and direct ionizing radiation.
Measuring Radiation
There are several ways of measuring the dose of ioni zing radiation. Workers who come in contact with radio active substances or
who may be exposed to radiation routinely carry perso nal dosimeters. In the United States, these dosimeters usually contain
materials that can be used in thermoluminescent dosim etry or optically stimulated luminescence. Outside th e United States, the
most widely used type of personal dosimeter is the fil m badge dosimeter, which uses photographic emulsions t hat are sensitive to
ionizing radiation. The equipment used in radiother apy (a linear particle accelerator in external beam therapy) is routinely
calibrated using ionization chambers or the new and more accurate diode technology. Internal dosimetry i s used to evaluate the
intake of particles inside a human being.
Ionization Chamber: This ionization chamber was used in the South Atlantic Anomaly Probe project.
Dose is reported in grays (Gy) for absorbed doses or si everts (Sv) for dose equivalents, where 1 Gy or 1 Sv is equal to 1 joule per
kilogram. Non-SI units are still prevalent as well: abso rbed dose is often reported in rads and dose equiva lent in rems. By
definition, 1 Gy = 100 rad, and 1 Sv = 100 rem.
Biological Effects
The distinction between absorbed dose (Gy/rad) and do se equivalent (Sv/rem) is based upon the biological e ffects. The weighting
factor (wr) and tissue/organ weighting factor (WT) hav e been established. They compare the relative biolog ical effects of various
types of radiation and the susceptibility of different org ans.
The weighting factor for the whole body is 1, such th at 1 Gy of radiation delivered to the whole body is e qual to one sievert.
Therefore, the WT for all organs in the whole body must su m to 1.
By definition, X-rays and gamma rays have a wr of unity, such that 1 Gy = 1 Sv (for whole-body irradiation). Val ues of wr are as
high as 20 for alpha particles and neutrons. That is to say, for the same absorbed dose in Gy, alpha partic les are 20 times as
biologically potent as x-rays or gamma rays.
Dose is a measure of deposited dose and therefore can n ever decrease: removal of a radioactive source can r educe only the rate of
increase of absorbed dose — never the total absorbed dose.
Biological Effects of Radiation
Ionizing radiation is generally harmful, even potentiall y lethal, to living organisms.learning objectives

30.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Describe effects of ionizing radiation on living organis ms.
The Radium Girls were female factory workers who contra cted radiation poisoning from painting watch dials wit h glow-inthe-dark paint at the United States Radium factory in Orange, New Jersey around 1917. The women, who had been t old the
paint was harmless, ingested deadly amounts of radium b y licking their paintbrushes to give them a fine po int; some also
painted their fingernails and teeth with the glowing s ubstance.
Ionizing radiation is generally harmful, even poten tially lethal, to living organisms. Although radiation was discovered in the late
19th century, the dangers of radioactivity and of rad iation were not immediately recognized. The acute eff ects of radiation were
first observed in the use of x-rays when Wilhelm Rönt gen intentionally subjected his fingers to x-rays in 1895. The genetic effects
of radiation, including the effects on cancer risk, were recognized much later. In 1927, Hermann Joseph Muller published research
showing genetic effects.
Some effects of ionizing radiation on human health a re stochastic, meaning that their probability of occu rrence increases with dose,
while the severity is independent of dose. Radiation-i nduced cancer, teratogenesis, cognitive decline, and h eart disease are all
examples of stochastic effects. Other conditions, such as radiation burns, acute radiation syndrome, chronic rad iation syndrome,
and radiation-induced thyroiditis are deterministic, meaning they reliably occur above a threshold dose and their severity increases
with dose. Deterministic effects are not necessarily mo re or less serious than stochastic effects; either can ultimately lead to damage
ranging from a temporary nuisance to death.
Radium Girls: Radium dial painters working in a factory
Quantitative data on the effects of ionizing radiatio n on human health are relatively limited compared t o other medical conditions
because of the low number of cases to date and becaus e of the stochastic nature of some of the effects. Sto chastic effects can only
be measured through large epidemiological studies in which enough data have been collected to remove con founding factors such
as smoking habits and other lifestyle factors. The r ichest source of high-quality data is the study of Ja panese atomic bomb
survivors.
Two pathways of exposure to ionizing radiation exist. In the case of external exposure, the radioactive sour ce is outside (and
remains outside) the exposed organism. Examples of ex ternal exposure include a nuclear worker whose hands h ave been dirtied
with radioactive dust or a person who places a sealed ra dioactive source in his pocket. External exposure i s relatively easy to
estimate, and the irradiated organism does not become radioactive, except if the radiation is an intense n eutron beam that causes
activation. In the case of internal exposure, the radi oactive material enters the organism, and the radioa ctive atoms become
incorporated into the organism. This can occur throu gh inhalation, ingestion, or injection. Examples of internal exposure include
potassium-40 present within a normal person or the in gestion of a soluble radioactive substance, such as st rontium-89 in cows’
milk. When radioactive compounds enter the human bod y, the effects are different from those resulting from exposure to an
external radiation source. Especially in the case of alpha radiation, which normally does not penetrate t he skin, the exposure can be
much more damaging after ingestion or inhalation.learning objectives
Example:

30.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Therapeutic Uses of Radiation
Radiation therapy uses ionizing radiation to treat condi tions such as hyperthyroidism, cancer, and blood disord ers.
Explain difference between external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy.
Radiation therapy involves the application of ioniz ing radiation to treat conditions such as hyperthyr oidism, thyroid cancer, and
blood disorders. Radiation therapy is particularly effective as a treatment of a number of types of can cer if they are localized to one
area of the body. It may also be used as part of cu rative therapy, to prevent tumor recurrence after sur gery, or to remove a primary
malignant tumor. Radiation therapy is synergistic wit h chemotherapy and has been used before, during, and after chemotherapy in
susceptible cancers.
Ionizing radiation works by damaging the DNA of exposed tissue, leading to cellular death. When external beam therapy is used,
shaped radiation beams are aimed from several angle s of exposure to intersect at the tumor, providing a much larger absorbed dose
there than in the surrounding, healthy tissue.
External Beam Therapy: Radiation therapy of the pelvis. Lasers and a mold under th e legs are used for precise positioning
Brachytherapy is another form of radiation therapy, in which a therapeutic radioisotope is injected into the body to chemically
localize to the tissue that requires destruction. A key feature of brachytherapy is that the irradiatio n affects only a very localized
area around the radiation sources. Exposure to radi ation of healthy tissues further away from the sources is therefore reduced in this
technique.learning objectives

30.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245
Clinical Applications of Brachytherapy: Body sites in which brachytherapy can be used to treat cancer
Radiation therapy is in itself painless. Many low-do se palliative treatments (for example, radiation the rapy targeting bony
metastases) cause minimal or no side effects, although short-term pain flare-ups can be experienced in the days following treatment
due to edemas compressing nerves in the treated are a. Higher doses can cause varying side effects during t reatment (acute), in the
months or years following treatment (long-term), or af ter re-treatment (cumulative). The nature, severity, a nd longevity of side
effects depend on the organs that receive the radia tion, the treatment itself (type of radiation, dose, fractionation, concurrent
chemotherapy), and the individual patient.
Radiation from Food
Food irradiation is a process of treating a food to a spe cific dosage of ionizing radiation for a predefined le ngth of time.
Explain how food irradiation is performed, commenting on i ts purpose and safety
Food irradiation is a process of treating a food to a specific dosage of ionizing radiation for a predefi ned length of time. This
process slows or halts spoilage that is due to the gro wth of pathogens. Food irradiation is currently permitte d by over 50 countries,
and the volume of food treated is estimated to exce ed 500,000 metric tons annually worldwide. Irradiated food is sold in regular
stores, often in specially marked packages.
Radura Logo: The Radura logo, required by U.S. Food and Drug Administrati on regulations to show a food has been treated with
ionizing radiation
By irradiating food, depending on the dose, some or a ll of the microorganisms, bacteria, viruses, and insec ts present are killed. This
prolongs the shelf-life of the food in cases where pa thogenic spoilage is the limiting factor. Some foods, e.g., herbs and spices, are
irradiated at sufficient doses (five kilograys or more) to reduce the microbial counts by several orders o f magnitude. Such
ingredients do not carry spoilage or pathogen microo rganisms into the final product. It has also been sho wn that irradiation can
delay the ripening of fruits and the sprouting of vegetable s.
Food irradiation using cobalt-60 is the preferred me thod by most processors. This is because the deep penet ration of gamma rays
allows for the treatment of entire industrial pallets or totes at once, which reduces the need for material handling. A pallet or tote is
typically exposed for several minutes to several hou rs, depending on the dose. Radioactive material must be monitored and
carefully stored to shield workers and the environme nt from its gamma rays. During operation this is ach ieved using concretelearning objectives

30.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245shields. With most designs the radioisotope can be lowe red into a water-filled source storage pool to allow m aintenance personnel
to enter the radiation shield. In this mode the water in th e pool absorbs the radiation.
X-ray irradiators are considered an alternative to i sotope-based irradiation systems. X-rays are generated by colliding accelerated
electrons with a dense material (the target), such as t antalum or tungsten, in a process known as bremsstrahl ung-conversion. X-ray
irradiators are scalable and have deep penetration c omparable to Co-60, with the added benefit that the electronic source stops
radiating when switched off. They also permit dose uni formity, but these systems generally have low energeti c efficiency during
the conversion of electron energy to photon radiatio n, so they require much more electrical energy than other systems. X-ray
systems also rely on concrete shields to protect the e nvironment and workers from radiation.
Irradiated food does not become radioactive, since t he particles that transmit radiation are not themse lves radioactive. Still, there is
some controversy in the application of irradiation due to its novelty, the association with the nuclear industry, and the potential for
the chemical changes to be different than the chemi cal changes due to heating food (since ionizing radia tion produces a higher
energy transfer per collision than conventional radi ant heat).
Tracers
A radioactive tracer is a chemical compound in which o ne or more atoms have been replaced by a radioisotope.
Explain structure and use of radioactive tracers
A radioactive tracer is a chemical compound in which one or more atoms have been replaced by a radioisoto pe. By virtue of its
consequent radioactive decay, this compound can be use d to explore the mechanism of chemical reactions by tracing the path that
the radioisotope follows from reactants to products.
The underlying principle in the creation of a radio active tracer is that an atom in a chemical compoun d is replaced by another atom
of the same chemical element. In a tracer, this subst ituting atom is a radioactive isotope. This process is often called radioactive
labeling. Radioactive decay is much more energetic than chemical reactions. Therefore, the radioactive i sotope can be present in
low concentration and its presence still detected by sens itive radiation detectors such as Geiger counters and sci ntillation counters.
Geiger Counter: Image of a Geiger counter with pancake-type probe
There are two main ways in which radioactive tracers are used:
When a labeled chemical compound undergoes chemical reactions, one or more of the products will contain th e radioactive label.
Analysis of what happens to the radioactive isotope provides d etailed information about the mechanism of the chemical reaction.
A radioactive compound can be introduced into a liv ing organism. The radio-isotope provides a way to buil d an image showing
how that compound and its reaction products are distributed a round the organism.
All the commonly used radioisotopes (Tritium and) h ave short half-lives. They do not
occur in nature and are produced through nuclear reactio ns.learning objectives

30.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245
Iodine; 123 Radioisotope: Lead container containing iodine-123 radioisotope
Nuclear Fusion
In nuclear fusion two or more atomic nuclei collide at v ery high speed and join, forming a new nucleus.
Analyze possibility of the use of nuclear fusion for the pr oduction of electricity.
The sun is a main-sequence star and therefore generate s its energy through nuclear fusion of hydrogen nucl ei into helium. In its
core, the sun fuses 620 million metric tons of hydrogen each second.
Nuclear fusion is a nuclear reaction in which two or mo re atomic nuclei collide at very high speed and joi n to form a new type of
atomic nucleus. During this process, matter is not conse rved because some of the mass of the fusing nuclei is conver ted into energy.
Fusion of Deuterium with Tritium: Fusion of deuterium with tritium creating helium-4, freein g a neutron, and releasing 17.59
MeV of energy; some mass changes form to appear as the kinetic energy of the productslearning objectives
Example:

30.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245
Fission and FusionFission and Fusion
Fission and Fusion
Describes the difference between fission and fusion
Fusion reactions of light elements power the stars and p roduce virtually all elements in a process called nu cleosynthesis. The fusion
of lighter elements in stars releases energy and mass. Fo r example, in the fusion of two hydrogen nuclei to f orm helium, 0.7 percent
of the mass is carried away from the system in the form of kinetic energy or other forms of energy (such as electromagnetic
radiation).
It takes considerable energy to force nuclei to fuse, even nuclei of the lightest element, hydrogen. Th is is because all nuclei have a
positive charge due to their protons, and since like charges repel, nuclei strongly resist being put close together. Accelerated to high
speeds, they can overcome this electrostatic repulsion and be forced close enough for the attractive nucl ear force to be sufficiently
strong to achieve fusion. The fusion of lighter nucl ei, which creates a heavier nucleus and often a free neutron or proton, generally
releases more energy than it takes to force the nuc lei together. This is an exothermic process that can produce self-sustaining
reactions.
Research into controlled fusion, with the aim of prod ucing fusion power for the production of electricity, has been conducted for
over 60 years. It has been accompanied by extreme sci entific and technological difficulties, but it has resu lted in progress. At

30.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245present, controlled fusion reactions have been unabl e to produce self-sustaining controlled fusion react ions. Researchers are
working on a reactor that theoretically will deliver 10 times more fusion energy than the amount needed to heat up plasma to
required temperatures. Workable designs of this rea ctor were originally scheduled to be operational in 20 18; however, this has been
delayed, and a new date has not been released.
Nuclear Fission in Reactors
Nuclear reactors convert the thermal energy released fro m nuclear fission into electricity.
Explain how nuclear chain reactions can be controlled.
Some serious nuclear and radiation accidents have occ urred. In 2011, three of the reactors at Fukushima I overheated, causing
meltdowns that eventually led to explosions, which releas ed large amounts of radioactive material into the air.
Nuclear fission is a nuclear reaction in which the nu cleus of an atom splits into smaller (lighter) nucle i. This reaction often
produces free neutrons and photons (in the form of ga mma rays) and releases a very large amount of energy, even by the standards
of radioactive decay. The two nuclei produced are m ost often of comparable but slightly different sizes, typically with a mass ratio
of products of about 3 to 2, for common fissile nuclides.
Nuclear Fission Reaction: An induced nuclear fission event. A neutron is absorbe d by the nucleus of a uranium-235 atom, which
in turn splits into fast-moving lighter elements (fission products) and free neutrons
For example, when a large fissile atomic nucleus such a s uranium-235 or plutonium-239 absorbs a neutron, i t may undergo nuclear
fission. The heavy nucleus splits into two or more ligh ter nuclei (the fission products), releasing kinetic energy, gamma radiation,
and free neutrons. A portion of these neutrons may l ater be absorbed by other fissile atoms and trigger further fission events, which
release more neutrons, and so on. This is known as a nuclea r chain reaction.
Just as conventional power stations generate electric ity by harnessing the thermal energy released from b urning fossil fuels, the
thermal energy released from nuclear fission can be converted in electricity by nuclear reactors. A nucl ear chain reaction can be
controlled by using neutron poisons and neutron moder ators to change the percentage of neutrons that will go on to cause more
fissions. Nuclear reactors generally have automatic a nd manual systems to shut the fission reaction down if unsafe conditions are
detected.
The reactor core generates heat in a number of ways. The kinetic energy of fission products is converte d to thermal energy when
these nuclei collide with nearby atoms. Some of the ga mma rays produced during fission are absorbed by the reactor, and their
energy is converted to heat. Heat is produced by the radioactive decay of fission products and materials that have been activated by
neutron absorption. This decay heat source will remain for some time even after the reactor is shut down.
A nuclear reactor coolant — usually water, but someti mes a gas, liquid metal, or molten salt — is circulate d past the reactor core to
absorb the heat that it generates. The heat is carried away fr om the reactor and is then used to generate steam.
The power output of the reactor is adjusted by contro lling how many neutrons are able to create more fiss ions. Control rods that are
made of a neutron poison are used to absorb neutron s. Absorbing more neutrons in a control rod means th at there are fewerlearning objectives
Example:

30.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245neutrons available to cause fission, so pushing the control rod deeper into the reactor will reduce the reactor’s power output, and
extracting the control rod will increase it.
Control Rod Assembly: Control rod assembly, above fuel element
Some serious nuclear and radiation accidents have occ urred. Nuclear power plant accidents include the Cherno byl disaster (1986),
the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster (2011), the Thre e Mile Island accident (1979), and the SL-1 accident (1961).
Nuclear safety involves the actions taken to prevent nuclear and radiation accidents or to limit their consequences. The nuclear
power industry has improved the safety and performan ce of reactors and has proposed new safer (but general ly untested) reactor
designs. However, there is no guarantee that these reactors will be designed, built, and operated correctly.
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Disaster: Satellite image taken March 16, 2011 of the four damaged r eactor buildings
Emission Topography
Positron emission tomography is a nuclear medical imagi ng technique that produces a three-dimensional imag e of processes in the
body.
Discuss possibility of uses of positron emission tomography wi th other diagnostic techniques.
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear medical imaging technique that produces a three-dimensiona l image or picture of
functional processes in the body. The system detects p airs of gamma rays emitted indirectly by a positron -emitting radionuclide
(tracer), which is introduced into the body on a biol ogically active molecule. Three-dimensional images o f tracer concentration
within the body are then constructed by computer analysis.
PET acquisition process occurs as the radioisotope un dergoes positron emission decay (also known as positi ve beta decay), it emits
a positron, an antiparticle of the electron with oppo site charge. The emitted positron travels in tissue f or a short distance (typically
less than 1 mm, but dependent on the isotope), during which time it loses kinetic energy, until it decelerate s to a point where it can
interact with an electron. The encounter annihilates both electron and positron, producing a pair of anni hilation (gamma) photons
moving in approximately opposite directions. These are detected when they reach a scintillator in the sc anning device, creating a
burst of light which is detected by photomultiplier tubes or silicon avalanche photodiodes. The techniq ue depends on simultaneous
or coincident detection of the pair of photons movin g in approximately opposite directions (it would be e xactly opposite in their
center of mass frame, but the scanner has no way to k now this, and so has a built-in slight direction-err or tolerance). Photons that
do not arrive in temporal “pairs” (i.e. within a timing-win dow of a few nanoseconds) are ignored.learning objectives

30.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245
Positron Emission Tomography Acquisition Process: Schema of a PET acquisition process.
A technique much like the reconstruction of compute d tomography (CT) and single-photon emission compute d tomography
(SPECT) data is more commonly used, although the data set collected in PET is much poorer than CT, so recon struction techniques
are more difficult.
PET scans are increasingly read alongside CT or magne tic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, with the combinati on giving both
anatomic and metabolic information. Because PET imagi ng is most useful in combination with anatomical imag ing, such as CT,
modern PET scanners are now available with integrated h igh-end multi-detector-row CT scanners. Because the two scans can be
performed in immediate sequence during the same sessio n, with the patient not changing position between the t wo types of scans,
the two sets of images are more-precisely registered, so that areas of abnormality on the PET imaging can b e more perfectly
correlated with anatomy on the CT images. This is ve ry useful in showing detailed views of moving organs or structures with
higher anatomical variation, which is more common outsid e the brain.
PET/CT-System: PET/CT-System with 16-slice CT; the ceiling mounted device is an injection pump for CT contrast agent.
PET scanning is non-invasive, but it does involve expo sure to ionizing radiation. The total dose of radiat ion is significant, usually
around 5–7 mSv. However, in modern practice, a combined PET/CT scan is almost always performed, and for PET/CT scanning,
the radiation exposure may be substantial—around 23– 26 mSv (for a 70 kg person—dose is likely to be highe r for higher body
weights). When compared to the classification level for radiation workers in the UK of 6 mSv, it can be seen th at use of a PET scan
needs proper justification.
Nuclear Weapons
A nuclear weapon is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions—either fission, fusion, or a
combination.
Explain the difference between an “atomic” bomb and a “hy drogen” bomb, discussing their history
A nuclear weapon is an explosive device that derives i ts destructive force from nuclear reactions, either fi ssion or a combination of
fission and fusion. Both reactions release vast quant ities of energy from relatively small amounts of mat ter. The first fission (i.e.,
“atomic”) bomb test released the same amount of ener gy as approximately 20,000 tons of trinitrotoluene (T NT). The first fusion
(i.e., thermonuclear “hydrogen”) bomb test released the s ame amount of energy as approximately 10,000,000 tons of TNT.learning objectives

30.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245A modern thermonuclear weapon weighing little more th an 2,400 pounds (1,100 kg) can produce an explosive force comparable to
the detonation of more than 1.2 million tons (1.1 m illion tonnes) of TNT. Thus, even a small nuclear dev ice no larger than
traditional bombs can devastate an entire city by b last, fire and radiation. Nuclear weapons are considere d weapons of mass
destruction, and their use and control have been a major focus of international relations policy since their inc eption.
Only two nuclear weapons have been used in the course of warfare, both by the United States near the end of Wo rld War II. On
August 6, 1945, a uranium gun-type fission bomb code-na med “Little Boy” was detonated over the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
Only three days later a plutonium implosion-type fissi on bomb code-named “Fat Man” (as illustrated in) was ex ploded over
Nagasaki, Japan. The resulting mushroom cloud is shown i n. The death toll from the two bombings was estimated at
approximately 200,000 people—mostly civilians, and mainly from acute injuries sustained from the explosi ons. The role of the
bombings in Japan’s surrender, and their ethical implicati ons, remain the subject of scholarly and popular debate.
Nagasaki Atomic Bombing: The mushroom cloud of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, Ja pan (August 9,1945) rose some 18
kilometers (11 mi) above the bomb’s hypocenter.
Fat Man Atomic Bomb: The first nuclear weapons were gravity bombs, such as thi s “Fat Man” weapon dropped on Nagasaki,
Japan. They were very large and could only be delivered by h eavy bomber aircraft.
Since the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, nuclear we apons have been detonated on over two thousand occasi ons for testing
purposes and demonstrations. Only a small number of nations either possess such weapons, or are suspected of trying to acquire
and/or develop them. The only countries known to hav e detonated nuclear weapons (and that acknowledge pos sessing such
weapons) are, as listed chronologically by date of f irst test: the United States, the Soviet Union (succeede d as a nuclear power by
Russia), the United Kingdom, France, the People’s Republic of China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea. In addition, it is also
widely believed that Israel possesses nuclear weapons (th ough they have not admitted to it).
The Federation of American Scientists estimates that as of 2012, there are more than 17,000 nuclear warheads in the world, with
around 4,300 considered “operational”—as in ready for use.
NMR and MRIs
Magnetic resonance imaging is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to visualize internal structures of the b ody in detail.

30.4.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Explain the difference between magnetic resonance imagi ng and computed tomography.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI) or magnetic resonan ce tomography
(MRT), is a medical imaging technique used in radiolo gy to visualize internal structures of the body in detail. MRI utilized the
property of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to image the n uclei of atoms inside the body.
MRI machines (as pictured in) make use of the fact that body tissue contains a large amount of water and therefore protons (1H
nuclei), which get aligned in a large magnetic field. Each water molecule has two hydrogen nuclei or proto ns. When a person is
inside the scanner’s powerful magnetic field, the hy drogen protons in their body align with the directio n of the field. A radio
frequency current is briefly activated, producing a v arying electromagnetic field. This electromagnetic field has just the right
frequency (known as the resonance frequency) to beco me absorbed and then reverse the rotation of the hyd rogen protons in the
magnetic field.
MRI Scanner: Phillips MRI scanner in Gothenburg, Sweden.
After the electromagnetic field is turned off, the r otations of the hydrogen protons return to thermodyn amic equilibrium, and then
realign with the static magnetic field. During this re laxation, a radio frequency signal (electromagnetic r adiation in the RF range) is
generated; this signal can be measured with receiver coils. Hydrogen protons in different tissues return to their equilibrium state at
different relaxation rates. Images are then constru cted by performing a complex mathematical analysis of the signals emitted by the
hydrogen protons.
MRI shows a marked contrast between the different soft tissues of the body, making it especially useful in i maging the brain, the
muscles, the heart, and cancerous tissue—as compared with other medical imaging techniques such as computed tomography (CT)
or X-rays. MRI contrast agents may be injected intravenou sly to enhance the appearance of blood vessels, tumors or in flammation.
Unlike CT, MRI does not use ionizing radiation and is generally a very safe procedure. The strong magnetic fields and radio pulses
can, however, affect metal implants (including cochlea r implants and cardiac pacemakers).
Key Points
Ionizing radiation works by damaging the DNA of exposed tis sue, leading to cellular death.
In external beam radiotherapy, shaped radiation beams are aimed from several angles of exposure to intersect at the tumor,
providing a much larger absorbed dose there than in the s urrounding, healthy tissue.
In brachytherapy, a therapeutic radioisotope is inject ed into the body to chemically localize to the tissue t hat requires
destruction.
There are several ways of measuring doses of ionizing radiat ion: personal dosimeters, ionization chambers, and inter nal
dosimetry.
The distinction between absorbed dose (Gy/rad) and dose equivalent (Sv/rem) is based upon the biological effects.
Dose is a measure of deposited dose and therefore can never dec rease: removal of a radioactive source can reduce only th e rate
of increase of absorbed dose — never the total absorbed dose.
The effects of ionizing radiation on human health are separated into stochastic effects (the probability of occurrence increases
with dose) and deterministic effects (they reliably occ ur above a threshold dose, and their severity increases with do se).learning objectives

30.4.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Quantitative data on the effects of ionizing radiation o n human health are relatively limited compared to other medical
conditions because of the low number of cases to date and bec ause of the stochastic nature of some of the effects.
Two pathways (external and internal) of exposure to ionizi ng radiation exist.
Ionizing radiation works by damaging the DNA of exposed tis sue, leading to cellular death.
In external beam radiotherapy, shaped radiation beams are aimed from several angles of exposure to intersect at the tumor,
providing a much larger absorbed dose there than in the s urrounding, healthy tissue.
In brachytherapy, a therapeutic radioisotope is inject ed into the body to chemically localize to the tissue t hat requires
destruction.
Food irradiation kills some of the microorganisms, bacteri a, viruses, and insects found in food. It prolongs shelf-lif e in cases
where pathogenic spoilage is the limiting factor.
Food irradiation using cobalt-60 is the preferred method by most processors.
Irradiated food does not become radioactive, since the particles that transmit radiation are not themselves radi oactive.
Radioactive tracers are used to explore the mechanism of ch emical reactions by tracing the path that the radioisot ope follows
from reactants to products.
The radioactive isotope can be present in low concentrat ion and its presence still detected by sensitive radiatio n detectors.
All the commonly used radioisotopes have short half-lives, do not occur in nature, and are produced through nuclear rea ctions.
The fusion of lighter elements releases energy.
Matter is not conserved during fusion reactions.
Fusion reactions power the stars and produce virtually al l elements in a process called nucleosynthesis.
Nuclear fission is a nuclear reaction in which the nucleus of an atom splits into smaller parts, releasing a very large amo unt of
energy.
Nuclear chain reactions can be controlled using neutro n poisons and neutron moderators.
Although the nuclear power industry has improved the safety an d performance of reactors and has proposed new, safer rea ctor
designs, there is no guarantee that serious nuclear accide nts will not occur.
PET scanning utilizes detection of gamma rays emitted in directly by a positron-emitting radionuclide (tracer), which is
introduced into the body on a biologically active mol ecule.
PET scans are increasingly read alongside CT or magnetic r esonance imaging (MRI) scans, with the combination givi ng both
anatomic and metabolic information.
PET scanning is non-invasive, but it does involve exposure to ionizing radiation.
Nuclear weapons utilize either fission (“atomic” bomb) or c ombination of fission and fusion (“hydrogen” bomb).
Nuclear weapons are considered weapons of mass destruction.
The use and control of nuclear weapons is a major focus of international relations policy since their first use.
MRI makes use of the property of nuclear magnetic resona nce to image nuclei of atoms inside the body.
MRI provides good contrast between the different soft tissues o f the body (making it especially useful in imaging the brain, the
muscles, the heart, and cancerous tissue).
Although MRI uses non-ionizing radiation, the strong mag netic fields and radio pulses can affect metal impla nts, including
cochlear implants and cardiac pacemakers.
Key Terms
external beam therapy: Radiotherapy that directs the radiation at the tumour from outside the body.
ionizing radiation: high-energy radiation that is capable of causing ioniza tion in substances through which it passes; also
includes high-energy particles
brachytherapy: Radiotherapy using radioactive sources positioned withi n (or close to) the treatment volume.
diode: an electronic device that allows current to flow in one dir ection only; a valve
dosimeter: A dosimeter is a device used to measure a dose of ioni zing radiation. These normally take the form of either
optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), photographic-fil m, thermoluminescent (TLD), or electronic personal dosime ters
(PDM).
gamma ray: A very high frequency (and therefore very high energy) electromagnetic radiation emitted as a consequence of
radioactivity.

30.4.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245x-ray: Short-wavelength electromagnetic radiation usually pro duced by bombarding a metal target in a vacuum. Used to create
images of the internal structure of objects; this is possib le because x-rays pass through most objects and can exp ose
photographic film
radioactive tracer: a radioactive isotope that, when injected into a chemica lly similar substance, or artificially attached to a
biological or physical system, can be traced by radiatio n detection devices
isotope: any of two or more forms of an element where the atoms hav e the same number of protons but a different number of
neutrons within their nuclei. As a consequence, atoms for the same isotope will have the same atomic number but differen t mass
numbers (atomic weights)
radioactive decay: any of several processes by which unstable nuclei emit s ubatomic particles and/or ionizing radiation and
disintegrate into one or more smaller nuclei
nucleosynthesis: any of several processes that lead to the synthesis of h eavier atomic nuclei
fusion: A nuclear reaction in which nuclei combine to form more massive nuclei with the concomitant release of energy.
control rod: any of a number of steel tubes, containing boron or anot her neutron absorber, that is inserted into the core of a
nuclear reactor in order to control its rate of reaction
nuclear reactor: any device in which a controlled chain reaction is maint ained for the purpose of creating heat (for power
generation) or for creating neutrons and other fissio n products for experimental, medical, or other purposes
fission: The process of splitting the nucleus of an atom into sm aller particles; nuclear fission.
tracer: A chemical used to track the progress or history of a natural process.
positron: The antimatter equivalent of an electron, having th e same mass but a positive charge.
tomography: Imaging by sections or sectioning.
warfare: The waging of war or armed conflict against an enemy.
computed tomography: (CT) – A form of radiography which uses computer soft ware to create images, or slices, at various
planes of depth from images taken around a body or volume of interest.
nuclear magnetic resonance: (NMRI) – The absorption of electromagnetic radiation (ra dio waves), at a specific frequency, by
an atomic nucleus placed in a strong magnetic field; u sed in spectroscopy and in magnetic resonance imaging.
magnetic resonance imaging: Commonly referred to as MRI; a technique that uses nuclear magnetic resonance to form cross
sectional images of the human body for diagnostic purposes.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear medicine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_medicine. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Brachytherapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brachytherapy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiation therapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation_therapy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
External beam radiotherapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Externa...m_radiotherapy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
external beam therapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/externa...beam%20therapy. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dosimeter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dosimeter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

30.4.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Dosimetry. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dosimetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
diode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diode. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dosimeter.gif. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi.../Dosimeter.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ion-Chamber-Dosimeter-SAAP.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...meterSAAP.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Biological effects of ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biologi...zing_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radium Girls. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radium_Girls. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
/761px-USRadiumGirls-Argonne1,ca1922-23-150dpi.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...-23-150dpi.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear medicine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_medicine. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Brachytherapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Brachytherapy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiation therapy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation_therapy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
External beam radiotherapy. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Externa...m_radiotherapy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radiation_therapy.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...on_therapy.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Clinical_applications_of_brachytherapy.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...chytherapy.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Food irradiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_irradiation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
gamma ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gamma_ray. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
x-ray. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/x-ray. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ionizing radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ionizing_radiation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radura-Symbol.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...Symbol.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Radoactive tracer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radioactive_tracer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
radioactive decay. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radioactive_decay. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
isotope. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isotope. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Geiger_counter_2.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi..._counter_2.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Lead_container_for_nuclear_medications.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...edications.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
nucleosynthesis. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nucleosynthesis. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear fusion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fusion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fusion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fusion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

30.4.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/16245Deuterium-tritium_fusion.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...fusion.svg.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear reactors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_reactors. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear fission. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fission. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fission. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fission. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Atomic reactor. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_reactor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nuclear reactor. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nuclear_reactor. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
control rod. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/control_rod. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
PWR_control_rod_assembly.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...od_assemby.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear_fission.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...ission.svg.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fukushima_I_by_Digital_Globe.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...ital_Globe.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tomography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomography. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Positron emission tomography. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Positro...ion_tomography.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
positron. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/positron. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
tracer. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tracer. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
PET-schema.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...PET-schema.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nuclear weapon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_weapon. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb.jpg. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...gasakibomb.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Magnetic resonance imaging. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Magneti...onance_imaging.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
magnetic resonance imagine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/magnet...onance_imaging.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
nuclear magnetic resonance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nuclea...etic_resonance. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
computed tomography. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/computed_tomography. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
MRI-Philips.JPG. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedi...RI-Philips.JPG. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: The Laws of Motion
This page titled 4: The Laws of Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.4.1: Introduction
4.2: Force and Mass
4.3: Newton’s Laws
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
4.5: Problem-Solving
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s LawsTopic hierarchy

4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144524.1: Introduction
Newton and His Laws
There are three laws of motion that describe the relations hip between forces, mass, and acceleration.
Apply three Newton’s laws of motion to relate forces, mass, and acceleration
Newton’s laws of motion describe the relationship between the forces acting on a body and its motion due to those forces. For
example, if your car breaks down and you need to push it, you must exert a force with your hands on the ca r in order for it to move.
The laws of motion will tell you how quickly the car will move from your pushing. There are three laws of motion:
First law: If an object experiences no net force, then its velocity is constant: the object is either at res t (if its velocity is zero), or it
moves in a straight line with constant speed (if its ve locity is nonzero). For example, if you don’t push the car (no force), then it
doesn’t move.
Second law: The acceleration aa of a body is parallel and directly proportional to the net force acting on the body, is in the
direction of the net force, and is inversely proportiona l to the mass mm of the body:
For example, if you push the car with a greater force i t will accelerate more. But, if the car is more massiv e (mm is larger) then it
won’t accelerate as much from the same size force as a ligh ter car.
Third law: When a first body exerts a force on a se cond body, the second body simultaneously exerts a fo rce on the
first body. This means that and are equal in magnit ude and opposite in direction. For example, when you pu sh a car, if it is
exerting the same force on you that you are exerting on it, you might wonder why you don’t move backwards? The answer is there
are also forces from the ground on your feet pushin g you forward. So, in fact, the car is pushing a force back on you that is of the
same magnitude that you are using to push it forward.
In the figure below there are some practical examples ill ustrating the concept of force:
Strain: by using a machine known as pulley you can easily r aise or lower a massive body
Gravitational Force: a massive body is attracted downward b y the gravitational force practiced by the Earth
Magnetic Force: two magnets repel each other when the same p oles get closer
Examples of Force: Some situations in which forces are at play.
Key Points
Acceleration of an object is proportional to the force on i t.
Force causes an object to move.
Objects with more mass require more force to move.learning objectives

4.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14452Key Terms
force: Any influence that causes an object to undergo a certai n change, either concerning its movement, direction o r geometrical
construction.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Newton's laws of motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_laws_of_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 4.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144534.2: Force and Mass
Force
Force is any influence that causes an object to change, eithe r concerning its movement, direction, or geometrical co nstruction.
Develop the relationship between mass and acceleration in determining force
Overview of Forces
In physics, a force is any influence that causes an o bject to undergo a certain change, either concernin g its movement, direction, or
geometrical construction. It is measured with the SI un it of Newtons. A force is that which can cause an object with mass to change
its velocity, i.e., to accelerate, or which can cause a flexible object to deform. Force can also be describe d by intuitive concepts
such as a push or pull. A force has both magnitude and d irection, making it a vector quantity.
What is a force?What is a force?
What is a force?: Describes what forces are and what they do.learning objectives

4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14453Qualities of Force
The original form of Newton’s second law states that the net force acting upon an object is equal to the ra te at which its momentum
changes. This law is further given to mean that the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the
object, is in the direction of the net force, and is inverse ly proportional to the mass of the object.
As we mentioned, force is a vector quantity. A vector is a one dimensional array with elements of both magnitu de and direction. In
a force vector, the mass,, is the magnitude component and the acceleration,, is the directional componen t. The equation for
force is written:
Related concepts to force include thrust, which incre ases the velocity of an object; drag, which decrease s the velocity of an object;
and torque which produces changes in rotational speed of an object. Forces which do not act uniformly on al l parts of a body will
also cause mechanical stresses, a technical term for influences which cause deformation of matter. While mechanical stress can
remain embedded in a solid object, gradually deform ing it, mechanical stress in a fluid determines chan ges in its pressure and
volume.
Dynamics
Dynamics is the study of the forces that cause objec ts and systems to move. To understand this, we need a wo rking definition of
force. Our intuitive definition of force — that is, a push or a pull —is a good place to start. We know that a push or pull has both
magnitude and direction (therefore, it is a vector qua ntity) and can vary considerably in each regard.
shows a few examples of the “push-pull” nature of for ce. The top left example is that of a pulley system. T he force that someone
would have to pull down on the cable would have to equ al and exceed the force made by the mass the object and the effects of
gravity on those object in order for the system to move up. The top right example shows that any object r esting on a surface will
still exert force on that surface. The bottom example i s that of two magnets being attracted to each other due to m agnetic force.
Examples of Force: Some situations in which forces are at play.
Mass
Mass is a physical property of matter that depends on size a nd shape of matter, and is expressed as kilograms by the SI s ystem.
Justify the significance of understanding mass in physics
What is Mass?
All elements have physical properties whose values can help describe an elements physical state. Changes to t hese properties can
describe elemental transformations. Physical propert ies do not change the chemical nature of matter. The physical property we are
covering in this atom is called mass.learning objectives

4.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14453Mass is defined as a quantitative measure of an objec t’s resistance to acceleration. The terms mass and weigh t are often
interchanged, however it is incorrect to do so. Weight is a different property of matter that, while related to mass, is not mass, but
rather the amount of gravitational force acting on a giv en body of matter. Mass is an intrinsic property that never ch anges.
Units of Mass
In order to measure something, a standard value mus t be established to use in relation to the object o f measurement. This relation is
called a unit. The International System of Units (SI) me asures mass in kilograms, or kg. There are other units o f mass, including the
following (only the first two are accepted by the SI syste m):
t – Tonne; 1t = 1000kg
u – atomic mass unit; 1u ~= 1.66×10 kg
sl – slug
lb – pound
Concepts Using Mass
Weight – see
Newtons Second Law – mass has a central role in determining the behavior of bodies. Newtons Second Law relates force f,
exerted in a body of mass m, to the body’s acceleration a:
Momentum – mass relates a body’s momentum, p, to its linear velocity, v:
Kinetic Energy – mass relates kinetic energy, K to veloc ity, v:
Key Points
Force is stated as a vector quantity, meaning it has elemen ts of both magnitude and direction. Mass and acceleration
respectively.
In layman’s terms, force is a push or pull that can be de fined in terms of various standards.
Dynamics is the study of the force that causes objects and s ystems to move or deform.
External forces are any outside forces that act on a bo dy, and internal forces are any force acting within a body.
Mass is defined as a quantitative measure of an object’s re sistance to acceleration.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, if a body of f ixed mass m is subjected to a single force F, its accel eration a is
given by F/m.
Mass is central in many concepts of physics, including:weight, momentum, acceleration, and kinetic energy.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, if a body of f ixed mass m is subjected to a single force F, its accel eration a is
given by F/m.
Key Terms
force: A force is any influence that causes an object to unde rgo a certain change, either concerning its movement, direct ion or
geometrical construction.
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
mass: The quantity of matter which a body contains, irrespecti ve of its bulk or volume. It is one of four fundamental pr operties
of matter. It is measured in kilograms in the SI system of m easurement.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution-27

4.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14453OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is a force?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIZpG7h5b54. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Special Relativity/Relativistic dynamics. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Special_Relativity/Relativistic_dynamics%23 Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Physical properties. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_properties. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
mass. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is a force?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIZpG7h5b54. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 4.2: Force and Mass is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144544.3: Newton’s Laws
The First Law: Inertia
Newton’s first law of motion describes inertia. Accordin g to this law, a body at rest tends to stay at rest, a nd a body in motion tends
to stay in motion, unless acted on by a net external forc e.
Define the First Law of Motion
History
Sir Isaac Newton was an English scientist who was intereste d in the motion of objects under various conditions. In 1687, he
published a work called Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica, which described his three laws of motion. Newton used
these laws to explain and explore the motion of physic al objects and systems. These laws form the basis for mechanics. The laws
describe the relationship between forces acting on a b ody and the motions experienced due to these forces. The three laws are as
follows:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force, and is inversely proportional to the mass of th e object.
3. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
The First Law of Motion
You have most likely heard Newton’s first law of motion before. If you haven’t heard it in the form written above, you have
probably heard that “a body in motion stays in moti on, and a body at rest stays at rest.” This means that a n object that is in motion
will not change its velocity unless an unbalanced for ce acts upon it. This is called uniform motion. It is easier to explain this
concept through examples.
If you are ice skating, and you push yourself away f rom the side of the rink, according to Newton’s first law you will continue
all the way to the other side of the rink. But, this won ’t actually happen. Newton says that a body in motion will stay in motion
until an outside force acts upon it. In this and mos t other real world cases, this outside force is friction. The friction between
your ice skates and the ice is what causes you to slow down and eventually stop.
Let’s look at another situation. Refer to for this ex ample. Why do we wear seat belts? Obviously, they’re th ere to protect us
from injury in case of a car accident. If a car is t raveling at 60 mph, the driver is also traveling at 60 mph. When the car
suddenly stops, an external force is applied to the car that causes it to slow down. But there is no for ce acting on the driver, so
the driver continues to travel at 60 mph. The seat b elt is there to counteract this and act as that ext ernal force to slow the driver
down along with the car, preventing them from being harm ed.
Newton’s First Law: Newton’s first law in effect on the driver of a carlearning objectives
Example:

4.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454Inertia
Sometimes this first law of motion is referred to as th e law of inertia. Inertia is the property of a body t o remain at rest or to remain
in motion with constant velocity. Some objects have mo re inertia than others because the inertia of an obje ct is equivalent to its
mass. This is why it is more difficult to change the directio n of a boulder than a baseball.
New ton ' s First Law (Inertia) | New ton ' s Three Law s New ton ' s First Law (Inertia) | New ton ' s Three Law s
Doc Physics – Newton: Newton’s first law is hugely counterintuitive. You may ha ve learned it in gradeschool, though. Let’s see it
for the mind-blowing conclusion it really is.
The Second Law: Force and Acceleration
The second law states that the net force on an object is e qual to the rate of change, or derivative, of its linear mom entum.
Define the Second Law of Motion
English scientist Sir Isaac Newton examined the motion o f physical objects and systems under various conditio ns. In 1687, he
published his three laws of motion in Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica. The laws form the basis for mechanics—they
describe the relationship between forces acting on a body, a nd the motion experienced due to these forces. These three laws state:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero, or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
learning objectives

4.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144543. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
The first law of motion defines only the natural stat e of the motion of the body (i.e., when the net force is zero). It does not allow us
to quantify the force and acceleration of a body. T he acceleration is the rate of change in velocity; it is caused only by an external
force acting on it. The second law of motion states t hat the net force on an object is equal to the rate of change of its linear
momentum.
Linear Momentum
Linear momentum of an object is a vector quantity th at has both magnitude and direction. It is the produ ct of mass and velocity of a
particle at a given time:
where, and. From this equation, we see that objects with more mass will have more
momentum.
The Second Law of Motion
Picture two balls of different mass, traveling in the same direction at the same velocity. If they both collide with a wall at the same
time, the heavier ball will exert a larger force on t he wall. This concept, illustrated below, explains Newton ’s second law, which
emphasizes the importance of force and motion, over velocity alone. It states: the net force on an objec t is equal to the rate of
change of its linear momentum. From calculus we know th at the rate of change is the same as a derivative. When we the linear
momentum of an object we get:
Force and Mass: This animation demonstrates the connection between fo rce and mass.
where, and. From this we can further simplify the equatio n:
where, a=accelerationa=acceleration. As we stated earlier, acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, or velo city divided by time.

4.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454
New ton ' s Second Law (1 of 2) | New ton ' s Three LawNew ton ' s Second Law (1 of 2) | New ton ' s Three Law
Newton’s Three Laws of Mechanics – Second Law – Part 1: Here we’ll see how many people can confuse your understand ing of
Newton’s 2nd law of motion through oversight, sloppy langua ge, or cruel intentions.
New ton ' s Second Law (2 of 2) | New ton ' s Three LawNew ton ' s Second Law (2 of 2) | New ton ' s Three Law

4.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454Newton’s Three Laws of Mechanics – Second Law – Part Two: Equilibrium is investigated and Newton’s 1st law is seen as a
special case of Newton’s 2nd law!
The Third Law: Symmetry in Forces
The third law of motion states that for every action, the re is an equal and opposite reaction.
Define the Third Law of Motion
Sir Isaac Newton was a scientist from England who was inte rested in the motion of objects under various condit ions. In 1687, he
published a work called Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica, which contained his three laws of motion. Newton used
these laws to explain and explore the motion of physic al objects and systems. These laws form the bases for me chanics. The laws
describe the relationship between forces acting on a b ody, and the motion is an experience due to these fo rces. Newton’s three laws
are:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
3. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
Newton’s Third Law of Motion
Newton’s third law basically states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. If object A exerts a force on object
B, because of the law of symmetry, object B will exert a forc e on object A that is equal to the force acted on it:
In this example, F is the action and F is the reactio n. You have undoubtedly witnessed this law of motion. For example, take a
swimmer who uses her feet to push off the wall in order to gain speed. The more force she exerts on the wall, the harder she pushes
off. This is because the wall exerts the same force on her that she forces on it. She pushes the wall in the direction behind her,
therefore the wall will exert a force on her that is in the direction in front of her and propel her forward.
learning objectives
A B

4.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454
Newton’s Third Law of Motion: When a swimmer pushes off the wall, the swimmer is using t he third law of motion.
Take as another example, the concept of thrust. When a rocket launches into outer space, it expels gas ba ckward at a high velocity.
The rocket exerts a large backward force on the gas, a nd the gas exerts and equal and opposite reaction fo rce forward on the rocket,
causing it to launch. This force is called thrust. Thrus t is used in cars and planes as well.
New ton ' s Third Law is What' s Up. But how can stuff New ton ' s Third Law is What' s Up. But how can stuff
Newton’s Third Law: The most fundamental statement of basic physical rea lity is also the most often misunderstood. As your
mom if she’s clear on Newton’s Third. Then ask her why th ings can move if every force has a paired opposite force all the time,
forever.
Key Points
Newton’s three laws of physics are the basis for mechanics.
The first law states that a body at rest will stay at rest until a net external force acts upon it and that a body in motion will
remain in motion at a constant velocity until acted on by a net external force.

4.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454Net external force is the sum of all of the forcing acting on an object.
Just because there are forces acting on an object doesn’t necessarily mean that there is a net external force; for ces that are equal
in magnitude but acting in opposite directions can cancel o ne another out.
Friction is the force between an object in motion and the surface on which it moves. Friction is the external force that acts on
objects and causes them to slow down when no other external f orce acts upon them.
Inertia is the tendency of a body in motion to remain in m otion. Inertia is dependent on mass, which is why it is harder t o
change the direction of a heavy body in motion than it is to change the direction of a lighter object in motion.
Newton’s three laws of motion explain the relationship be tween forces acting on an object and the motion they ex perience due
to these forces. These laws act as the basis for mechanics.
The second law explains the relationship between force and motion, as opposed to velocity and motion. It uses the con cept of
linear momentum to do this.
Linear momentum, is the product of mass, and velocity.
The second law states that the net force is equal to the derivative, or rate of change of its linear momentum.
By simplifying this relationship and remembering tha t acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, we can s ee that the second
law of motion is where the relationship between force and a cceleration comes from.
If an object A exerts a force on object B, object B exer ts an equal and opposite force on object A.
Newton’s third law can be seen in many everyday circumst ances. When you walk, the force you use to push off the g round
backwards makes you move forward.
Thrust is an application of the third law of motion. A he licopter uses thrust to push the air under the propeller down, and
therefore lift off the ground.
Key Terms
inertia: The property of a body that resists any change to its uniform motion; equivalent to its mass.
friction: A force that resists the relative motion or tendency to such motion of two bodies in contact.
uniform motion: Motion at a constant velocity (with zero acceleration). Not e that an object in motion will not change its
velocity unless an unbalanced force acts upon it.
net force: The combination of all the forces that act on an object.
momentum: (of a body in motion) the product of its mass and veloci ty.
acceleration: The amount by which a speed or velocity increases (and so a scalar quantity or a vector quantity).
symmetry: Exact correspondence on either side of a dividing line, plane, center or axis.
thrust: The force generated by propulsion, as in a jet engine.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s First Law of Motion: Inertia. Sept ember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42130/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
uniform motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/uniform%20motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

4.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14454Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
net force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/net_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Newton's Second Law of Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14042/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part 1. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFybXASirwQ.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastischer stou00df3. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elastischer_sto%C3%9F3.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part Two. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Z7qivqbSBI.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42074/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
symmetry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/symmetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
thrust. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thrust. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part 1. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFybXASirwQ.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastischer stou00df3. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elastischer_sto%C3%9F3.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part Two. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Z7qivqbSBI.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42074/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Third Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VR7NfNWuPLk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 4.3: Newton’s Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144554.4: Other Examples of Forces
Weight
Weight is taken as the force on an object due to gravity, and is different than the mass of an object.
Infer what factors other than gravity will contribute to t he apparent weight of an object
In physics, it is important to differentiate the weig ht of an object from its mass. The mass of an object is an intrinsic quantity,
independent of the location of the object. On the oth er hand, the weight of an object is an extrinsic quan tity. It is considered as the
force on an object due to gravity. Since gravitationa l acceleration changes depending on the location in the universe, weight does as
well.
Mathematically, the weight of an object (W) can be found by multiplying its mass (m) by the acceleration due to gravity (g):
. The strength of gravity varies very little over t he surface of the Earth. In fact, the greatest percent difference in the value
of the acceleration due to gravity on Earth is 0.5%.
For most calculations involving the weight of an object o n Earth, it is sufficient to assume that.
The weight of an object has the same SI unit as force—the Ne wton ().
In US customary units, the weight of an object can be ex pressed in pounds. Keep in mind that in US units the poun d is either a unit
of force or of mass. If one must find the weight (as opposed to the mass) of an object in US units, it can be calculated in terms of
pounds of force.
It is important to note that the apparent weight of a n object (i.e., the weight of an object determined by a scale) will vary if forces
other than gravity are acting upon the object. For e xample, if you weigh a given mass underwater you will find a different result
than if you weigh that mass in air. In this case, the we ight of the object varies due to the force of buoyan cy. While the mass is in the
water it displaces fluid, resulting in an upward forc e upon it. This upward force affects the net force th at the mass exerts on the
scale, and thus alters its “apparent” weight.
Spring Scale: A spring scale measures weight by finding the extent to which a spring is compressed.This is proportional to th e
force that a mass exerts on the scale due to its weight.learning objectives

4.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14455Normal Forces
The normal force comes about when an object contacts a surface; the resulting force is always perpendicular to the surface of
contact.
Evaluate Newton’s Second and Third Laws in determining the no rmal force on an object
Overview
The normal force,, comes about when an object contac ts a surface. According to Newton’s third law, when one ob ject exerts a
force on a second object, the second object always exe rts a force that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction on the first
object. This is the reason that the normal force exists.
A common situation in which a normal force exists is when a person stands on the ground. Because of Newton’ s third law, the
ground exerts a force on the person that is equal in magnitude to the person’s weight. In this simple case, the weight of the person
and the opposing normal force are the only two force s considered on the person. The person remains stil l because the forces due to
weight and the normal force create a net force of zero on the person.
Forces on Inclined Planes
A more complex example of a situation in which a norm al force exists is when a mass rests on an inclined plane. In this case, the
normal force is not in the exact opposite direction as the force due to the weight of the mass. This is b ecause the mass contacts the
surface at an angle. By taking this angle into account, the magnitude of the normal force () can be found from:
where:
is the mass under consideration,
is the acceleration due to gravity,
and is the angle between the inclined surface and the ho rizontal.
Inclined Plane: A mass rests on an inclined plane that is at an angle to the horizontal. The following forces act on the mass: the
weight of the mass (),the force due to friction (),and the norm al force ().
Another interesting example involving normal forces is when a person stands in an elevator. When the eleva tor goes up, the normal
force is actually greater than the force due to grav ity. In this situation there are only two forces acti ng on the person. The first is the
force of gravity on the person, which does not chang e. The second is the normal force. By summing the fo rces and setting them
equal to m ⋅am ⋅a (utilizing Newton’s second law), we find:
where:
is the normal force,
is the force due to gravity,
is the mass of the person,learning objectives

4.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14455and is the acceleration.
Since acceleration is positive, the normal force must ac tually be greater than the force due to gravity (the weight of the person).
Key Points
Weight is taken to be the force on an object due to gravi ty.
Weight and mass are not the same thing!
The weight of a given mass will be different when the accelera tion due to gravity is different.
Apparent weight can change because of the effect of buoya ncy.
The strength of gravity is almost the same everywhere on th e surface of the Earth.
The normal force,, comes about when an object contacts a sur face.
The normal force exists because for every force, there is al ways an equal and opposite force.
The normal force is always perpendicular to the plane tha t the object contacts or rests on.
Key Terms
Gravitational acceleration: Gravitational acceleration is the acceleration that a n object undergoes due solely to gravity
perpendicular: at or forming a right angle (to).
normal: A line or vector that is perpendicular to another lin e, surface, or plane.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Gravitational acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational%20acceleration.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY: Attribution
Normal force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Newton's laws of motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_laws_of_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
perpendicular. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/perpendicular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
normal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/normal. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY: Attribution
Normal force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_force. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 4.4: Other Examples of Forces is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144564.5: Problem-Solving
A General Approach
Basic problem-solving techniques can aid in the solut ion of problems involving motion (i.e., the laws of motion).
Assess the laws of motion through practiced problem solvi ng techniques
When dealing with the laws of motion, although knowledge of concepts and equations is important, understand ing basic problem
solving techniques can simplify the process of solvi ng problems that may appear difficult. Your approach to problem solving can
involve several key steps.
Free body diagram: An example of a drawing to help identify forces and direc tions.
First, gather all relevant information from the probl em. Identify all quantities that are given (the knowns), then do the same for all
quantities needed (the unknowns). Also, identify the physical principles involved (e.g., f orce, gravity, friction, etc.).
Next, a drawing may be helpful. Sometimes a drawing can even help determine the known and unknown quantities. It need not be a
work of art, but it should be clear enough to illustra te proper dimension, (meaning one, two, or three dime nsions). You can then use
this drawing to determine which direction is positive and wh ich is negative (making note of this on the drawing).
A next step is to use what is known to find the approp riate equation to find what is unknown. While it is ea siest to find an equation
that leaves only one unknown, sometimes this is not po ssible. In these situations, you can solve multiple equ ations to find the right
answer. Remember that equations represent physical prin ciples and relationships, so use the equations and drawin gs in tandem.
You may then substitute the knowns into the appropriate equations and find a numerical solution.
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable and makes se nse. Your judgment will improve and fine tune as you solve more problems
of this nature. This “judgement” step helps intuit t he problem in terms of its conceptual meaning. If yo u can judge whether the
answer is reasonable, you have a deeper understanding of physics than simply the mechanics of problem solving.
When solving problems, we tend to perform these steps in different order, as well as do several steps simultane ously. There is no
rigid procedure that will work every time. Creativity and insight grow with experience. In time, the basics of problem solving can
become relatively automatic.
Key Points
Gathering all relevant information and identifying known s and unknowns is an important first step.
Always make a drawing to help identify directions of forces a nd to establish, and axes.learning objectives

4.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14456Choose the correct equations, solve the problem, and check t hat the answer fits expectations numerically.
Key Terms
equation: An assertion that two expressions are equal, expressed by writing the two expressions separated by an equal sign;
from which one is to determine a particular quantity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42125/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
equation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Free body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_body_diagram. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 4.5: Problem-Solving is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144574.6: Vector Nature of Forces
Forces in Two Dimensions
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes depende nt upon how strong the push or pull is.
Explain why forces are classified as “vector quantities”
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes d ependent upon how strong the push or pull is. Because of these characteristics,
forces are classified as “vector quantities. ” This mean s that forces follow a different set of mathematical rules than physical
quantities that do not have direction (denoted scalar quantities).
For example, when determining what happens when two forc es act on the same object, it is necessary to know bo th the magnitude
and the direction of both forces to calculate the r esult. If both of these pieces of information are no t known for each force, the
situation is ambiguous. For example, if you know that t wo people are pulling on the same rope with known magni tudes of force but
you do not know which direction either person is pull ing, it is impossible to determine what the accelerat ion of the rope will be.
The two people could be pulling against each other a s in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction. In this
simple one-dimensional example, without knowing the d irection of the forces it is impossible to decide whe ther the net force is the
result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting o ne from the other. Associating forces with vectors avoi ds such problems.
When two forces act on a point particle, the resultin g force or the resultant (also called the net force) can be determined by
following the parallelogram rule of vector addition: the addition of two vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram gives an
equivalent resultant vector which is equal in magnit ude and direction to the transversal of the parallelo gram. The magnitude of the
resultant varies from the difference of the magnitu des of the two forces to their sum, depending on the angle between their lines of
action.
Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on a system. Ideally, t hese diagrams are drawn
with the angles and relative magnitudes of the force vectors preserved so that graphical vector addition can be done to determine
the net force.learning objectives

4.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14457
Forces as Vectors: Free-body diagrams of an object on a flat surface and an inc lined plane. Forces are resolved and added together
to determine their magnitudes and the net force.
Key Points
When determining what happens when two forces act on the same object, it is necessary to know both the magnitude and th e
direction of both forces to calculate the result.
When two forces act on a point particle, the resulting forc e or the resultant (also called the net force), can be d etermined by
following the parallelogram rule of vector addition.
Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on an object.
Key Terms
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
free-body diagram: A free body diagram, also called a force diagram, is a pictorial representation often used by physicists and
engineers to analyze the forces acting on a body of intere st.

4.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14457resultant: A vector that is the vector sum of multiple vectors
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Net force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14040/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
resultant. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resultant. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
free-body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/free-body%20diagram. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Freebodydiagram3 pn.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyc lopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Freebodydiagram3_pn.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
This page titled 4.6: Vector Nature of Forces is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

4.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/152294.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
Applications of Newton’s Laws
Net force affects the motion, postion and/or shape of o bjects (some important and commonly used forces are friction, drag and
deformation).
Explain the effect of forces on an object’s motion and shap e
We know that a net force affects the motion, position and shape of an object. It is useful at this point to look at some particularly
interesting and common forces that will provide furt her applications of Newton’s laws of motion. Specifically, we will discuss the
forces of friction, air or liquid drag, and deformation.
Friction
Friction is a force that resists movement between two sur faces sliding against each other. When surfaces in co ntact move relative to
each other, the friction between the two surfaces conv erts kinetic energy into heat. This property can have a dramatic effect, as seen
in the use of friction created by rubbing pieces of wood together to start a fire. Friction is not itself a fundamental force, but arises
from fundamental electromagnetic forces between the char ged particles constituting the two contacting surfaces.
Drag
Another interesting force in everyday life is the for ce of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either gas or liquid). You
feel this drag force when you move your hand through water, or through the wind. Like friction, the force o f drag is a force that
resists motion. As we will discuss in later units, the dr ag force is proportional to the velocity of the obje ct moving through it. We
see an illustrated example of drag force in.
Drag Force on a Barge: (a) A view from above of two tugboats pushing on a barge. (b) The free-body diagram for the ship
contains only forces acting in the plane of the water. I t omits the two vertical forces—the weight of the barge and the buoyant force
of the water supporting it cancel and are not shown. Since t he applied forces are perpendicular, the – and -axes are in the same
direction as and. The problem quickly becomes a one-di mensional problem along the direction of, since fricti on is in the
direction opposite to.
Deformation
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wal l, the car will not move but it will noticeably chang e shape. The change in
shape of an object due to the application of a forc e is a deformation. Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation.
For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the object returns to its original shape when the force is
removed (that is, the deformation is elastic for small deformations). Second, the size of the deformation is p roportional to the force.
Friction: Kinetic
If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one anot her, then the friction between them is called kinetic frict ion.learning objectives

4.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Explain the dynamics of energy for friction between two su rfaces
When surfaces in contact move relative to each other, the friction between the two surfaces converts kineti c energy into heat. This
property can have dramatic consequences, as illustra ted by the use of friction created by rubbing pieces of wood together to start a
fire. Kinetic energy is converted to heat whenever motion with friction occurs, for example when a viscous fluid is stirred.
Kinetic Friction Introduction | Doc Phy sicsKinetic Friction Introduction | Doc Phy sics
Kinetic Friction Introduction: Here, I’ll explain the microscopic justification of fric tion and what we can know about it. The
coefficient of friction, too!
Kinetic (or dynamic) friction occurs when two objects ar e moving relative to each other and rub together; a sled on the ground
would be a good example of kinetic friction.
learning objectives

4.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Friction: Frictional forces always oppose motion or attempted motio n between objects in contact. Friction arises in part be cause of
the roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. In order for the object to move, it must r ise to where the
peaks can skip along the bottom surface. Thus, a force is requ ired just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks wi ll be broken
off, also requiring a force to maintain motion. Much of th e friction is actually due to attractive forces betwee n molecules making up
the two objects, so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are no t friction-free. Such adhesive forces also depend on the subst ances the
surfaces are made of, explaining, for example, why rubber-so led shoes slip less than those with leather soles.
The force of friction is what slows an object sliding o ver a surface. This force is what makes the brakes on cars work or causes
resistance when you slide your hand across a surface. T he force of friction can be represented by an equat ion:. In this
equation is something called the coefficient of fric tion. This is a unitless number that represents the strength of the friction of the
object. A very “grippy” surface like rubber might hav e a high coefficient of friction, whereas a slippery s urface like ice has a much
lower coefficient. is called the normal force and i s the force of the surface pushing up on the object. In most cases on level
ground, the normal force will be the equal and opposi te of the object’s weight. In other words, it is the fo rce that the surface must
exert to keep the object from falling through.
The coefficient of kinetic friction is typically rep resented as and is usually less than the coefficien t of static friction for the same
materials.
Friction: Static
Static friction is a type of friction that occurs to res ist motion when two objects are at rest against each other.
Demonstrate the relationship of maximum force of static friction
Static Friction
Another type of frictional force is static friction, otherwise known as stiction. Like all friction, it acts to resist the motion of an
object moving over a surface. Unlike kinetic friction, howev er, static friction acts to resist the start of motion.
Static Friction and some friction challenges | Doc Ph Static Friction and some friction challenges | Doc Ph
……learning objectives

4.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Static Friction and some friction challenges: Here, I talk about sneaky ol’ static friction.
Static friction is friction between two objects that a re not moving relative to each other. This frictional force is what prevents a
parked car from sliding down a hill, for example. Bef ore an object at rest on a surface can move, it must overcome the force of
static friction.
Static friction originates from multiple sources. For any given material on another material of the same composition, friction will
be greater as the material surfaces become rougher (consider sandpaper) on the macroscopic level. Addit ionally, intermolecular
forces can greatly influence friction when two materia ls are put into contact. When surface area is below t he micrometer range, Van
der Waals’ forces, electrostatic interactions and hy drogen bonding can cause two materials to adhere to one another. A force is
required to overcome these interactions and cause the surfaces to move across one another.
Like kinetic friction, the force of static friction is given by a coefficient multiplied by the normal f orce. The normal force is the
force of the surface pushing up on the object, which i s usually equal to the object’s weight. The coefficie nt of static friction is
usually greater than the coefficient of kinetic frict ion and is usually represented by.
Putting these elements together gives the maximum force o f static friction as:
In general, the force of static friction can be represente d as:
As with all frictional forces, the force of friction c an never exceed the force applied. Thus the force o f static friction will vary
between 0 and depending on the strength of the appli ed force. Any force smaller than
attempting to slide one surface over the other is opposed by a frictional force of equal magnitude and
opposite direction. Any force larger than that overco mes the force of static friction and causes sliding to occur. The instant sliding
occurs, static friction is no longer applicable—the fri ction between the two surfaces is then called kinetic fric tion.
Static Friction: To move a block at rest on a surface, a force must be appl ied which is great enough to overcome the force of static
friction.
Problem-Solving With Friction and Inclines
Combining motion on inclines with friction uses such c oncepts as equilibrium and contact force on an incline.
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

4.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Calculate the force of friction on an incline
Contact Force on an Incline
The incline plane has two contact or interface surfac es. One is the incline surface, where the block is place d and the other is the
base of the incline, which is in contact with the surf ace underneath. The motion of the block, therefore, may depend on the motion
of the incline itself.
Block and incline system: Forces on the block
When on an incline, calculating the force of friction is different than when the object is on a level surfa ce. Recall that the force of
friction depends on both the coefficient of friction and the normal force. When on an incline with an an gle, the normal
force becomes
As always, the frictional force resists motion. If the b lock is being pushed up the incline the friction fo rce points down the incline.
If the block is being pulled down the incline, the friction force will hold the block up.
Equilibrium of Forces on an Incline
When not acted on by any other forces, only by grav ity and friction, the frictional force will resist the tendency of the block to slide
down the incline. If the frictional force is equal to the gravitational force the block will not slide do wn the incline. The block is said
to be in equilibrium since the sum of the forces on it is 0.
Gravitational force down an incline is given by.
Where is the angle the incline makes with the horizon tal. For the block to be in equilibrium, the maximum force of friction
must be greater than or equal to FG=mgsin (θ). If the maximum frictional force is greater than the
force of gravity, the sum of the forces is still 0. T he force of friction can never exceed the other for ces acting on it. The frictional
forces only act to counter motion.
Drag
The drag force is the resistive force felt by objects mov ing through fluids and is proportional to the square of th e object’s speed.
Relate the magnitude of drag force to the speed of an object
Another interesting force in everyday life is the fo rce of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either a gas or a liquid). You
feel the drag force when you move your hand through water. You might also feel it if you move your hand d uring a strong wind.
The faster you move your hand, the harder it is to m ove. You feel a smaller drag force when you tilt your hand so only the side goes
through the air—you have decreased the area of your ha nd that faces the direction of motion.
Like friction, the drag force always opposes the mot ion of an object. Unlike simple friction, the drag fo rce is proportional to some
function of the velocity of the object in that flui d. This functionality is complicated and depends upon the shape of the object, its
size, its velocity, and the fluid it is in. Aerodyna mic objects tend to have small surface areas and be designed to have low drag
coefficients.learning objectives
learning objectives

4.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229For most large objects such as bicyclists, cars, and baseba lls not moving too slowly, the magnitude of the drag force is found to
be proportional to the square of the speed of the o bject. We can write this relationship mathematically as. When taking into
account other factors, this relationship becomes, where is known as the drag coefficient, a unit-less number that
represents the aerodynamic properties of the object, is the cross-sectional area of the object which is fac ing the direction of
motion, and is the density of the fluid the object is mo ving through.
Aerodynamic Shape: From racing cars to bobsled racers, aerodynamic shaping is cr ucial to achieving top speeds. Bobsleds are
designed for speed. They are shaped like a bullet with tapere d fins. (credit: U.S. Army, via Wikimedia Commons)
Phy sics: Retarding and Drag ForcesPhy sics: Retarding and Drag Forces

4.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Retarding and Drag Forces: A brief look at retarding (drag) forces in physics, for students in introductory physics classes that use
calculus. This video walks through a single scenario of an ob ject experiencing a drag force where the drag force is p roportional to
the object’s velocity.
Stress and Strain
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the strain.
Explain how forces affects the shape of an object
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wall, the car will not move past the wall but it will no ticeably change shape. A
change in shape due to the application of a force i s a deformation. Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation.
For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the object returns to its original shape when the force is
removed—that is, the deformation is elastic for small d eformations. Second, the size of the deformation is pro portional to the force
—that is, for small deformations, Hooke’s law is obeyed. In equation form, Hooke’s law is given by where is the
change in length and kk is a constant which depends on the ma terial properties of the object.
Deformations come in several types: changes in length (t ension and compression), sideways shear (stress), and change s in volume.
Tension/Compression: Tension: The rod is stretched a length when a force is a pplied parallel to its length. (b) Compression:
The same rod is compressed by forces with the same magni tude in the opposite direction. For very small deformations and uniform
materials, is approximately the same for the same mag nitude of tension or compression. For larger deformations, the crosssectional area changes as the rod is compressed or stretche d.
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the strain.
Stress and strain are related to each other by a const ant called Young’s Modulus or the elastic modulus which varies depending on
the material. Using Young’s Modulus the relation between st ress and strain is given by:.
A material with a high elastic modulus is said to have high tensile strength. Such materials are very resista nt to being stretched and
require a large amount of force to deform a small amoun t.
Translational Equilibrium
An object is said to be in equilibrium when there is no ex ternal net force acting on it.learning objectives

4.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Assess the role each type of equilibrium plays in mecha nical devices
We are surrounded by great engineering architecture s and mechanical devices, which are at rest in the fra me of reference of Earth.
A large part of engineering creations are static obj ects. Yet we also seek equilibrium of moving objects lik e that of floating ship,
airplane cruising at high speed, and such other mov ing mechanical devices. In both cases – static or dynam ic – net external forces
and torques are zero.
A body is said to be in mechanical equilibrium when net external force is equal to zero and net externa l torque is also zero.
Mathematically,
Since there is no net force on the object, the objec t does not accelerate. This implies two types of possi ble equilibrium. The first
type, where all particles in the system are at rest a nd do have not velocity, is known as static equilibriu m. In the second type, the
object has a velocity, but since there are no net f orces acting on it, the velocity remains constant. In the second case, the particle is
said to be in dynamic equilibrium. Static or dynamic, thes e kinds of equilibrium can be categorized as translat ional equilibrium.
Examples of translational equilibrium are all around us. A book resting on a table is pushing down on the t able with the force of its
weight. The table, in turn, is pushing back on the boo k, keeping the book from falling through the table. Since neither the table nor
the book are moving, this is an example of static equ ilibrium. The force of gravity on the book is perfe ctly counteracted by the
force of the table pushing on it.
Forces Acting on an Object at Rest: A force diagram showing the forces acting on an obje ct at rest on a surface. Notice that the
amount of force that the table is pushing upward on the ob ject (the N vector) is equal to the downward force of the object’s weight
(shown here as mg, as weight is equal to the object’s mass mul tiplied by the acceleration due to gravity): because th ese forces are
equal, the object is in a state of equilibrium (all the f orces acting on it balance to zero).
An example of dynamic (or mechanical) equilibrium is a n object sliding down a wedge. The force of gravity p ulls the object down
the wedge, but it is counteracted by the force of fric tion between the wedge and the object. If the force o f friction is equal to the
force of gravity, the object will proceed at a constant vel ocity.
Forces on a Table: These six forces are in equilibrium. The four forces o f the table leg counteract the force of the table and the
object pushing on them.learning objectives

4.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Connected Objects
Forces can be transferred from one object to another throu gh connections.
Analyze the affect a rigid connection has on the movement o f objects
The physics of connected objects is very similar to physics of simple objects. There are a variety of wa ys objects can be connected
to each other, and a corresponding variety of mathematica l ways to model such connections.
The simplest form of connection is a perfectly rigid connection. If two objects are connected by a perfe ctly rigid connector then
they may be thought of as the same object. Perfectly rigid connectors cannot stretch nor deform, and transf er forces instantaneously
from one side of the connection to the other. For exam ple, given two blocks (both of mass 1 kg) connected by a perfectly rigid bar,
if the first block is pulled with a force of 1 Newton, then both blocks will accelerate at the same time an d the same acceleration. In
this case the acceleration is —the same as if a for ce of mass 2 kg is exerted on one object. Thus it ca n be said that a
perfectly rigid connection makes two objects into on e large object. Of course, perfectly rigid connection s do not exist in nature.
Some deformation will always exist in any object as fo rce travels along it. However, many materials are suffic iently rigid, so that
using the perfectly rigid approximation is useful for sim plicity’s sake.
One can think of the force transferring through the c onnection by means of the “tension” force. Tension i s the pulling force exerted
by a string, chain, or similar connector on another ob ject. If two objects are connected by a string, a force exerted on one is
balanced by a tension force in the string which pulls on the other. Of course, if the tension force is greate r than the rope can
withstand, the rope will break.
Tension Forces: The forces involved in supporting a ball by a rope. Te nsion is the force of the rope on the scaffold, the force of the
rope on the ball, and the balanced forces acting on and pro duced by segments of the rope.
Circular Motion
An object in circular motion undergoes acceleration due to centripetal force in the direction of the center of rotation.
Develop an understanding of uniform circular motion as a n indicator for net external force
Uniform circular motion describes the motion of an o bject along a circle or a circular arc at constant speed. It is the basic form of
rotational motion in the same way that uniform linea r motion is the basic form of translational motion. Howev er, the two types of
motion are different with respect to the force required to maintain the motion.
Let us consider Newton’s first law of motion. It states that an object will maintain a constant velocity unle ss a net external force is
applied. Therefore, uniform linear motion indicates t he absence of a net external force. On the other hand, uniform circular motionlearning objectives
learning objectives

4.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229requires that the velocity vector of an object cons tantly change direction. Since the velocity vector of the object is changing, an
acceleration is occurring. Therefore, uniform circular motion indicates the presence of a net external force.
In uniform circular motion, the force is always perpend icular to the direction of the velocity. Since the di rection of the velocity is
continuously changing, the direction of the force must be a s well.
The direction of the velocity along the circular tr ajectory is tangential. The perpendicular direction to the circular trajectory is,
therefore, the radial direction. Therefore, the force (and therefore the acceleration) in uniform directi on motion is in the radial
direction. For this reason, acceleration in uniform circular motion is recognized to “seek the center” — i.e., centri petal force.
The equation for the acceleration aa required to sustai n uniform circular motion is:
where mm is the mass of the object, is the velocity of the object, and is the radius of the circle. Conseq uently, the net external
force required to sustain circular motion is:
Uniform Circular Motion: In uniform circular motion, the centripetal force is per pendicular to the velocity. The centripetal force
points toward the center of the circle, keeping the object o n the circular track.
Key Points
Friction is the force that resists relative motion betwe en two surfaces sliding across each other. Friction converts k inetic energy
into heat.
Drag force is the force that resists motion of an object trave ling through a fluid such as air or water. Drag force is proport ional
to the velocity of the object traveling.
Deformation forces are forces caused by stretching or compres sing a material. Some examples would be springs or elastics.
Kinetic (or dynamic) friction occurs when two objects are m oving relative to each other and rub together (like a s led on the
ground).
The force of friction can be represented by an equation where is the coefficient of friction and is a unitless
number that represents the strength of the friction o f the surface.
Kinetic friction and static (stationary) friction use two diff erent coefficients for the same material.
Static friction is a force that acts to resist the start of motion. It is borne of macroscopic inconsistencies in t he surfaces of
materials in contact as well as intermolecular interact ions between the materials, such as hydrogen bonding, Va n der Waal’s
interactions and electrostatic interactions.
Static friction uses a different, usually higher, coefficie nt than kinetic friction does.
The force of static friction is. Where is the coeffi cient of static friction which varies by material
and FnFn is the normal force.
Motion on an incline is resisted by friction.
The frictional force on an incline is dependent on the a ngle of the incline. is the maximum friction force on a n
incline.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

4.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229If the friction force is greater than or equal to the fo rces in the direction of motion, then the net force is 0 and the object is in
equilibrium.
Objects moving through a fluid feel a force which resists their motion. This force is known as the drag force.
The drag force is proportional to the square of the veloci ty of the object relative to the fluid.
The equation for drag is. is a constant called the dra g coefficient. ρρ is the density of the fluid. is the surf ace
area in the direction of motion.
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the stra in.
Stress and strain are related to each other by a constant called Young’s Modulus or the elastic modulus which var ies depending
on the material. Using Young’s Modulus the relation betwee n stress and strain is given by:.
A material with a high elastic modulus is said to have high tensile strength. Such materials are very resistant to b eing stretched
and require a large amount of force to deform a small amo unt.
When there is no external net force on an object, the ob ject is said to be in equilibrium.
When an object is in equilibrium, it does not accelera te. If it had a velocity, the velocity remains constant; if it was at rest, it
remains at rest.
An equilibrium in motion is known as dynamic equilibrium; an equilibrium at rest is a static equilibrium.
If two objects are connected, a force on one has an effect on the other.
Connections can often be approximated as completely rigid. In completely rigid cases, the connection does not defor m and the
force is transferred instantaneously.
Tension is the force of a rope or cable or other connector on the object it is connected to. It is one way force is transf erred
between objects.
An object that is undergoing circular motion has a veloci ty vector that is constantly changing direction.
The force that is needed to maintain circular motion p oints toward the center of the circular path. It is ther efore known as the
centripetal force.
The velocity of an object in circular motion is always tangen t to the circle, and the centripetal force is always perpe ndicular to
the velocity.
Key Terms
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
static: Fixed in place; having no motion.
kinetic: Of or relating to motion
friction: A force that resists the relative motion or tendency to such motion of two bodies in contact.
incline: A slope.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
fluid: Any substance which can flow with relative ease, tends to assume the shape of its container, and obeys Bernoulli’s
principle; a liquid, gas or plasma.
strain: The amount by which a material deforms under stress or force, given as a ratio of the deformation to the initial
dimension of the material and typically symbolized by ϵϵ is termed the engineering strain. The true strain is de fined as the
natural logarithm of the ratio of the final dimension to the initial dimension.
stress: The internal distribution of force per unit area (pressu re) within a body reacting to applied forces which causes strain or
deformation and is typically symbolized by.
dynamic: Changing; active; in motion.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
rigid: Stiff, rather than flexible.
tangent: a straight line touching a curve at a single point withou t crossing it at that point
perpendicular: at or forming a right angle (to).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

4.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Introduction: Further Applications of Newto nu2019s Laws. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42138/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Drag (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction%23Kinetic_friction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Friction. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction%23Static_friction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinetic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Working with Friction (Application). Septemb er 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14806/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
incline. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incline. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

4.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Drag (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fluid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fluid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Deformation (engineering). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Deformation_(engineering).
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stress. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
strain. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strain. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution

4.7.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dynamic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dynamic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
rigid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rigid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution

4.7.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15229Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Uniform Circular Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13871/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
perpendicular. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/perpendicular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
tangent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tangent. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Uniform Circular Motion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13871/latest/ucm2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
5.8: Energy Conservation
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
This page titled 5: Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144595.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
Kinematics of UCM
Uniform circular motion is a motion in a circular path at constant speed.
Relate centripetal force and centripetal acceleration t o uniform circular motion
Angular Quantities
Under uniform circular motion, angular and linear qu antities have simple relations. When objects rotate about some axis, each
point in the object follows a circular arc. The rota tion angle is the amount of rotation and is analogous to linear distance. We define
the rotation angle to be the ratio of the arc length to the radius of curvature:
Angle θθ and Arc Length ss: The radius of a circle is rotated through an angle. T he arc length is described on the
circumference.
We define angular velocity ωω as the rate of change o f an angle. In symbols, this is, where an angular ro tation takes
place in a time. From the relation of and (), we see:
Under uniform circular motion, the angular velocity is con stant. The acceleration can be written as:
This acceleration, responsible for the uniform circular m otion, is called centripetal acceleration.
Centripetal Force
Any force or combination of forces can cause a centri petal or radial acceleration. Just a few examples are the tension in the rope on
a tether ball, the force of Earth’s gravity on the M oon, friction between roller skates and a rink floor, a banked roadway’s force on a
car, and forces on the tube of a spinning centrifuge.
Any net force causing uniform circular motion is call ed a centripetal force. The direction of a centripet al force is toward the center
of curvature, the same as the direction of centripetal acceleration. According to Newton’s second law of moti on, net force is mass
times acceleration. For uniform circular motion, the acceleration is the centripetal acceleration:. Thus, the magnitude of
centripetal force is:learning objectives

5.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14459Dynamics of UCM
Newton’s universal law of gravitation states that every part icle attracts every other particle with a force along a line joining them.
Relate Kepler’s laws to Newton’s universal law of gravitation
Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
Newton’s universal law of gravitation states that every particle in the universe attracts every other partic le with a force along a line
joining them. The force is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportiona l to the square of the
distance between them. For two bodies having masses mm an d MM with a distance rr between their centers of mass, t he equation
for Newton’s universal law of gravitation is:
The gravitational force is responsible for artifici al satellites orbiting the Earth. The Moon’s orbit abo ut Earth, the orbits of planets,
asteroids, meteors, and comets about the Sun are oth er examples of gravitational orbits. Historically, Keple r discovered his 3 laws
(called Kepler’s law of planetary motion) long before the days of Newton. Kepler devised his laws after carefu l study (over some
20 years) of a large amount of meticulously recorded obse rvations of planetary motion done by Tycho Brahe (1546–16 01).
Kepler’s Laws
The orbit of each planet about the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one focus.
Each planet moves so that an imaginary line drawn from t he Sun to the planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
The ratio of the squares of the periods of any two planet s about the Sun is equal to the ratio of the cubes of their a verage
distances from the Sun.
Kepler’s Second Law: The shaded regions have equal areas. It takes equal times for mm to go from to, from to, and from
to. The mass mm moves fastest when it is closest to. Kepler’ s second law was originally devised for planets orbiting the Sun,
but it has broader validity.learning objectives

5.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14459
Ellipses and Kepler’s First Law: (a) An ellipse is a closed curve such that the sum of the distances from a point on the curve to
the two foci (and) is a constant. You can draw an ellips e as shown by putting a pin at each focus, and then placing a string
around a pencil and the pins and tracing a line on paper. A circle is a special case of an ellipse in which the two foci coincide (thus
any point on the circle is the same distance from the center). (b) For any closed gravitational orbit, follows an ellipt ical path with
at one focus. Kepler’s first law states this fact for plane ts orbiting the Sun.
Derivation of Kepler’s Third Law For Circular Orbits
Kepler’s 3rd law is equivalent to:
is the period (time for one orbit) and is the avera ge radius. We shall derive Kepler’s third law, start ing with Newton’s laws of
motion and his universal law of gravitation. We will assume a circular path (not an elliptical one) for simplicit y.
Let us consider a circular orbit of a small mass mm around a large mass, satisfying the two conditions s tated at the beginning of
this section. Gravity supplies the centripetal force to ma ss. Therefore, for a uniform circular motion:
The mass cancels, yielding:
Now, to get at Kepler’s third law, we must get the perio d into the equation. By definition, period is the time for one complete
orbit. Now the average speed is the circumference divided by the period:

5.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14459Substituting this into the previous equation gives:
Solving for yields:
Since is proportional to, their ratio is constant. Thi s is Kepler’s 3rd law.
Banked and Unbacked Highway Curves
In an “ideally banked curve,” the angle is chosen s uch that one can negotiate the curve at a certain s peed without the aid of
friction.
Derive for an ideally banked curve for speed
Overview
As an example of a uniform circular motion and its ap plication, let us now consider banked curves, where the s lope of the road
helps you negotiate the curve. The greater the angle, the faster you can take the curve. Race tracks for bikes as well as cars, for
example, often have steeply banked curves. In an “id eally banked curve,” the angle is such that you ca n negotiate the curve at a
certain speed without the aid of friction between the tires and the road. We will derive an expression for for an ideally banked
curve for speed and consider an example related to it.
Uniform Circular Motion and Determining Ideal Banking Conditions
For ideal banking, the net external force equals the horizontal centripetal force in the absence of fric tion. The components of the
normal force in the horizontal and vertical direct ions must equal the centripetal force and the weight of the car, respectively. In
cases in which forces are not parallel, it is most conv enient to consider components along perpendicular a xes—in this case, the
vertical and horizontal directions.
Car on a Banked Curve: The car on this banked curve is moving away and turning to the left.
Above is a free body diagram for a car on a friction less banked curve. The only two external forces acting on the car are its weight
ww and the normal force of the road. (A frictionless surface can only exert a force perpendicular to the surface—that is, a normal
force.) These two forces must add to give a net exte rnal force that is horizontal toward the center of cur vature and has magnitude
. Only the normal force has a horizontal component, and s o this must equal the centripetal force—that is:learning objectives

5.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14459Because the car does not leave the surface of the ro ad, the net vertical force must be zero, meaning th at the vertical components of
the two external forces must be equal in magnitude an d opposite in direction. From the figure, we see that t he vertical component
of the normal force is, and the only other vertical forc e is the car’s weight. These must be equal in magnitude, t hus:
Dividing the above equations yields:
Taking the inverse tangent gives:
for an ideally banked curve with no friction.
This expression can be understood by considering how depends on and. A large will be obtained for a la rge and a small.
That is, roads must be steeply banked for high speed s and sharp curves. Friction helps, because it allows you to take the curve at
greater or lower speed than if the curve is frictionle ss. Note that does not depend on the mass of the vehicle.
Key Points
Under uniform circular motion, angular and linear quantit ies have simple relations. The length of an arc is proporti onal to the
rotation angle and the radius. Also,.
The acceleration responsible for the uniform circular motion is called centripetal acceleration. It is given as.
Any net force causing uniform circular motion is called a centripetal force. The direction of a centripetal forc e is toward the
center of curvature and its magnitude is.
The gravitational force is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them.
Kepler discovered laws describing planetary motion long bef ore the days of Newton, purely based on the observations of Tycho
Brahe.
Kepler’s laws can be derived from the Newton’s universal law of gravitation and his equation of motion.
For ideal banking, the net external force equals the hori zontal centripetal force in the absence of friction.
For ideal banking, the components of the normal force NN in the horizontal and vertical directions must equal the centripetal
force and the weight of the car, respectively.
The ideal banking condition is given as.
Key Terms
centripetal: Directed or moving towards a center.
asteroid: A naturally occurring solid object, which is smaller than a planet and is not a comet, that orbits a star.
planet: A large body which directly orbits any star (or star c luster) but which has not attained nuclear fusion.
normal force: Any force acting normal, to a surface, or perpendicul ar to the tangent plane.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14459OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42084/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42086/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
centripetal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/centripetal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42143/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42144/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
planet. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/planet. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
asteroid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/asteroid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42144/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42144/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42086/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
centripetal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/centripetal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
normal force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/normal_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42144/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 28, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42144/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42086/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144605.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
Overview of Non-Uniform Circular Motion
Non-uniform circular motion denotes a change in the speed of a particle moving along a circular path.
Explain when a particle undergoes non-uniform circular mo tion
What do we mean by non-uniform circular motion? The answer lies in the definition of uniform circular moti on, which is a circular
motion with constant speed. It follows then that non-un iform circular motion denotes a change in the speed of the particle moving
along the circular path. Note especially the change in th e velocity vector sizes, denoting change in the magnitude of velocity.
Diagram of non-uniform circular motion: In non-uniform circular motion, the magnitude of the a ngular velocity changes over
time.
The change in direction is accounted by radial accel eration (centripetal acceleration), which is given by following relation:
. The change in speed has implications for radial (centrip etal) acceleration. There are two possibilities:
1: The radius of circle is constant (like in the moti on along a circular rail or motor track). A change in will change the magnitude
of radial acceleration. This means that the centrip etal acceleration is not constant, as is the case with uniform circular motion. The
greater the speed, the greater the radial accelerati on. A particle moving at higher speed will need a gre ater radial force to change
direction and vice-versa when the radius of the circula r path is constant.
2: The radial (centripetal) force is constant (like a satellite rotating about the earth under the inf luence of a constant force of
gravity). The circular motion adjusts its radius in response to changes in speed. This means that the ra dius of the circular path is
variable, unlike the case of uniform circular motion. In any eventuality, the equation of centripetal a cceleration in terms of “speed”
and “radius” must be satisfied. The important thing t o note here is that, although change in speed of the particle affects radial
acceleration, the change in speed is not affected by radial or centripetal force. We need a tangential f orce to affect the change in the
magnitude of a tangential velocity. The corresponding ac celeration is called tangential acceleration.
In either case, the angular velocity in non-uniform ci rcular motion is not constant as and is varying.
Key Points
In non- uniform circular motion, the size of the velocity vector (speed) changes, denoting change in the magnitu de of velocity.
The change in speed has implications for radial (centrip etal) acceleration. There are two possibilities: 1) the radius of the circle
is constant; or 2) the radial (centripetal) force is cons tant.
In either case, the angular velocity in non-uniform ci rcular motion is not constant, as, and varies.
Key Terms
radial: Moving along a radius.
centripetal: Directed or moving towards a center.learning objectives

5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14460LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Non-uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_circular_motion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Non-Uniform Circular Motion. September 17, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14020/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Non-uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_circular_motion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
centripetal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/centripetal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
radial. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radial. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Nonuniform circular motion.svg - Wikipedia, the free en cyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Nonuniform_circular_motion.sv g&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
This page titled 5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144615.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
Rotational Angle and Angular Velocity
The rotational angle is a measure of how far an object rotates, and angular velocity measures how fast it rotates.
Express the relationship between the rotational angle and th e distance
Rotational Angle and Angular Velocity
When an object rotates about an axis, as with a tire on a car or a record on a turntable, the motion can be described in two ways. A
point on the edge of the rotating object will have s ome velocity and will be carried through an arc by r iding the spinning object.
The point will travel through a distance of, but it is often more convenient to talk about the extent t he object has rotated. The
amount the object rotates is called the rotational angle and may be measured in either degrees or radia ns. Since the rotational angle
is related to the distance and to the radius by the eq uation, it is usually more convenient to use radians.
Angle θ and Arc Length s: The radius of a circle is rotated through an angle. T he arc length is described on the
circumference.
The speed at which the object rotates is given by th e angular velocity, which is the rate of change of the rotational angle with
respect to time. Although the angle itself is not a ve ctor quantity, the angular velocity is a vector. The direction of the angular
velocity vector is perpendicular to the plane of ro tation, in a direction which is usually specified by t he right-hand rule. Angular
acceleration gives the rate of change of angular vel ocity. The angle, angular velocity, and angular acce leration are very useful in
describing the rotational motion of an object.
The Direction of Angular Velocity: The angular velocity describes the speed of rotation and the orientation of the instantaneous
axis about which the rotation occurs. The direction of the a ngular velocity will be along the axis of rotation. In thi s case (counterclockwise rotation), the vector points upwards.
When the axis of rotation is perpendicular to the p osition vector, the angular velocity may be calculate d by taking the linear
velocity of a point on the edge of the rotating ob ject and dividing by the radius. This will give the ang ular velocity, usually
denoted by, in terms of radians per second.learning objectives

5.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461
Angular Velocity: A fly on the edge of a rotating object records a constan t velocity. The object is rotating with an angular
velocity equal to.
Centripetial Acceleration
Centripetal acceleration is the constant change in velo city necessary for an object to maintain a circular path.
Express the centripetal acceleration in terms of rotationa l velocity
Overview
As mentioned in previous sections on kinematics, any c hange in velocity is given by an acceleration. Often t he changes in velocity
are changes in magnitude. When an object speeds up or slows down this is a change in the objects velocity. Ch anges in the
magnitude of the velocity match our intuitive and e very day usage of the term accelerate. However, becaus e velocity is a vector, it
also has a direction. Therefore, any change in the directi on of travel of an object must also be met with an accelerati on.
Uniform circular motion involves an object traveling a circular path at constant speed. Since the speed i s constant, one would not
usually think that the object is accelerating. Howeve r, the direction is constantly changing as the object traverses the circle. Thus, it
is said to be accelerating. One can feel this accele ration when one is on a roller coaster. Even if the speed is constant, a quick turn
will provoke a feeling of force on the rider. This feelin g is an acceleration.learning objectives

5.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461
High School Phy sics - Centripetal AccelerationHigh School Phy sics - Centripetal Acceleration
Centripetal Acceleration: A brief overview of centripetal acceleration for hig h school physics students.
Calculating Centripetal Acceleration
To calculate the centripetal acceleration of an obj ect undergoing uniform circular motion, it is necessar y to have the speed at which
the object is traveling and the radius of the circle about wh ich the motion is taking place. The simple equation is:
where is the linear velocity of the object and is th e radius of the circle.
The centripetal acceleration may also be expressed in terms of rotational velocity as follows:
with omega being the rotational velocity given by.

5.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461
Centripetal Acceleration: As an object moves around a circle, the direction of the v elocity vector constantly changes.
Centripetal Force
A force which causes motion in a curved path is calle d a centripetal force (uniform circular motion is a n example of centripetal
force).
Express the equations for the centripetal force and acce leration
A force that causes motion in a curved path is call ed a centripetal force. Uniform circular motion is a n example of centripetal force
in action. It can be seen in the orbit of satellites around the earth, the tension in a rope in a game of tether ball, a roller coaster loop
de loop, or in a bucket swung around the body.learning objectives

5.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461
High School Phy sics - Centripetal ForceHigh School Phy sics - Centripetal Force
Overview of centripetal force: A brief overview of centripetal force.
Previously, we learned that any change in a velocity i s an acceleration. As the object moves through the circu lar path it is constantly
changing direction, and therefore accelerating—causi ng constant force to be acting on the object. This ce ntripetal force acts toward
the center of curvature, toward the axis of rotation. Because the object is moving perpendicular to the f orce, the path followed by
the object is a circular one. It is this force that keep s a ball from falling out of a bucket if you swing it in circu lar continuously.

5.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461
Centripetal force: As an object travels around a circular path at a constant speed, it experiences a centripetal force accelerating it
toward the center.
The equation for centripetal force is as follows:
where: is centripetal force, is mass, is velocity, an d is the radius of the path of motion.
From Newton’s second law, we can see that centripetal acceleratio n is:
Centripetal force can also be expressed in terms of an gular velocity. Angular velocity is the measure of how fast an object is
traversing the circular path. As the object travels i ts path, it sweeps out an arc that can be measured in d egrees or radians. The
equation for centripetal force using angular velocity i s:
Key Points
When an object rotates about an axis, the points on the e dge of the object travel in arcs.
The angle these arcs sweep out is called the rotational ang le, and it is usually represented by the symbol theta.
A measure of how quickly the object is rotating, with resp ect to time, is called the angular velocity. It is usua lly represented by a
Greek omega symbol. Like its counterpart linear velocity, it is a ve ctor.
For an object to maintain circular motion it must constan tly change direction.
Since velocity is a vector, changes in direction constitut e changes in velocity.
A change in velocity is known as an acceleration. The chan ge in velocity due to circular motion is known as centripetal
acceleration.

5.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461Centripetal acceleration can be calculated by taking the linear velocity squared divided by the radius of the circle the object is
traveling along.
When an object is in uniform circular motion, it is cons tantly changing direction, and therefore accelerating. This is angular
acceleration.
A force acting on the object in uniform circular motion (called centripetal force) is acting on the object from t he center of the
circle.
Key Terms
radians: The angle subtended at the centre of a circle by an ar c of the circle of the same length as the circle’s radi us.
acceleration: The amount by which a speed or velocity increases (and so a scalar quantity or a vector quantity).
circular motion: Motion in such a way that the path taken is that of a circl e.
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.
centripetal: Directed or moving towards a center.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity. Sept ember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
radians. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/radians. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity. Jan uary 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/Figure_07_01_04a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Angular velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_velocity. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Centripetal Acceleration. September 17, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42084/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/circular-motion.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity. Jan uary 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/Figure_07_01_04a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Angular velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_velocity. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Centripetal Acceleration. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EX5DZ2MHlV4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Centripetal Acceleration. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42084/latest/Figure_07_02_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Centripetal Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42086/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14461centripetal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/centripetal. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity. Jan uary 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/Figure_07_01_04a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Angular velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_velocity. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Centripetal Acceleration. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EX5DZ2MHlV4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Centripetal Acceleration. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42084/latest/Figure_07_02_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Centripetal Force. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42086/latest/Figure_07_03_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Overview of centripetal force. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldQWTNDBSSE. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144625.4: Types of Forces in Nature
Tides
Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels due to the effects of the gravity exerted by the moon and the sun, and the rotation of the
Earth.
Explain factors that influence the times and amplitude of the tides at a locale
Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels due to the effects of gravitational forces exerted by the moon and the sun when combined
with the rotation of the Earth. Tides occur to varyin g degrees and frequency, depending on location. Shoreli nes where two almost
equally high tides and two low tides occur each day e xperience a semi- diurnal tide. The occurrence of o nly one high and one low
tide each day is known as diurnal tide. A mixed tide re feres to the daily occurrence of two uneven tides, or perhaps one high and
one low tide. The times and amplitude of tides at var ious locales are influenced by the alignment of the sun and moon, the pattern
of tides in the deep ocean, the shape of the coastline, and o ther forces.
Earth’s tides.: Schematic of the lunar portion of earth’s tides showing (exaggerated) high tides at the sublunar and antipodal po ints
for the hypothetical case of an ocean of constant depth wit h no land. There would also be smaller, superimposed bulges on the sides
facing toward and away from the sun.
Tidal Force
If we want to know the acceleration “felt” by an obser ver living on Earth due to the moon, a tricky part i s that the Earth is not an
inertial frame of reference because it is in “free fall” with respect to the moon. Given this, in order t o figure out the force observed,
we must subtract the acceleration of the (Earth) fram e itself. The tidal force produced by the moon on a small particle located on
Earth is the vector difference between the gravitati onal force exerted by the moon on the particle, and the gravitational force that
would be exerted if it were located at the Earth’s cente r of mass.
learning objectives

5.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462Moon’s Gravity on the Earth: Top picture shows the gravity force due to the Moon at dif ferent locations on Earth. Bottom
picture shows the differential force. This is the acceler ation “felt” by an observer living on Earth.
As diagramed below, this is equivalent to subtracting the “red” vector from the “black” vectors on the su rface of the Earth in the
top picture, leading to the “differential” force re presented by the bottom picture. Thus, the tidal forc e depends not on the strength of
the lunar gravitational field, but on its gradient (which falls off approximately as the inverse cube of t he distance to the originating
gravitational body).
On average, the solar gravitational force on the Ear th is 179 times stronger than the lunar, but because the sun is on average 389
times farther from the Earth its field gradient is weaker. The solar tidal force is 46% as large as the lu nar. More precisely, the lunar
tidal acceleration (along the moon-Earth axis, at th e Earth’s surface) is about g, while the solar tidal acceleration (along
the sun-Earth axis, at the Earth’s surface) is about g, where g is the gravitational acceleration at the Earth’s surface.
Venus has the largest effect of the other planets, at 0.000 113 times the solar effect.
Tidal Energy
Energy of tides can be extracted by two means: inser ting a water turbine into a tidal current, or buildi ng ponds that release/admit
water through a turbine. In the first case, the energ y amount is entirely determined by the timing and t idal current magnitude, but
the best currents may be unavailable because the turb ines would obstruct ships. In the second case, impound ment dams are
expensive to construct, natural water cycles are complet ely disrupted, as is ship navigation. However, with mul tiple ponds, power
can be generated at chosen times. Presently, there ar e few installed systems for tidal power generation (mo st famously, La Rance by
Saint Malo, France), as many difficulties are involved. Asid e from environmental issues, simply withstanding corrosi on and
biological fouling pose engineering challenges.
Tidal Energy Generator: Tidal energy generator that works like a wind turbine, bu t with the ocean currents providing the energy.
The circle in the middle is the turbine. The contrapti on travels up and down the two legs just like a lift and sits o n the sea floor
when in use.
Unlike with wind power systems, tidal power proponents po int out that generation levels can be reliably predi cted (save for
weather effects). While some generation is possible for most of the tidal cycle, in practice, turbines lose efficiency at lower
operating rates. Since the power available from a flo w is proportional to the cube of the flow speed, the ti mes during which high
power generation is possible are brief.
The Coriolois Force
The Coriolis effect is a deflection of moving objects whe n they are viewed in a rotating reference frame.
Formulate relationship between the Coriolis force, mass of a n object, and speed in the rotating frame
The Coriolis effect is a deflection of moving object s when they are viewed in a rotating reference frame. I n a reference frame with
clockwise rotation, the deflection is to the left of t he motion of the object; in one with counter-clockwis e rotation, the deflection is
to the right. Although recognized previously by other s, the mathematical expression for the Coriolis force appeared in an 1835learning objectives

5.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462paper by French scientist Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis, in co nnection with the theory of water wheels. Early in the 20 century, the
term “Coriolis force” began to be used in connection with m eteorology.
Frames of Reference: In the inertial frame of reference (upper part of the picture), the black object moves in a straight line.
However, the observer (red dot) who is standing in the rotati ng/non-inertial frame of reference (lower part of the p icture) sees the
object as following a curved path due to the Coriolis and c entrifugal forces present in this frame.
Newton’s laws of motion govern the motion of an object in a (non-accelerating) inertial frame of referenc e. When Newton’s laws
are transformed to a uniformly rotating frame of re ference, the Coriolis and centrifugal forces appear. Both forces are proportional
to the mass of the object. The Coriolis force is propor tional to the rotation rate, and the centrifugal for ce is proportional to its
square. The Coriolis force acts in a direction perpe ndicular to the rotation axis and to the velocity of the body in the rotating frame.
It is proportional to the object’s speed in the rota ting frame. These additional forces are termed iner tial forces, fictitious forces, or
pseudo-forces. They allow the application of Newton’s la ws to a rotating system. They are correction factors t hat do not exist in a
non-accelerating or inertial reference frame.
Perhaps the most commonly encountered rotating refer ence frame is the Earth. The Coriolis effect is caus ed by the rotation of the
Earth and the inertia of the mass experiencing the e ffect. Because the Earth completes only one rotation per day, the Coriolis force
is quite small. Its effects generally become noticea ble only for motions occurring over large distances and long periods of time,
such as large-scale movements of air in the atmosphe re or water in the ocean. Such motions are constrained by the surface of the
earth, so generally only the horizontal component of the Coriolis force is important. This force causes mo ving objects on the
surface of the Earth to be deflected in a clockwise se nse (with respect to the direction of travel) in the northern hemisphere and in a
counter-clockwise sense in the southern hemisphere. Ra ther than flowing directly from areas of high pressur e to low pressure, as
they would in a non-rotating system, winds and curren ts tend to flow to the right of this direction north o f the equator and to the left
of this direction south of it. This effect is responsible for the rotation of large cyclones.th

5.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462
Coriolis Force: This low-pressure system over Iceland spins counter- clockwise due to balance between the Coriolis force a nd the
pressure gradient force.
Other Geophysical Applications
Tidal and Coriolis forces may not be obvious over a s mall time-space scale, but they are important in met eorology, navigation, and
fishing.
Identify fields that have to take into account the tidal and Coriolis forces
We have studied tidal and Coriolis forces previousl y. To review, the tidal force is responsible for the tides — it is a “differential
force,” due to a secondary effect of the force of g ravity. The Coriolis force is a fictitious force, r epresenting a deflection of moving
objects when they are viewed in a rotating reference frame of the Earth. Although their effects may not be obvious over a small
time-space scale, these forces are important in such conte xts as meteorology, navigation, fishing, and others.
The Tides
Tidal flows are important for marine navigation, and significant errors in position occur if they are no t accounted for. Tidal heights
are also important; for example, many rivers and ha rbors have a shallow “bar” at the entrance to prevent boats with significant draft
from entering at low tide. Until the advent of automat ed navigation, competence in calculating tidal effec ts was important to naval
officers. The certificate of examination for lieute nants in the Royal Navy once declared that the prospe ctive officer was able to
“shift his tides. ”learning objectives

5.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462
Tidal Indicator: Tidal Indicator, Delaware River, Delaware c. 1897. In the mo ment pictured, the tide is 1.25 feet above mean low
water and is still falling, as indicated by the pointing of the arrow. The indicator is powered by a system of pulle ys, cables, and a
float
The Coriolis Force
The Coriolis force is quite small, and its effects gene rally become noticeable only when we are dealing with motions occurring
over large distances and long periods of time, such a s large-scale movements of air in the atmosphere or wa ter in the ocean. The
Coriolis effects also became important in ballistics calculations — for example, calculating the traject ories of very long-range
artillery shells. The most famous historical example is the Paris gun, used by the Germans during World War I to bombard Paris
from a range of about 120 km.
Flow Representation: A schematic representation of flow around a low-press ure area in the Northern Hemisphere. The pressuregradient force is represented by blue arrows and the Cori olis acceleration (always perpendicular to the velocity) by red arrows

5.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462Key Points
The tidal force depends not on the strength of the lunar gravitational field itself, but on its gradient, which f alls off
approximately as the inverse cube of the distance to the or iginating gravitational body. This is because the tidal force felt by an
observer on Earth is a differential force.
The times and amplitude of the tides at a locale are infl uenced by several factors, such as the alignment of the su n and moon,
the pattern of tides in the deep ocean, the shape of the co astline, and others forces.
Energy of tides can be extracted by two means: inserting a wate r turbine into a tidal current, or building ponds that
release/admit water through a turbine.
When Newton’s laws are transformed to a uniformly rotating frame of reference, the Coriolis and centrifugal forces a ppear.
The Coriolis force acts in a direction perpendicular to t he rotation axis and to the velocity of the body in the rotating frame; it is
proportional to the object’s mass and speed in the rotating frame.
The Coriolis effect is caused by the rotation of the Eart h and the inertia of the mass experiencing the effect.
Tidal flows are important for marine navigation, and signi ficant errors in position occur if they are not accounted for.
The Coriolis force is quite small, and its effects genera lly become noticeable only when we are dealing with mot ions occurring
over large distances and long periods of time, such as larg e-scale movements of air in the atmosphere or water in the o cean.
The tidal force is responsible for the tides. It is a “diff erential force,” due to a secondary effect of the force of gravity. The
Coriolis force is a fictitious force, representing a defl ection of moving objects when they are viewed in a rotat ing reference
frame of the Earth.
Key Terms
inertial frame: A frame of reference that describes time and space h omogeneously, isotropically, and in a time-independent
manner.
diurnal: Having a daily cycle that is completed every 24 hours, us ually referring to tasks, processes, tides, or sunrise to sun set.
gradient: The rate at which a physical quantity increases or decre ases relative to change in a given variable, especially dista nce.
fictitious force: an apparent force that acts on all masses in a non-inert ial frame of reference, such as a rotating reference fram e
centrifugal force: the apparent outward force that draws a rotating body away fr om the center of rotation
ballistics: the science of mechanics that deals with the flight, beha vior, and effects of projectiles, especially bullets, gr avity
bombs, rockets, or the like
meteorology: the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosp here
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
gradient. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gradient. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
inertial frame. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/inertial%20frame. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
diurnal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diurnal. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51085139e4b0c14bf46493bf/ 1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/4/4a/Tidal_energy_gene rator,_Eday_-_geograph.org.uk__1267433.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14462fictitious force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/fictitious%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
centrifugal force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/centrifugal%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
inertial frame. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/inertial%20frame. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51085139e4b0c14bf46493bf/ 1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/4/4a/Tidal_energy_gene rator,_Eday_-_geograph.org.uk__1267433.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect%23Ballistic_missiles_and_ satellites. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/ballistics. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
meteorology. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/meteorology. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51085139e4b0c14bf46493bf/ 1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/4/4a/Tidal_energy_gene rator,_Eday_-_geograph.org.uk__1267433.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect. License: CC BY: Attribution
Tide. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tide. License: CC BY: Attribution
Coriolis effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_effect%23Ballistic_missiles_and_ satellites. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.4: Types of Forces in Nature is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

5.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144635.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
The Law of Universal Gravitation
Objects with mass feel an attractive force that is pro portional to their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance.
Express the Law of Universal Gravitation in mathematical form
While an apple might not have struck Sir Isaac Newton’ s head as myth suggests, the falling of one did inspir e Newton to one of the
great discoveries in mechanics: The Law of Universal Gravitation. Pondering why the apple never drops sideways or upward s or
any other direction except perpendicular to the gro und, Newton realized that the Earth itself must be respo nsible for the apple’s
downward motion.
Theorizing that this force must be proportional to the masses of the two objects involved, and using prev ious intuition about the
inverse-square relationship of the force between the e arth and the moon, Newton was able to formulate a gener al physical law by
induction.
The Law of Universal Gravitation states that every poin t mass attracts every other point mass in the universe by a force pointing in
a straight line between the centers-of-mass of both p oints, and this force is proportional to the masses o f the objects and inversely
proportional to their separation This attractive fo rce always points inward, from one point to the other. The Law applies to all
objects with masses, big or small. Two big objects can be considered as point-like masses, if the distance betwe en them is very
large compared to their sizes or if they are spheric ally symmetric. For these cases the mass of each obje ct can be represented as a
point mass located at its center-of-mass.
While Newton was able to articulate his Law of Universal Gravitation and verify it experimentally, he could o nly calculate the
relative gravitational force in comparison to anoth er force. It wasn’t until Henry Cavendish’s verificatio n of the gravitational
constant that the Law of Universal Gravitation received i ts final algebraic form:
where represents the force in Newtons, and represen t the two masses in kilograms, and represents the separ ation in meters.
represents the gravitational constant, which has a va lue of. Because of the magnitude of, gravitational
force is very small unless large masses are involved.
image
Forces on two masses: All masses are attracted to each other. The force is pr oportional to the masses and inversely proportional to
the square of the distance.
Gravitational Attraction of Spherical Bodies: A Uniform Sphere
The Shell Theorem states that a spherically symmetri c object affects other objects as if all of its mas s were concentrated at its
center.
Formulate the Shell Theorem for spherically symmetric ob jects
Universal Gravitation for Spherically Symmetric Bodies
The Law of Universal Gravitation states that the gravitational force between two point s of mass is proportional to the magnitudes
of their masses and the inverse-square of their separat ion,:learning objectives
learning objectives

5.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14463However, most objects are not point particles. Finding the gravitational force between three-dimensional ob jects requires treating
them as points in space. For highly symmetric shapes such as spher es or spherical shells, finding this point is simple.
The Shell Theorem
Isaac Newton proved the Shell Theorem, which states that:
1. A spherically symmetric object affects other object s gravitationally as if all of its mass were concentrated at i ts center,
2. If the object is a spherically symmetric shell (i.e., a h ollow ball) then the net gravitational force on a body inside of it is zero.
Since force is a vector quantity, the vector summation of all parts of the shell/sphere contribute to the net force, and this net force is
the equivalent of one force measurement taken from th e sphere’s midpoint, or center of mass (COM). So when fin ding the force of
gravity exerted on a ball of 10 kg, the distance mea sured from the ball is taken from the ball’s center of mass to the earth’s center of
mass.
Given that a sphere can be thought of as a collectio n of infinitesimally thin, concentric, spherical shel ls (like the layers of an
onion), then it can be shown that a corollary of the Sh ell Theorem is that the force exerted in an object inside of a solid sphere is
only dependent on the mass of the sphere inside of th e radius at which the object is. That is because shel ls at a greater radius than
the one at which the object is, do not contribute a force to an object inside of them (Statem ent 2 of theorem).
When considering the gravitational force exerted on an object at a point inside or outside a uniform spherically symmetric object of
radius RR, there are two simple and distinct situations t hat must be examined: the case of a hollow spherical shell, and that of a
solid sphere with uniformly distributed mass.
Case 1: A hollow spherical shell
The gravitational force acting by a spherically symm etric shell upon a point mass inside it, is the vector sum of gravitational forces
acted by each part of the shell, and this vector sum is equal to zero. That is, a mass mm within a spherically symmetric shell of
mass, will feel no net force (Statement 2 of Shell Theorem).
The net gravitational force that a spherical shell o f mass exerts on a body outside of it, is the vector sum of the gravitational
forces acted by each part of the shell on the outsid e object, which add up to a net force acting as if ma ss is concentrated on a
point at the center of the sphere (Statement 1 of Shell T heorem).
Diagram used in the proof of the Shell Theorem: This diagram outlines the geometry considered when prov ing The Shell
Theorem. In particular, in this case a spherical shell of mass (left side of figure) exerts a force on mass (right side of the
figure) outside of it. The surface area of a thin slice o f the sphere is shown in color. (Note: The proof of the theor em is not
presented here. Interested readers can explore further using the sources listed at the bottom of this article.)
Case 2: A solid, uniform sphere
The second situation we will examine is for a solid, uniform sphere of mass and radius, exerting a forc e on a body of mass
at a radius inside of it (that is,). We can use the results and coro llaries of the Shell Theorem to analyze this case. T he
contribution of all shells of the sphere at a radius (or distance) greater than dd from the sphere’s cente r-of-mass can be ignored (see
above corollary of the Shell Theorem). Only the mass o f the sphere within the desired radius (that is the ma ss of the sphere
inside dd) is relevant, and can be considered as a p oint mass at the center of the sphere. So, the gravitati onal force acting upon point
mass mm is:

5.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14463where it can be shown that
(is the mass density of the sphere and we are assuming that it does not depend on the radius. That is, the s phere’s mass is
uniformly distributed.)
Therefore, combining the above two equations we get:
which shows that mass mm feels a force that is linearly propor tional to its distance, dd, from the sphere’s center of ma ss.
As in the case of hollow spherical shells, the net gra vitational force that a solid sphere of uniformly di stributed mass exerts on a
body outside of it, is the vector sum of the gravitational forces acted by each shell of the sphere on the outside obj ect. The resulting
net gravitational force acts as if mass is concentr ated on a point at the center of the sphere, which is the center of mass, or COM
(Statement 1 of Shell Theorem). More generally, this res ult is true even if the mass is not uniformly distributed, but its density
varies radially (as is the case for planets).
Weight of the Earth
When the bodies have spatial extent, gravitational fo rce is calculated by summing the contributions of p oint masses which
constitute them.
Describe how gravitational force is calculated for the b odies with spatial extent
Newton’s law of universal gravitation states that every point mass in the universe attracts every other poin t mass with a force that is
directly proportional to the product of their masses, a nd inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
In modern language, the law states the following: Every point mass attracts every single other point mass by a force pointing along
the line intersecting both points. The force is proportional to the product of the t wo masses and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance between them:
where is the force between the masses, is the gravitat ional constant, is the first mass, is the second ma ss and is the
distance between the centers of the masses.
If the bodies in question have spatial extent (rather than being theoretical point masses), then the gravita tional force between them
is calculated by summing the contributions of the n otional point masses which constitute the bodies. In the limit, as the component
point masses become “infinitely small”, this entails inte grating the force (in vector form, see below) over th e extents of the two
bodies.
In this way it can be shown that an object with a spher ically-symmetric distribution of mass exerts the same gravitational attraction
on external bodies as if all the object’s mass were concent rated at a point at its center.
For points inside a spherically-symmetric distributio n of matter, Newton’s Shell theorem can be used to find the gravitational force.
The theorem tells us how different parts of the mass d istribution affect the gravitational force measured at a point located a distance
from the center of the mass distribution:
1. The portion of the mass that is located at radii cause s the same force at as if all of the mass enclosed within a sp here of
radius was concentrated at the center of the mass distribut ion (as noted above).
2. The portion of the mass that is located at radii exert s no net gravitational force at the distance from the cen ter. That is,
the individual gravitational forces exerted by the ele ments of the sphere out there, on the point at, cancel e ach other out.learning objectives

5.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14463As a consequence, for example, within a shell of uniform thickness and density there is no net gravitational acceleration anywhere
within the hollow sphere. Furthermore, inside a uniform sphere the gravity increases linearly with the dist ance from the center; the
increase due to the additional mass is 1.5 times th e decrease due to the larger distance from the cent er. Thus, if a spherically
symmetric body has a uniform core and a uniform mant le with a density that is less than of that of the co re, then the gravity
initially decreases outwardly beyond the boundary, and if the sphere is large enough, further outward the gra vity increases again,
and eventually it exceeds the gravity at the core/mant le boundary.
The gravity of the Earth may be highest at the core/man tle boundary, as shown in Figure 1:
Gravitational Field of Earth: Diagram of the gravitational field strength within the E arth.
Key Points
Sir Isaac Newton’s inspiration for the Law of Universal Gravitatio n was from the dropping of an apple from a tree.
Newton’s insight on the inverse-square property of gravit ational force was from intuition about the motion of the earth and the
moon.
The mathematical formula for gravitational force is wh ere is the gravitational constant.
Since force is a vector quantity, the vector summation of al l parts of the shell contribute to the net force, and th is net force is the
equivalent of one force measurement taken from the sph ere’s midpoint, or center of mass (COM).
The gravitational force on an object within a hollow sphe rical shell is zero.
The gravitational force on an object within a uniform s pherical mass is linearly proportional to its distance from the sphere’s
center of mass (COM).
Newton’s law of universal gravitation states that every poi nt mass in the universe attracts every other point mass with a force
that is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the d istance between them.
The second step in calculating earth’s mass came with the d evelopment of Newton’s law of universal gravitation.
By equating Newton’s second law with his law of universal gravi tation, and inputting for the acceleration a the exper imentally
verified value of 9.8, the mass of earth is calculated to be, making the earth’s weight calculable given any
gravitational field.
The gravity of the Earth may be highest at the core/man tle boundary
Key Terms
induction: Use inductive reasoning to generalize and interpret r esults from applying Newton’s Law of Gravitation.
inverse: Opposite in effect or nature or order.
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
point mass: A theoretical point with mass assigned to it.

5.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14463weight: The force on an object due to the gravitational attr action between it and the Earth (or whatever astronomica l object it is
primarily influenced by).
gravitational force: A very long-range, but relatively weak fundamental forc e of attraction that acts between all particles that
have mass; believed to be mediated by gravitons.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Newton's law of universal gravitation. Provided by: WIKIPEDIA. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_law_of_universal_gravitation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Isaac Newton. Provided by: WIKIPEDIA. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Newton%23Apple_incident. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
induction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/induction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
inverse. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inverse. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Shell theorem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_theorem. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/mef.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's law of universal gravitation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_law_of_universal_gravitation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Shell-diag-1. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shell-diag-1.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Law of universal gravitation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_universal_gravitation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42073/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Gravitational constant. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_constant. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Law of universal gravitation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_universal_gravitation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
weight. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/weight. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
point mass. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/point_mass. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gravitational force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gravitational_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Shell-diag-1. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shell-diag-1.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/4/43/Earth-G-force.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144645.6: Kepler’s Laws
Kepler’s First Law
Kepler’s first law is: The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one o f the two foci.
Apply Kepler’s first law to describe planetary motion
Kepler’s First Law
Kepler’s first law states that
The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci.
An ellipse is a closed plane curve that resembles a s tretched out circle. Note that the Sun is not at the ce nter of the ellipse, but at
one of its foci. The other focal point,, has no physical significance for the orbit. The cent er of an ellipse is the midpoint of the
line segment joining its focal points. A circle is a specia l case of an ellipse where both focal points coincide.
Ellipses and Kepler’s First Law: (a) An ellipse is a closed curve such that the sum of the distances from a point on the curve to
the two foci (and) is a constant. You can draw an ellips e as shown by putting a pin at each focus, and then placing a string
around a pencil and the pins and tracing a line on paper. A circle is a special case of an ellipse in which the two foci coincide (thus
any point on the circle is the same distance from the center). (b) For any closed gravitational orbit, follows an ellipt ical path with
at one focus. Kepler’s first law states this fact for plane ts orbiting the Sun.
How stretched out an ellipse is from a perfect circle is known as its eccentricity: a parameter that can take any value greater than or
equal to 0 (a circle) and less than 1 (as the eccent ricity tends to 1, the ellipse tends to a parabola). Th e eccentricities of the planetslearning objectives
Definition

5.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464known to Kepler varied from 0.007 (Venus) to 0.2 (Mercury). Minor bodies such as comets an asteroids (discovered after Kepler’s
time) can have very large eccentricities. The dwarf plane t Pluto, discovered in 1929, has an eccentricity of 0.25.
Symbolically, an ellipse can be represented in polar coordin ates as:
where are the polar coordinates (from the focus) for the ellipse, is the semi-latus rectum, and is th e eccentricity of the
ellipse. For a planet orbiting the Sun, is the distan ce from the Sun to the planet and is the angle betwe en the planet’s current
position and its closest approach, with the Sun as the vert ex.
Orbit As Ellipse: Heliocentric coordinate system for ellipse. Also shown are: semi-major axis, semi-minor axis and semilatus rectum; center of ellipse and its two foci marked b y large dots. For, and for,.
At, perihelion, the distance is minimum
At and at, the distance is.
At, aphelion, the distance is maximum
The semi-major axis is the arithmetic mean between and:
The semi-minor axis is the geometric mean between an d:
The semi-latus rectum is the harmonic mean between and:
The eccentricity is the coefficient of variation bet ween and:

5.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464The area of the ellipse is
The special case of a circle is, resulting in and. The orbits of planets with very small
eccentricities can be approximated as circles.
Understanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and OrbitsUnderstanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and Orbits
Understanding Kepler’s 3 Laws and Orbits: In this video you will be introduced to Kepler’s 3 laws and see how they are
relevant to orbiting objects.
Kepler’s Second Law
Kepler’s second law states: A line joining a planet and the Su n sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.
Apply Kepler’s second law to describe planetary motion
Kepler’s second law states:
learning objectives

5.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal are as during equal intervals of time.
Understanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and OrbitsUnderstanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and Orbits
Understanding Kepler’s 3 Laws and Orbits: In this video you will be introduced to Kepler’s 3 laws and see how they are
relevant to orbiting objects.
In a small time the planet sweeps out a small triangle hav ing base line and height. The area of this triangle is gi ven by:
and so the constant areal velocity is:
Now as the first law states that the planet follows an e llipse, the planet is at different distances from the Sun at different parts in its
orbit. So the planet has to move faster when it is closer to the Sun so that it sweeps equal areas in equal times.Definition

5.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464The total area enclosed by the elliptical orbit is:
Therefore the period satisfies:
Where is the angular velocity, (using Newton notation for differentiation), and is the mean motion of th e planet
around the Sun.
See below for an illustration of this effect. The plan et traverses the distance between A and B, C and D, and E and F in equal times.
When the planet is close to the Sun it has a larger ve locity, making the base of the triangle larger, but the height of the triangle
smaller, than when the planet is far from the Sun. One can see that the planet will travel fastest at perihe lion and slowest at
aphelion.
Kepler’s Second Law: The shaded regions have equal areas. It takes equal times for m to go from A to B, from C to D, and from E
to F. The mass m moves fastest when it is closest to M. Kepler ’s second law was originally devised for planets orbiti ng the Sun, but
it has broader validity.
Kepler’s Third Law
Kepler’s third law states that the square of the orbital period of a planet is dire ctly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis
of its orbit.
Apply Kepler’s third law to describe planetary motion
Kepler’s Third Law
Kepler’s third law states:
The square of the orbital period of a planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbi t.
The third law, published by Kepler in 1619, captures th e relationship between the distance of planets from the Sun, and their orbital
periods. Symbolically, the law can be expressed as
where P is the orbital period of the planet and a is the semi -major axis of the orbit (see).learning objectives
Definition

5.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464
Kepler’s Third Law: Kepler’s third law states that the square of the period of t he orbit of a planet about the Sun is proportional to
the cube of the semi-major axis of the orbit.
The constant of proportionality is
for a sidereal year (yr), and astronomical unit (AU).
Kepler enunciated this third law in a laborious attemp t to determine what he viewed as the “music of the sph eres” according to
precise laws, and express it in terms of musical notatio n. Therefore, it used to be known as the harmonic law.
Derivation of Kepler’s Third Law
We can derive Kepler’s third law by starting with Newton’ s laws of motion and the universal law of gravitation. We can therefore
demonstrate that the force of gravity is the cause of Keple r’s laws.
Consider a circular orbit of a small mass m around a large mass M. Gravity supplies the centripetal force to mass m. Starting with
Newton’s second law applied to circular motion,
The net external force on mass m is gravity, and so we subst itute the force of gravity for F:
The mass m cancels, as well as an r, yielding
The fact that m cancels out is another aspect of the oft-noted fact that at a given location all masses f all with the same acceleration.
Here we see that at a given orbital radius r, all masse s orbit at the same speed. This was implied by the res ult of the preceding
worked example. Now, to get at Kepler’s third law, we must get the period P into the equation. By definition, per iod P is the time
for one complete orbit. Now the average speed v is the circumfe rence divided by the period—that is,
Substituting this into the previous equation gives
Solving for P yieldsnet

5.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464Using subscripts 1 and 2 to denote two different satellites, and taking the ratio of the last equation for satellite 1 to satellite 2 yields
This is Kepler’s third law. Note that Kepler’s third law i s valid only for comparing satellites of the same paren t body, because only
then does the mass of the parent body M cancel.
Now consider what one would get when solving for the ra tio. We obtain a relationship that can be used to determine
the mass M of a parent body from the orbits of its satelli tes:
If r and P are known for a satellite, then the mass M of the parent can be calculated. This principle has b een used extensively to find
the masses of heavenly bodies that have satellites. Fu rthermore, the ratio should be a constant for all sa tellites of the same
parent body (because).
Understanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and OrbitsUnderstanding Kepler' s 3 Law s and Orbits

5.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464Understanding Kepler’s 3 Laws and Orbits: In this video you will be introduced to Kepler’s 3 laws and see how they are
relevant to orbiting objects.
Orbital Maneuvers
An orbital maneuver is the use of propulsion systems to cha nge the orbit of a spacecraft (the rest of the flight is c alled “coasting”).
Explain purpose of an orbital maneuver
Orbital Maneuvers
In spaceflight, an orbital maneuver is the use of prop ulsion systems to change the orbit of a spacecraft. T he rest of the flight,
especially in a transfer orbit, is called coasting.
Rocket Equation
The Tsiolkovsky rocket equation or ideal rocket equation is an equation useful for considering vehicles that follow the basic
principle of a rocket: a device that can apply acce leration to itself (a thrust) by expelling part of its mass with high speed and
moving due to the conservation of momentum. Specifica lly, it is a mathematical equation relating the del ta-v with the effective
exhaust velocity and both the initial and final mass of a rocket (or other reaction engine).
For any such maneuver (or journey involving a number of s uch maneuvers):
where:
m is the initial total mass, including propellant;
m is the final total mass;
v is the effective exhaust velocity (v =I g where I is the specific impulse expressed as a time period and g is the
gravitational constant); and
Δv is delta-v the maximum change of speed of the vehicle (with no external forces acting).
See for an illustration plotting the relationship between f inal velocity and rocket mass ratios (according to the rocke t equation).
learning objectives
e e sp • 0 sp 0

5.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464
Rocket Equation: Rocket mass ratios versus final velocity calculated fr om the rocket equation
Delta-v Budget:
The total delta-v for each maneuver estimated for a mission is called a delta-v budget. With a good approximation of the delta-v
budget, designers can estimate the fuel to payload requir ements of the spacecraft using the rocket equation.
Oberth Effect and Gravitational Assist
In astronautics, the Oberth effect occurs when the use o f a rocket engine travelling at high speed generate s much more useful
energy than one at low speed. This effect is the resu lt of propellant having more usable energy (due to its kinetic energy on top of
its chemical potential energy). The vehicle is able to emp loy this kinetic energy to generate more mechanical po wer.
Oberth effect is used in a powered flyby or Oberth mane uver in which the application of an impulse (typical ly from the use of a
rocket engine) close to a gravitational body (where the gravity potential is low and the speed is high) allows for more change in
kinetic energy and final speed (i.e. higher specific energy) than the same impulse applied further from the body for the same initial
orbit.
In orbital mechanics, a gravitational slingshot (or g ravity assist maneuver) is the use of the relative m ovement and gravity of a
planet or other celestial body to alter the path and speed of a spacecraft, typically in an effort to save propellant, time, and expense.
Gravity assistance can be used to accelerate, decelera te and/or re-direct the path of a spacecraft. This t echnique was used by the
V oyager probes in their fly-bys of Jupiter and Saturn (se e).
Voyager Path Using Gravity Assists: The trajectories that enabled NASA’s twin V oyager spac ecraft to tour the four gas giant
planets and achieve velocity to escape our solar system

5.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464Transfer Orbits
Orbit insertion is a general term used for a maneuver when it is mor e than a small correction. It may be used in a maneu ver to
change a transfer orbit or an ascent orbit into a sta ble one, but also to change a stable orbit into a de scent (i.e., descent orbit
insertion). Also, the term orbit injection is used, especially for changing a stable orbit into a transfer orbit—e.g., trans-lunar
injection (TLI), trans-Mars injection (TMI) and trans-Eart h injection (TEI).
The Hohmann transfer orbit is an elliptical orbit us ed to transfer between two circular orbits of differen t altitudes in the same plane.
The orbital maneuver to perform the Hohmann transfer uses two engine impulses that move aspacecraft onto and off the transfer
orbit, as diagramed in. Hohmann transfer orbits are th e most efficient with fuel. Other non-Hohmann types of transfer orbits that
are less efficient with fuel exist, but these may be mor e efficient with other resources (such as time).
Hohmann Transfer Orbit: A diagram of the Hohmann Transfer Orbit.
Orbital inclination change is an orbital maneuver aimed at changing an orbiti ng body’s orbit inclination (this maneuver is also
known as an orbital plane change as the plane of the o rbit is tipped). The maneuver requires a change in th e orbital velocity vector
(delta-v) at the orbital nodes (i.e., the point at whic h the initial and desired orbits intersect: the line of orbital nodes is defined by
the intersection of the two orbital planes).
Satellites
Natural satellites are celestial objects that orbit a large r body; artificial satellites are manmade objects put in the orbit of the Earth.
Define the concept of a satellite, in the broadest possi ble terms
Satellites
The word “satellite” has a somewhat ambiguous definitio n. The broadest possible definition of a satellite is an object that orbits a
larger one due to the force of gravity. Natural satell ites, often called moons (see), are celestial bodies that orbit a larger body call a
primary (often planet, though there are binary asteroids, to o). It is technically correct to refer to a planet as a “satellite” of its parent
star, though this is not common.learning objectives

5.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464
Moons of the Solar System: Nineteen natural satellites are large enough to be round, and one, Saturn’s Titan, has a substantial
atmosphere.
Artificial satellites (see) are man made objects pu t in orbit about the Earth or another planet in the Solar System. All satellites
follow the laws of orbital mechanics, which can almost alway s be approximated with Newtonian physics.
Orbital Altitudes: Orbital Altitudes of several significant satellites of e arth.
Natural satellites are often classified in terms of t heir size and composition, while artificial satellite s are categorized in terms of
their orbital parameters.
Natural Satellites
Formally classified natural satellites, or moons, incl ude 176 planetary satellites orbiting six of the eig ht planets, and eight orbiting
three of the five IAU-listed dwarf planets. As of January 2012, over 200 minor-planet moons have been discovere d. There are 76
objects in the asteroid belt with satellites (five wit h two satellites each), four Jupiter trojans, 39 near- Earth objects, and 14 Marscrossers. There are also 84 known natural satellites o f trans-Neptunian objects. Planets around other stars are likely to have natural
satellites as well, although none have yet been observed.
Of the inner planets, Mercury and Venus have no natura l satellites; Earth has one large natural satellite, known as the Moon; and
Mars has two tiny natural satellites, Phobos and Deimos. T he large gas giants have extensive systems of natural satellites, including
half a dozen comparable in size to Earth’s Moon: the f our Galilean moons, Saturn’s Titan, and Neptune’s Trit on. Saturn has an
additional six mid-sized natural satellites massive e nough to have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium, and Uranus has five. It has
been suggested that some satellites may potentially har bor life, though there is currently no direct evidence.
The Earth–Moon system is unique in that the ratio of the mass of the Moon to the mass of the Earth is much greater than that of any
other natural satellite to planet ratio in the Solar Sy stem. Additionally the Moon’s orbit with respect to the Sun is always concave.
The seven largest natural satellites in the Solar System (those bigger than 2,500 km across) are Jupiter’s Gali lean moons
(Ganymede, Callisto, Io, and Europa), Saturn’s moon Titan, E arth’s moon, and Neptune’s captured natural satellite Triton.

5.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464Artificial Satellites
The first satellite, Sputnik 1, was put into orbit ar ound Earth and was therefore in geocentric orbit. By far this is the most common
type of orbit with about 2,500 artificial satellites orbiting the Earth. Geocentric orbits may be further classified by their altitude,
inclination and eccentricity.
The commonly used altitude classifications are Low Ea rth orbit (LEO), Medium Earth orbit (MEO) and High Earth orbit (HEO).
Low Earth orbit is any orbit below 2000 km, and Medium Earth orbit is any orbit higher than that but still below the altitude for
geosynchronous orbit at 35,786 km. High Earth orbit is any o rbit higher than the altitude for geosynchronous orbi t.
Altitude classifications
Low Earth orbit (LEO): Geocentric orbits ranging in altitude from 0–2000 km (0–1240 miles)
Medium Earth orbit (MEO): Geocentric orbits ranging in altitude from 2,000 km (1,200 mi) to just below geosynchronous or bit
at 35,786 km (22,236 mi). Also known as an intermediate ci rcular orbit.
High Earth orbit (HEO): Geocentric orbits above the altitud e of geosynchronous orbit 35,786 km (22,236 mi).
Inclination Classifications
Inclined orbit: An orbit whose inclination in reference to the equatorial plane is not zero degrees.
Polar orbit: An orbit that passes above or nearly above both poles of the planet on each revolution. Therefore it has an
inclination of (or very close to) 90 degrees.
Polar sun synchronous orbit: A nearly polar orbit that pa sses the equator at the same local time on every pass. Useful fo r image
taking satellites because shadows will be nearly the same on every pass.
Eccentricity Classifications
Circular orbit: An orbit that has an eccentricity of 0 and whose path traces a circle.
Hohmann transfer orbit: An orbital maneuver that moves a sp acecraft from one circular orbit to another using two en gine
impulses.
Elliptic orbit: An orbit with an eccentricity greater than 0 and less than 1 whose orbit traces the path of an ellipse.
Geosynchronous transfer orbit: An elliptic orbit where the perigee is at the altitude of a Low Earth orbit (LEO) and the apogee
at the altitude of a geosynchronous orbit.
Geostationary transfer orbit: An elliptic orbit where the p erigee is at the altitude of a Low Earth orbit (LEO) and t he apogee at
the altitude of a geostationary orbit.
Key Points
An ellipse is a closed plane curve that resembles a stre tched out circle (The Sun is at one focus while the other focus has no
physical significance. A circle is a special case of an ellipse where both focal points coincide.
How stretched out an ellipse is from a perfect circle is known a s its eccentricity: a parameter that can take any value gr eater
than or equal to 0 (a circle) and less than 1 (as the ecc entricity tends to 1, the ellipse tends to a parabola).
Symbolically, an ellipse can be represented in polar coordin ates as:, where are the polar coordinates (from the
focus) for the ellipse, is the semi-latus rectum, and is the eccentricity of the ellipse.
Perihelion is minimum distance from the Sun a planet achieve s in its orbit and is given by Aphelion is the largest
distance from the Sun a planet reaches in his orbit and is g iven by
In a small time the planet sweeps out a small triangle ha ving base line and height. The area of this triangle is g iven by
and so the constant areal velocity is:
The period satisfies:. One can see that the product of a nd must be constant, so that when the planet is further
from the Sun it travels at a slower rate and vise versa.
A planet travels fastest at perihelion and slowest at ap helion.
Kepler’s third law can be represented symbolically as where P is the orbital period of the planet and a is the semi- major
axis of the orbit (see.
The constant of proportionality is for a sidereal year (y r), and astronomical unit (AU).

5.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464Kepler’s third law can be derived from Newton’s laws of motion and the universal law of gravitation. Set the force of gr avity
equal to the centripetal force. After substituting an ex pression for the velocity of the planet, one can obtain: which
can also be written
Using the expression above we can obtain the mass of the par ent body from the orbits of its satellites:
The ideal rocket equation related the maximum change in v elocity attainable by a rocket (delta-v or Δv) as a func tion of the
exhaust velocity (v) and the ratio between the mass of the rocket with and without the propellant (m /m). The equati on is
given by.
The Oberth effect: where the use of a rocket engine tra velling at high speed generates more useful energy tha n one at low speed.
Thus it is more efficient to apply thrust when the spacecra ft is nearest to the planet (periastron).
A gravity assist maneuver is the use of the relative moveme nt and gravity of a planet (or other celestial body) to a lter the
velocity of a spacecraft—typically in order to save propell ant, time, and expense. This technique was employed by the V oyager
probes (see.
The Hohmann transfer orbit is an elliptical orbit used to transfer between two circular orbits of different altitude s, in the same
plane. The orbital maneuver to perform the Hohmann tra nsfer uses two engine impulses which move aspacecraft onto and o ff
the transfer orbit. See.
The broadest possible definition of a satellite is an object that orbits a larger one due to the force of gravity.
All satellites follow the laws of orbital mechanics, which can almost always be approximated with Newtonian physics.
Natural satellites are often classified in terms of their si ze and composition, while artificial satellites are categori zed in terms of
their orbital parameters.
Artificial Earth-orbiting satellites have orbits categori zed by their altitudes, inclinations, and eccentricities.
Key Terms
eccentricity: The coefficient of variation between and: The fur ther appart the foci are, the stronger the
eccentricity.
perihelion: The point in the elliptical orbit of a planet or come t etc. where it is nearest to the Sun. The point farthest from the
Sun is called aphelion.
semi-latus rectum: The latus rectum is a chord perpendicular to the majo r axis and passing through the focus. The semi-latus
rectum is half the latus rectrum. See distance p in.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
mean motion: An angle of (radians) divided by the orbital period (of a celestial body in an elliptic orbit).
astronomical unit: The mean distance from the Earth to the Sun (the semi-ma jor axis of Earth’s orbit), approximately
149,600,000 kilometres (symbol AU), used to measure distance s in the solar system.
sidereal year: The orbital period of the Earth; a measure of the time it t akes for the Sun to return to the same position with
respect to the stars of the celestial sphere. A sidereal y ear is about 20.4 minutes longer than the tropical year du e to precession
of the equinoxes.
Hohmann transfer orbit: The Hohmann transfer orbit is an elliptical orbit used to transfer between two circular orbits of
different altitudes, in the same plane. The orbital maneuv er to perform the Hohmann transfer uses two engine impulses, one to
move a spacecraft onto the transfer orbit and a second t o move off it.
delta-v: The maximum change in the scalar speed of a rocket if the rocket were operated in a vacuum away from external for ces
(i.e., if no other external forces act).
natural satellite: A natural satellite, moon, or secondary planet is a cel estial body that orbits a planet or smaller body, which is
called its primary.
artificial satellite: In the context of spaceflight, a satellite is an object whi ch has been placed into orbit by human endeavour.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikee 0 1

5.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14464This page titled 5.6: Kepler’s Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

5.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154495.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
Defining Graviational Potential Energy
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associated with gravitational force, such as elevating objects against th e Earth’s gravity.
Express gravitational potential energy for two masses
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associa ted with gravitational force, as work is required to e levate objects against
Earth’s gravity. The potential energy due to elevate d positions is called gravitational potential energy, and is evidenced by water in
an elevated reservoir or kept behind a dam. If an ob ject falls from one point to another point inside a gravitational field, the force of
gravity will do positive work on the object, and the gravita tional potential energy will decrease by the same amo unt.
Consider a book placed on top of a table. As the book is raised from the floor to the table, some extern al force works against the
gravitational force. If the book falls back to the floor, the “falling” energy the book receives is pro vided by the gravitational force.
Thus, if the book falls off the table, this potentia l energy goes to accelerate the mass of the book and is converted into kinetic
energy. When the book hits the floor, this kinetic energy is converted into heat and sound by the impact.
The factors that affect an object’s gravitational p otential energy are its height relative to some refe rence point, its mass, and the
strength of the gravitational field it is in. Thus, a book lying on a table has less gravitational potent ial energy than the same book on
top of a taller cupboard, and less gravitational po tential energy than a heavier book lying on the sam e table. An object at a certain
height above the Moon’s surface has less gravitation al potential energy than at the same height above t he Earth’s surface because
the Moon’s gravity is weaker. Note that “height” in the common sense of the term cannot be used for gravitati onal potential energy
calculations when gravity is not assumed to be a constant. The following sections provide more detail.
Local Approximation
The strength of a gravitational field varies with loc ation. However, when the change of distance is small in relation to the distances
from the center of the source of the gravitational f ield, this variation in field strength is negligible and we can assume that the force
of gravity on a particular object is constant. Near th e surface of the Earth, for example, we assume that the acceleration due to
gravity is a constant (“standard gravity”). In this case, a simple expression for gravitational potential energy can be
derived using the equation for work. The upward forc e required while moving at a constant velocity is equ al to the weight,
, of an object, so the work done in lifting it throu gh a height is the product. Thus, when accounting only for mass, gravity,
and altitude, the equation is:
where is the potential energy of the object relativ e to its being on the Earth’s surface, is the mass of the object, is the
acceleration due to gravity, and is the altitude of the object. If is expressed in kilograms, in and in meters then will
be calculated in joules. In most situations, the change in potential energy is the relevant quantity:
General Formula
However, over large variations in distance, the approxi mation that gg is constant is no longer valid, and we have to use calculus and
the general mathematical definition of work to deter mine gravitational potential energy. For the computat ion of the potential
energy, we can integrate the gravitational force, who se magnitude is given by Newton’s law of gravitation, wi th respect to the
distance between the two bodies. Using that definitio n, the gravitational potential energy of a system of masses and at a
distance using gravitational constant is
where is the constant of integration. Choosing the convention that makes calculations simpler, albeit at the cost of making
negative. Note that in this case the potential energy becomes zero when is infinite, and approaches negati ve infinity as goes tolearning objectives

5.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15449zero.
Trebuchet: A trebuchet uses the gravitational potential energy o f the counterweight to throw projectiles over long distan ces.
Key Points
If an object falls from one point to another point in side a gravitational field, the force of gravity will do positive work on the
object, and the gravitational potential energy will decr ease by the same amount.
Near the surface of the Earth, the work done in lifting a n object through a height is the product, so.
The gravitational potential energy,, of a system of masses and at a distance using gravitational constan t is
Key Terms
Newton’s law of gravitation: This law states that every point mass in the universe attrac ts every other point mass with a force
that is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the d istance between them.
potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
gravity: Resultant force on Earth’s surface, of the attraction by t he Earth’s masses, and the centrifugal pseudo-force caus ed by
the Earth’s rotation.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Physics with Calculus/Mechanics/Gravitational Potential En ergy. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_with_Calculus/Mechanics/Gravitational_P otential_Energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Gravitational potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_potential_energy%23Gravita tional_potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Newton's law of gravitation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's%20law%20of%20gravitation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
gravity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gravity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Trebuchet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Trebuchet.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154495.7: Gravitational Potential Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154505.8: Energy Conservation
Calculate the escape speed of an object given its kinetic e nergy and the gravitational potential energy
Escape speed is the required starting speed require d by an object to go from a starting point in a gra vitational potential field to an
ending point that is infinitely far away. It is assumed th at the velocity of the object at the ending point will b e zero.
Isaac Newton’s Analysis of Escape Speed: In this figure, Objects A and B don’t have the required e scape speed and so they fall
back to Earth after launch. Objects C and D don’t either, th ey achieve a circular and an elliptical orbit respectiv ely. Object E is
launched with sufficient escape velocity and escapes the Ear th.
Imagine a situation in which a spaceship that does no t have a propulsion system is launched straight away f rom a planet. (It is moot
to discuss escape speed for objects with propulsion sy stems.) Let us assume that the only significant force t hat is acting on the
spaceship is the force of gravity from the planet. Th e escape speed of the spaceship can calculated thro ugh a simple analysis of
conservation of energy. The gravitational potential en ergy of the spaceship is:
Where is the universal gravitational constant (), is the mass of the planet, is the mass of the
spaceship, and is the distance of the spaceship from the planet’s center of gravity.
At the ending point of the spaceship, goes to infinit y. As goes to infinity, the value of the gravitationa l potential energy
expression goes to 0.
The kinetic energy of the spaceship can be found from:
Where mm is the mass of the spaceship and is the velocit y of the spaceship.
At the starting point of the spaceship, the velocity m ust have a magnitude equal to the escape speed (). The velocity of the
spaceship is 0 at its ending point, and so consequently i ts kinetic energy is 0 in the end as well.
Summarizing the kinetic energy () and potential energy () of the spaceship at it’s initial () and final () states:
Due to conservation of energy, the initial energy must equ al the final energy and so we can solve for:
Interestingly, if the spaceship were to fall to the p lanet from a point infinitely far away it would obtai n a final speed of at the
planet.learning objectives

5.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15450It should be noted that if an object is launched fro m a rotating body, such as the Earth, the speed at wh ich the body rotates will
affect the required velocity that an object must hav e relative to the surface of the body. If a rocket i s launched tangentially from the
Earth’s equator in the same direction that the Earth is turning, it will require a lower velocity relativ e to the Earth than if it were
launched in the opposite direction to meet escape speed re quirements.
Additionally, it is a misconception that powered vehicl es (such as rockets) require escape speed to leave or bit and travel through
outer-space. If the vehicle has a propulsion system to p rovide it with energy once it has left the surface of the planet, it is not
necessary to initially meet escape speed requirements.
Key Points
It is assumed that the velocity of the object at the endi ng point will be zero.
The requisite escape speed (se)(se) of an object to escape a spherically symmetric body is given by:, where is
the universal gravitational constant, is the mass of t he body, and is the distance of the object from the body ’s center of
gravity.
Escape speed is the required speed that an object has to ha ve to go from a starting point in a gravitational poten tial field to an
ending point that is infinitely far away.
The speed at which a body rotates will affect the requ ired velocity that an object must have relative to the su rface of the body.
Objects that have propulsion systems do not need to reach escape velocity.
Key Terms
propulsion: Force causing movement.
potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Escape velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Escape_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
propulsion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/propulsion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Escape velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Escape_velocity. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.8: Energy Conservation is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154565.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
Describe properties characteristic to angular velocity a nd angular momentum
Linear motion is motion in a straight line. This type of motion has several familiar vector quantities ass ociated with it, including
linear velocity and momentum. These vector quantiti es each have a magnitude (a scalar, or number) and di rection associated with
them. Similarly, circular motion is motion in a circl e. It has the same set of vector quantities associat ed with it, including angular
velocity and angular momentum.
Angular velocity diagram: A vector diagram illustrating circular motion. The blue vector connects the origin (center) of the
motion to the position of the particle. The red vector is the angular velocity vector, pointing perpendicular to th e plane of motion
and with magnitude equal to the instantaneous velocity. File:Angular velocity.svg - Wikipedia, the free encycl opedia. Provided by:
Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Angular_velocity.sv g&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Imagine a particle moving in a circle around a poin t at a constant speed. We will call that point the ori gin. At any instant in time,
the particle is moving in a particular straight-lin e direction with that speed. In the next instant, the particle has the same speed, but
the direction of its velocity has changed.
We recall from our study of linear velocity that a c hange in the direction of the velocity vector, is a c hange in velocity and a change
in velocity is acceleration. However, we can define an angular momentum vector which is constant throughout this motion. The
angular velocity has a direction perpendicular to t he plane of circular motion, just like a bike axle p oints perpendicularly to the
rotating wheel. This direction never changes as the obje ct moves in its circle. The magnitude of the angula r momentum is equal to
the rate at which the angle of the particle advances:
Note that there are two vectors that are perpendicula r to any plane. For example, imagine a vector pointi ng into your table and the
opposite one pointing out of it. To remove this ambig uity, the convention in physics is to use the right hand rule: curl the fingers of
your right hand in the direction of the circular mot ion, and your thumb will point toward the direction of the angular velocity and
momentum vectors.
learning objectives

5.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15456Right hand rule: When determining the direction of an angular vector, us e the right hand rule: curl the fingers of your right han d
in the direction of the circular motion and your thumb poi nts in the vector direction. File:Right-hand grip rule.sv g - Wikipedia, the
free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Righthand_grip_rule.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
The units of angular velocity are radians per second. Radian describes the plane angle subtended by a circ ular arc as the length of
the arc divided by the radius of the arc. One radian i s the angle subtended at the center of a circle by a n arc that is equal in length to
the radius of the circle. More generally, the magnit ude in radians of such a subtended angle is equal to the ratio of the arc length to
the radius of the circle; that is,, where is the subte nded angle in radians, is arc length, and is radius.
Thus, while the object moves in a circle at constant speed, it undergoes constant linear acceleration to ke ep it moving in a circle.
However, it’s angular velocity is constant since it con tinually sweeps out a constant arc length per unit tim e. Constant angular
velocity in a circle is known as uniform circular motion.
Just as there is an angular version of velocity, so too is there an angular version of acceleration. When the object is going around a
circle but its speed is changing, the object is unde rgoing angular acceleration. Just like with linear acc eleration, angular
acceleration is a change in the angular velocity ve ctor. This change could be a change in the speed of the object or in the direction.
Angular velocity can be clockwise or counterclockwise.
Key Points
The direction of angular quantity vectors points perpe ndicular to the plane of the motion. You can determine t his direction using
the right hand rule.
The direction of linear quantities such as velocity an d momentum change as an object moves in a circle. We ca n instead define
angular versions of these quantities which are constant th roughout the circular motion.
The units of angular quantities are per radian, a meas urement of angle, rather than per linear distance (e.g. m eter).
Key Terms
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
angular momentum: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the momentum of the
particle, and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its circular motion.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Right hand rule. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_hand_rule. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Angular velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Radians. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Radians. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-momentum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Work and Energy
6.1: Introduction
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
6.6: Power
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
6.8: Further Topics
This page titled 6: Work and Energy is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144666.1: Introduction
Introduction to Work and Energy
Work is the energy associated with the action of a force.
Describe relationship between work, energy, and force
The work done on a system by a constant force is the product of the component of the force in the direct ion of motion times the
distance through which the force acts. For one-way mot ion in one dimension, this is expressed in equation fo rm as,
where W is work, F is the magnitude of the force on the system, d is the magnitude of the displacement of the system, and θ is the
angle between the force vector F and the displacement ve ctor d.
Work, Pow er, and Energy | Doc Phy sicsWork, Pow er, and Energy | Doc Phy sics
Work, Power, and Energy: Biology is useful.
Take this example of work in action from: (A) The work done by the force F on this lawn mower is. Note that
is the component of the force in the direction of motion. (B) A person holding a briefcase does no work on it, because
there is no motion. No energy is transferred to or f rom the briefcase. (C) The person moving the briefcas e horizontally at a constant
speed does no work on it, and transfers no energy to it. (D) Work is done on the briefcase by carrying it up stairs at constant speed,
because there is necessarily a component of force F in the direction of the motion. Energy is transferred t o the briefcase and could,
in turn, be used to do work. (E) When the briefcase is lowered, energy is transferred out of the briefcase an d into an electriclearning objectives

6.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14466generator. Here the work done on the briefcase by the g enerator is negative, removing energy from the brie fcase, because F and d
are in opposite directions.
Examples of Work: This is how work in progress and energy co-exist and opera te. Work is the energy associated with the action of
a force.
In physics, a force is said to do work when it acts on a body so that there is a displacement of the point of application, however
small, in the direction of the force. Thus a force do es work when there is movement under the action of th e force. The work done
by a constant force of magnitude F on a point that moves a distance d in the direction of the force is the produc t:
For example, if a force of 10 newton (F = 10 N) acts al ong point that travels two meters (d = 2 m), then it does the work W = (10
N)(2 m) = 20 N m = 20 J. This is approximately the work d one lifting a 1 kg weight from the ground to over a person’s head
against the force of gravity. Notice that the work is doubled either by lifting twice the weight in the sa me distance or by lifting the
same weight twice the distance.
Work is closely related to energy. The conservation of energy states that the change in total internal energy of a system equals the
added heat minus the work performed by the system (see th e first law of thermodynamics, and):

6.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14466Baseball Pitcher: A baseball pitcher does work on a baseball by throwing t he ball at some force, F, over some distance d, which for
the average baseball field, is about 60 feet.
Also, from Newton’s second law for rigid bodies, it can b e shown that work on an object is equal to the change i n kinetic energy of
that object:
The work of forces generated by a potential function is known as potential energy and the forces are said to be conservative.
Therefore work on an object moving in a conservative forc e field is equal to minus the change of potential energ y of the object:
This shows that work is the energy associated with the actio n of a force, and so has the physical dimensions and units of energy.
Key Points
Work is the transfer of energy by a force acting on an ob ject as it is displaced.
The work done by a force is zero if the displacement is ei ther zero or perpendicular to the force.
The work done is positive if the force and displacement h ave the same direction, and the work done is negative if they have
opposite direction.
Key Terms
energy: A quantity that denotes the ability to do work and is me asured in a unit dimensioned in mass × distance²/time² (ML ²/T²)
or the equivalent.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/energy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Work: The Scientific Definition. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/Figure_08_02_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Baseball pitching motion 2004. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Baseball_pitching_motion_2004.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work, Power, and Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B_5T7Er7RA. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 6.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144676.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
Force in the Direction of Displacement
The work done by a constant force is proportional to the fo rce applied times the displacement of the object.
Contrast displacement and distance in constant force situ ations
Work Done by a Constant Force
When a force acts on an object over a distance, it is said to have done work on the object. Physically, the work done on an object is
the change in kinetic energy that that object experienc es. We will rigorously prove both of these claims.
The term work was introduced in 1826 by the French mat hematician Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis as “weight lifted th rough a height,”
which is based on the use of early steam engines to li ft buckets of water out of flooded ore mines. The SI uni t of work is the
newton-meter or joule (J).
Units
One way to validate if an expression is correct is to perform dimensional analysis. We have claimed that work is the change in
kinetic energy of an object and that it is also equal to the force times the distance. The units of these two should agree. Kinetic
energy – and all forms of energy – have units of jo ules (J). Likewise, force has units of newtons (N) and dis tance has units of
meters (m). If the two statements are equivalent they sh ould be equivalent to one another.
Displacement versus Distance
Often times we will be asked to calculate the work done by a force on an object. As we have shown, this is propo rtional to the force
and the distance which the object is displaced, not moved. W e will investigate two examples of a box being moved to illu strate this.
Example Problems
Here are a few example problems:
(1.a) Consider a constant force of two newtons (F = 2 N) acting on a box of mass three kilograms (M = 3 kg). Calculate the work
done on the box if the box is displaced 5 meters.
(1.b) Since the box is displaced 5 meters and the for ce is 2 N, we multiply the two quantities together. The object’s mass will
dictate how fast it is accelerating under the force, and thus the time it takes to move the object from point a to point b. Regardless
of how long it takes, the object will have the same displacemen t and thus the same work done on it.
(2.a) Consider the same box (M = 3 kg) being pushed by a constant force of four newtons (F = 4 N). It begins at rest and is pushed
for five meters (d = 5m). Assuming a frictionless surface, calculate the velocity of the box at 5 meters.
(2.b) We now understand that the work is proportional to the change in kinetic energy, from this we can cal culate the final velocity.
What do we know so far? We know that the block begins a t rest, so the initial kinetic energy must be zero. Fro m this we
algebraically isolate and solve for the final velocity.
We see that the final velocity of the block is approxim ately 3.15 m/s.learning objectives

6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14467Force at an Angle to Displacement
A force does not have to, and rarely does, act on an object p arallel to the direction of motion.
Infer how to adjust one-dimensional motion for our three- dimensional world
The Fundamentals
Up until now, we have assumed that any force acting on an object has been parallel to the direction of mot ion. We have considered
our motion to be one dimensional, only acting along the x or y axis. To best examine and understand how nature operators in our
three-dimensional world, we will first discuss work in two d imensions in order to build our intuition.
A force does not have to, and rarely does, act on an object parallel to the direction of motion. In the p ast, we derived that;
such that the work done on an object is the force ac ting on the object multiplied by the displacement. But this is not the whole
story. This expression contains an assumed cosine term, wh ich we do not consider for forces parallel to the dir ection of motion.
“Why would we do such a thing? ” you may ask. We do t his because the two are equivalent. If the angle of the force along the
direction of motion is zero, such that the force is parallel to the direction of motion, then the cosin e term equals one and does not
change the expression. As we increase the force’s angl e with respect to the direction of motion, less and l ess work is done along the
direction that we are considering; and more and more work is being done in another, perpendicular, direction of motion. This
process continues until we are perpendicular to our or iginal direction of motion, such that the angle is 90, and the cosine term
would equal zero; resulting in zero work being done alon g our original direction. Instead, we are doing work in a nother direction!
Angle: Recall that both the force and direction of motion are vectors. When the angle is 90 degrees, the cosine term g oes to zero.
When along the same direction, they equal one.
Let’s show this explicitly and then look at this phenomena in t erms of a box moving along the x and y directions.
We have discussed that work is the integral of the f orce and the dot product respect to x. But in fact, d ot product of force and a very
small distance is equal to the two terms times cosine of th e angle between the two.. Explicitly,
A Box Being Pushed
Consider a coordinate system such that we have x as th e abscissa and y as the ordinate. More so, consider a box being pushed along
the x direction. What happens in the following three scenarios?
The box is being pushed parallel to the x direction?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 45 degrees to the x d irection?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 60 degrees to the x d irection?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 90 degrees to the x d irection?
In the first scenario, we know that all of the force i s acting on the box along the x-direction, which mea ns that work will only be
done along the x-direction. More so, a vertical per spective the box is not moving – it is unchanged in the y direction. Since thelearning objectives

6.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14467force is acting parallel to the direction of motion, the angle is equal to zero and our total work is simp ly the force times the
displacement in the x-direction.
In the second scenario, the box is being pushed at an angle of 45 degrees to the x-direction; and thus als o a 45 degree angle to the
y-direction. When evaluated, the cosine of 45 degree s is equal to, or approximately 0.71. This means is that 71% of the force is
contributing to the work along the x-direction. The oth er 29% is acting along the y-direction.
In the third scenario, we know that the force is acti ng at a 60 degree angle to the x-direction; and thu s also a 30 degree angle to the
y-direction. When evaluated, cosine of 60 degrees i s equal to 1/2. This means that the force is equall y acting in the x and ydirection! The work done is linear with respect to both x and y.
In the last scenario, the box is being pushed at an a ngle perpendicular to the x direction. In other word s, we are pushing the box in
the y-direction! Thus, the box’s position will be uncha nged and experience no displacement along the x-axi s. The work done in the
x direction will be zero.
Key Points
Understanding work is quintessential to understanding syste ms in terms of their energy, which is necessary for higher level
physics.
Work is equivalent to the change in kinetic energy of a s ystem.
Distance is not the same as displacement. If a box is moved 3 meters forward and then 4 meters to the left, the total
displacement is 5 meters, not 7 meters.
Work done on an object along a given direction of motio n is equal to the force times the displacement times the co sine of the
angle.
No work is done along a direction of motion if the force is pe rpendicular.
When considering force parallel to the direction of motio n, we omit the cosine term because it equals 1 which does no t change
the expression.
Key Terms
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
dot product: A scalar product.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work and Energy. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14098/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dot product. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dot_product. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

6.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14467Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

6.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144686.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
Work Done by a Variable Force
Integration is used to calculate the work done by a variab le force.
Describe approaches used to calculate work done by a variab le force
Using Integration to Calculate the Work Done by Variable Forces
A force is said to do work when it acts on a body so th at there is a displacement of the point of applicati on in the direction of the
force. Thus, a force does work when it results in movement.
The work done by a constant force of magnitude F on a point that moves a displacement in the direction of the force is simply
the product
In the case of a variable force, integration is necess ary to calculate the work done. For example, let’s consi der work done by a
spring. According to the Hooke’s law the restoring forc e (or spring force) of a perfectly elastic spring is proportional to its
extension (or compression), but opposite to the direc tion of extension (or compression). So the spring force acting upon an object
attached to a horizontal spring is given by:
that is proportional to its displacement (extension or compression) in the x direction from the spring’s equilibrium position, but its
direction is opposite to the x direction. For a varia ble force, one must add all the infinitesimally smal l contributions to the work
done during infinitesimally small time intervals dt (or equivalently, in infinitely small length interv als dx=v dt). In other words, an
integral must be evaluated:
This is the work done by a spring exerting a variable force on a mass moving from position x to x (from t ime 0 to time t). The
work done is positive if the applied force is in the same direction as the direction of motion; so the wo rk done by the object on
spring from time 0 to time t, is:
in this relation is the force acted upon spring by the object. and are in fact action- reaction pairs; and is equal to the
elastic potential energy stored in spring.
Using Integration to Calculate the Work Done by Constant Forces
The same integration approach can be also applied t o the work done by a constant force. This suggests th at integrating the product
of force and distance is the general way of determining th e work done by a force on a moving body.
Consider the situation of a gas sealed in a piston, the study of which is important in Thermodynamics. In this case, the Pressure
(Pressure =Force/Area) is constant and can be taken out of the integral:
Another example is the work done by gravity (a constan t force) on a free-falling object (we assign the y-ax is to vertical motion, in
this case):learning objectives
x
o

6.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14468Notice that the result is the same as we would have obtained by simply evaluating the produc t of force and distance.
Units Used for Work
The SI unit of work is the joule (J), which is defined as the work done by a force of one newton moving an o bject through a
distance of one meter.
Non-SI units of work include the erg, the foot-pound, th e foot-pound, the kilowatt hour, the liter-atmosphere, and the horsepowerhour.
Key Points
The work done by a constant force of magnitude F on a poin t that moves a displacement d in the direction of the fo rce is the
product:.
Integration approach can be used both to calculate work done by a variable force and work done by a constant for ce.
The SI unit of work is the joule; non- SI units of work includ e the erg, the foot-pound, the foot-poundal, the kilowatt hour, the
litre-atmosphere, and the horsepower-hour.
Key Terms
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body, which is measured in a unit dimensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

6.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144696.4: Work-Energy Theorem
Kinetic Energy and Work-Energy Theorem
The work-energy theorem states that the work done by all forces acting on a particle equals the change in the particle’s kinetic
energy.
Outline the derivation of the work-energy theorem
The Work-Energy Theorem
The principle of work and kinetic energy (also known as the work-energy theorem) states that the work done by the sum of all
forces acting on a particle equals the change in the kinetic energy of the particle. This definition can be extended to rigid bodies by
defining the work of the torque and rotational kinetic ener gy.
Kinetic Energy: A force does work on the block. The kinetic energy of the b lock increases as a result by the amount of work. This
relationship is generalized in the work-energy theorem.
The work W done by the net force on a particle equals the change i n the particle’s kinetic energy K E:
where v and v are the speeds of the particle before and after the appli cation of force, and m is the particle’s mass.
Derivation
For the sake of simplicity, we will consider the case in which the resultant force F is constant in both magnitude and direction and
is parallel to the velocity of the particle. The par ticle is moving with constant acceleration a along a straight line. The relationship
between the net force and the acceleration is given by the equation F = ma (Newton’s second law), and the particle’s displacemen t
d, can be determined from the equation:
obtaining,
The work of the net force is calculated as the produc t of its magnitude (F=ma) and the particle’s displace ment. Substituting the
above equations yields:
Key Points
The work W done by the net force on a particle equals the change i n the particle’s kinetic energy K E:
The work-energy theorem can be derived from Newton’s second law.
Work transfers energy from one place to another or one form to another. In more general systems than the particle sys tem
mentioned here, work can change the potential energy of a mechanical device, the heat energy in a thermal system, or the
electrical energy in an electrical device.learning objectives
i f

6.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14469Key Terms
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Work energy theorem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_energy_theorem%23Workenergy_principle. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work - Kinetic Energy Theorem. February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14095/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 6.4: Work-Energy Theorem is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

6.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144706.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Conservative and Nonconservative Forces
Conservative force—a force with the property that th e work done in moving a particle between two points is independent of the
path it takes.
Describe properties of conservative and nonconservative f orces
A conservative force is a force with the property that the work done in moving a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken. Equivalently, if a particle travels in a closed loop, the net work done (the sum of the force acting along the path
multiplied by the distance travelled) by a conservative f orce is zero.
A conservative force is dependent only on the posit ion of the object. If a force is conservative, it is po ssible to assign a numerical
value for the potential at any point. When an object moves from one location to another, the force chang es the potential energy of
the object by an amount that does not depend on the path taken. Gravity and spring forces are examples of conservati ve forces.
If a force is not conservative, then defining a scalar potential is not possible, b ecause taking different paths would lead to
conflicting potential differences between the start and end points. Nonconservative forces transfer energy from the object in motion
(just like conservative force), but they do not tra nsfer this energy back to the potential energy of the system to regain it du ring
reverse motion. Instead, they transfer the energy fro m the system in an energy form which can not be used by the force to transfer it
back to the object in motion. Friction is one such noncon servative force.
Path Independence of Conservative Force
Work done by the gravity in a closed path motion is zero. We can extend this observation to other conser vative force systems as
well. We imagine a closed path motion. We imagine this closed path motion be divided in two motions between points A and B as
diagramed in Fig 1. Starting from point A to point B a nd then ending at point A via two work paths named 1 and 2 in the figure.
The total work by the conservative force for the round t rip is zero:
Motion Along Different Paths: Motion along different paths. For a conservative force, work d one via different path is the same.
Let us now change the path for motion from A to B by another path, shown as path 3. Again, the total work by the conservative
force for the round trip via new route is zero:.
Comparing two equations,. This is true for an arbitra ry path. Therefore, work done for motion from A to B b y
conservative force along any paths are equal.
What is Potential Energy?
Potential energy is the energy difference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a reference position.
Relate the potential energy and the work
Potential energy is often associated with restoring fo rces such as a spring or the force of gravity. The a ction of stretching the spring
or lifting the mass of an object is performed by an external force that works against the force field of the potential. This work is
stored in the force field as potential energy. If t he external force is removed the force field acts o n the body to perform the work aslearning objectives
learning objectives

6.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470it moves the body back to its initial position, reduci ng the stretch of the spring or causing the body to fall. The more formal
definition is that potential energy is the energy di fference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a
reference position.
Potential Energy in a Bow and Arrow: In the case of a bow and arrow, the energy is converted from the potential energy in the
archer’s arm to the potential energy in the bent lim bs of the bow when the string is drawn back. When the string is released, the
potential energy in the bow limbs is transferred back throu gh the string to become kinetic energy in the arrow as it takes flight.
If the work for an applied force is independent of th e path, then the work done by the force is evaluated a t the start and end of the
trajectory of the point of application. This means that there is a function U(x), called a “potential,” that can be evaluated at th e two
points x(t = t) and x(t) to obtain the work over any trajectory between these two points. It is tradition to define this function with a
negative sign so that positive work is represented as a re duction in the potential:
Examples of Potential Energy
There are various types of potential energy, each as sociated with a particular type of force. More speci fically, every conservative
force gives rise to potential energy. For example, th e work of an elastic force is called elastic potentia l energy; work done by the
gravitational force is called gravitational potentia l energy; and work done by the Coulomb force is called elec tric potential energy.
Gravity
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associated with gravitational force, as work is required to move objects against gravity.
Generate an equation that can be used to express the grav itational potential energy near the earth
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associate d with gravitational force (a conservative force), a s work is required to elevate
objects against Earth’s gravity. The potential energ y due to elevated positions is called gravitational p otential energy, evidenced, for
example, by water held in an elevated reservoir or b ehind a dam (as an example, shows Hoover Dam). If an obje ct falls from one1 2
learning objectives

6.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470point to another point inside a gravitational field, the force of gravity will do positive work on the obj ect, and the gravitational
potential energy will decrease by the same amount.
Hoover Dam: Hoover dam uses the stored gravitational potential energy t o generate electricity.
Potential Near Earth
Gravitational potential energy near the Earth can be expressed with respect to the height from the surface o f the Earth. (The surface
will be the zero point of the potential energy.) We ca n express the potential energy (gravitational potenti al energy) as:
where PE = potential energy measured in joules (J), m = mass of the object (measured in kg), and h = perpen dicular height from the
reference point (measured in m); g = gravitational acceleration (9.8m/s). Near the surface of the Earth, g can be considered
constant.
General Formula
However, over large variations in distance, the approxi mation that g is constant is no longer valid. Instea d, we must use calculus
and the general mathematical definition of work to d etermine gravitational potential energy. For the comp utation of the potential
energy we can integrate the gravitational force, whos e magnitude is given by Newton’s law of gravitation (wi th respect to the
distance r between the two bodies). Using that definition, the gravitational potential energy of a system of masses m and M at a
distance r using gravitational constant G is:
where K is the constant of integration. Choosing the conve ntion that K=0 makes calculations simpler, albeit at the cost of making U
negative. For this choice, the potential at infinity is def ined as 0.
Springs
When a spring is stretched/compressed from its equilibr ium position by x, its potential energy is give as.2

6.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470Explain how potential energy is stored in springs
Spring force is conservative force, given by the Hooke ’s law:, where k is spring constant, measured experiment ally for a
particular spring and x is the displacement. We woul d like to obtain an expression for the work done to the spring. From the
conservation of mechanical energy (Check our Atom on “Conservation of Mechanical Energy), the work should b e equal to the
potential energy stored in spring. The displacement x is usually measured from the position of “neutral le ngth” or “relaxed length”
– the length of spring corresponding to situation whe n spring is neither stretched nor compressed. We shall identify this position as
the origin of coordinate reference (x=0).
Hooke’s Law: Plot of applied force F vs. elongation X for a helical sprin g according to Hooke’s law (solid line) and what the
actual plot might look like (dashed line). Red is used ext ension, blue for compression. At bottom, schematic pictur es of spring
states corresponding to some points of the plot; the middle one is in the relaxed state (no force applied).
Let and be the initial and final positions of the block attached to the string. As the block slowly moves, we do
work W on the spring:. When we stretch the spring. We have to apply force in the same direction as the
displacement. (Technically, work is given as the inner product of the two vectors: force and displacement.). Therefore,
the overall sign in the integral is +, not -.
If the block is gently released from the stretched pos ition (\mathrm{x = x_f}\), the stored potential energ y in the spring will start to
be converted to the kinetic energy of the block, an d vice versa. Neglecting frictional forces, Mechanical e nergy conservation
demands that, at any point during its motion,
From the energy conservation, we can estimate that, by the time the block reaches x=0 position, its speed will be.
The block will keep oscillating between x = -x and x.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy
Conservation of mechanical energy states that the mechani cal energy of an isolated system remains constant without friction.
Formulate the principle of the conservation of the mecha nical energylearning objectives
f f
learning objectives

6.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470Conservation of mechanical energy states that the mec hanical energy of an isolated system remains constan t in time, as long as the
system is free of all frictional forces. In any real situation, frictional forces and other non-conserva tive forces are always present,
but in many cases their effects on the system are so sma ll that the principle of conservation of mechanical energy can be used as a
fair approximation. An example of a such a system is sh own in. Though energy cannot be created nor destroyed in an isolated
system, it can be internally converted to any other form o f energy.
A Mechanical System: An example of a mechanical system: A satellite is orbiti ng the Earth only influenced by the conservative
gravitational force and the mechanical energy is there fore conserved. This acceleration is represented by a gr een acceleration vector
and the velocity is represented by a red velocity vector.
Derivation
Let us consider what form the work -energy theorem ta kes when only conservative forces are involved (lead ing us to the
conservation of energy principle). The work-energy t heorem states that the net work done by all forces ac ting on a system equals its
change in kinetic energy (KE). In equation form, this is:
If only conservative forces act, then, where W is the tot al work done by all conservative forces. Thus,.
Now, if the conservative force, such as the gravitation al force or a spring force, does work, the system loses p otential energy (PE).
That is,. Therefore,
This equation means that the total kinetic and poten tial energy is constant for any process involving onl y conservative forces. That
is,
where i and f denote initial and final values. This equation is a form of the work-energy theorem for co nservative forces; it is
known as the conservation of mechanical energy principle.
Remember that the law applies to the extent that all the forces are conservative, so that friction is negl igible. The total kinetic plus
potential energy of a system is defined to be its m echanical energy (). In a system that experiences onl y conservative
forces, there is a potential energy associated with eac h force, and the energy only changes form between KE a nd various types of
PE (with the total energy remaining constant).c

6.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470
Conservation of Mechanical Energy Worked ExamplConservation of Mechanical Energy Worked Exampl
Conservation of Mechanical Energy: Worked example.
Problem Solving With the Conservation of Energy
To solve a conservation of energy problem determine the system of interest, apply law of conservation of e nergy, and solve for the
unknown.
Identify steps necessary to solve a conservation of ene rgy problem
Problem-solving Strategy
You should follow a series of steps whenever you are prob lem solving:
Step One
Determine the system of interest and identify what in formation is given and what quantity is to be calcula ted. For example, let’s
assume you have the problem with car on a roller coa ster. You know that the cars of a roller coaster reac h their maximum kinetic
energy (KEKE) when at the bottom of their path. When t hey start rising, the kinetic energy begins to be co nverted to gravitational
potential energy (PEgPEg). The sum of kinetic and pot ential energy in the system should remain constant, if losses to friction are
ignored.
learning objectives

6.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470
Determining Energy: The cars of a roller coaster reach their maximum kinetic energy when at the bottom of their path. When they
start rising, the kinetic energy begins to be converted t o gravitational potential energy. The sum of kinetic and potential energy in
the system remains constant, ignoring losses to frictio n.
Step Two
Examine all the forces involved and determine whethe r you know or are given the potential energy from th e work done by the
forces. Then use step three or step four.
Step Three
If you know the potential energies () for the forces that enter into the problem, then forces are all con servative, and you can
apply conservation of mechanical energy simply in te rms of potential and kinetic energy. The equation ex pressing conservation of
energy is:
Step Four
If you know the potential energy for only some of the forces, then the conservation of energy law in its most general form must be
used:
where stand for all other energies, and stands for wor k done by non-conservative forces. In most problems, one or more of
the terms is zero, simplifying its solution. Do not calculate, the work done by conservative forces; it i s already incorporated in
the terms.
Step Five
You have already identified the types of work and ene rgy involved (in step two). Before solving for the un known, eliminate terms
wherever possible to simplify the algebra. For example, choose height at either the initial or final point —this will allow to set
at zero. Then solve for the unknown in the customary manne r.
Step Six
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Once you h ave solved a problem, reexamine the forms of work and energy to see if you
have set up the conservation of energy equation corr ectly. For example, work done against friction should be negative, potential
energy at the bottom of a hill should be less than that a t the top, and so on.

6.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470
Joy phy sics probs 05- Energy conservationJoy phy sics probs 05- Energy conservation
Energy conservation: Part of a series of videos on physics problem-solving. The problems are taken from “The Joy of Physics. ”
This one deals with energy conservation. The viewer is urged t o pause the video at the problem statement and work the pr oblem
before watching the rest of the video.
Problem Solving with Dissipative Forces
In the presence of dissipative forces, total mechani cal energy changes by exactly the amount of work done by nonconservative
forces (W).
Express the energy conservation relationship that can be app lied to solve problems with dissipative forces
INTRODUCTION
We have seen a problem-solving strategy with the con servation of energy in the previous section. Here we wi ll adopt the strategy
for problems with dissipative forces. Since the work done by nonconservative (or dissipative) forces will irre versibly alter the
energy of the system, the total mechanical energy (KE + PE) changes by exactly the amount of work done by n onconservative
forces (W). Therefore, we obtain, where KE and PE repre sent kinetic and potential energies
respectively. Therefore, using the new energy conserva tion relationship, we can apply the same problem-solvi ng strategy as with
the case of conservative forces.
c
learning objectives
c

6.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470EXAMPLE
Consider the situation shown in, where a baseball play er slides to a stop on level ground. Using energy consid erations, calculate
the distance the 65.0-kg baseball player slides, given that his initial speed is 6.00 m/s and the force of friction against him is a
constant 450 N.
Fig 1: The baseball player slides to a stop in a distance d. In the process, friction removes the player’s kinetic ener gy by doing an
amount of work fd equal to the initial kinetic energy.
Strategy: Friction stops the player by converting his kinetic energy into other forms, including thermal en ergy. In terms of the
work-energy theorem, the work done by friction (f), whi ch is negative, is added to the initial kinetic ener gy to reduce it to zero. The
work done by friction is negative, because f is in th e opposite direction of the motion (that is,, and s o). Thus
. The equation simplifies to.
Solution: Solving the previous equation for d and subs tituting known values yields, we get d = 2.60 m. The m ost important point of
this example is that the amount of nonconservative work equ als the change in mechanical energy.
Key Points
If a particle travels in a closed loop, the net work do ne (the sum of the force acting along the path multiplie d by the distance
travelled) by a conservative force is zero.
Conservative force is dependent only on the position of the object. If a force is conservative, it is possible to a ssign a numerical
value for the potential at any point.
Nonconservative force transfer the energy from the system i n an energy form which can not be used by the force to trans fer
back to the object in motion.
If the work for an applied force is independent of the pat h, then the work done by the force is evaluated at the star t and end of
the trajectory of the point of application. This means t hat there is a function U(x), called a ” potential “.
It is tradition to define the potential function with a negative sign so that positive work is represented as a redu ction in the
potential.
Every conservative force gives rise to potential energy. Examples are elastic potential energy, gravitational po tential energy, and
electric potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy near the earth can be expres sed with respect to the height from the surface of the Eart h as PE =
mgh. g = gravitational acceleration (9.8m/s). Near the sur face of the Earth, g can be considered constant.
Over large variations in distance, the approximation th at g is constant is no longer valid and a general formula s hould be used
for the potential. It is given as:.
Choosing the convention that the constant of integration K=0 assumes that the potential at infinity is defined to b e 0.
The displacement of spring x is usually measured from the position of “neutral length ” or “relaxed length”. Ofte n, it is most
convenient to identify this position as the origin of co ordinate reference (x=0).
If the block is gently released from the stretched positio n (), energy conservation tells us that
If the block is released from the stretched position (), by the time the block reaches x=0 position, its speed will be
. The block will keep oscillating between and.
The conservation of mechanical energy can be written as “ ”.2

6.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470Though energy cannot be created nor destroyed in an iso lated system, it can be internally converted to any other form of energy.
In a system that experiences only conservative forces, there is a potential energy associated with each force, and the energy only
changes form between KE and various types of PE, with the tot al energy remaining constant.
If you know the potential energies for the forces that e nter into the problem, then forces are all conservative, an d you can apply
conservation of mechanical energy simply in terms of po tential and kinetic energy. The equation expressing c onservation of
energy is:.
If you know the potential energy for only some of the forc es, then the conservation of energy law in its most general f orm must
be used:, where OE stands for all other energies.
Once you have solved a problem, always check the answer to see if it is reasonable.
Using the new energy conservation relationship
, we can apply the same problem-solving strategy as with t he case of conservative forces.
The most important point is that the amount of nonconser vative work equals the change in mechanical energy.
The work done by nonconservative (or dissipative) forces will irreversibly dissipated in the system.
Key Terms
potential: A curve describing the situation where the difference in the potential energies of an object in two different po sitions
depends only on those positions.
Coulomb force: the electrostatic force between two charges, as described b y Coulomb’s law
potential: A curve describing the situation where the difference in the potential energies of an object in two different po sitions
depends only on those positions.
conservative force: A force with the property that the work done in mov ing a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken.
Hooke’s law: the principle that the stress applied to a solid is d irectly proportional to the strain produced. This law d escribes the
behavior of springs and solids stressed within their elas tic limit.
conservation: A particular measurable property of an isolated physic al system does not change as the system evolves.
isolated system: A system that does not interact with its surroundings, t hat is, its total energy and mass stay constant.
frictional force: Frictional force is the force resisting the relative mot ion of solid surfaces, fluid layers, and material elemen ts
sliding against each other.
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
conservative force: A force with the property that the work done in mov ing a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken.
dissipative force: A force resulting in dissipation, a process in which ener gy (internal, bulk flow kinetic, or system potential) is
transformed from some initial form to some irreversible fina l form.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
curl. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/curl. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

6.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gradient. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gradient. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Coulomb force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Coulomb_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Gravity and Mechanica l Energy: Potential Energy. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40047/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work by Spring Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14102/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hooke's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Hooke's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Conservative Forces and Potential Energy. Sep tember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42149/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
conservation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frictional force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/frictional%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

6.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470isolated system. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isolated_system. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Conservation of Energy. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42151/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conservation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIzC5TBIJNM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Wooden_roller _coaster_txgi.jpg/486pxWooden_roller_coaster_txgi.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Nonconservative Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dissipative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dissipative%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution

6.5.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14470HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conservation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIzC5TBIJNM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Wooden_roller _coaster_txgi.jpg/486pxWooden_roller_coaster_txgi.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Nonconservative Forces. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Boundless.

6.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144716.6: Power
What is Power?
In physics, power is the rate of doing work—the amount of en ergy consumed per unit time.
Relate power to the transfer, use, and transformation of dif ferent types of energy
In physics, power is the rate of doing work. It is the a mount of energy consumed per unit time. The unit of power is the joule per
second (J/s), known as the watt (in honor of James Watt, the eighteenth-century developer of the steam engin e). For example, the
rate at which a lightbulb transforms electrical energy into heat and light is measured in watts (W)—the more wattage, the more
power, or equivalently the more electrical energy is used p er unit time.
High School Phy sics - Pow erHigh School Phy sics - Pow er
Power: A brief overview of power in an algebra-based physics c ourse.learning objectives

6.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14471Energy transfer can be used to do work, so power is als o the rate at which this work is performed. The same a mount of work is
done when carrying a load up a flight of stairs wheth er the person carrying it walks or runs, but more powe r is expended during the
running because the work is done in a shorter amount of time. The output power of an electric motor is the product of the torque the
motor generates and the angular velocity of its out put shaft. The power expended to move a vehicle is th e product of the traction
force of the wheels and the velocity of the vehicle.
Examples of power are limited only by the imagination, because there are as many types as there are forms of work and energy.
Sunlight reaching Earth’s surface carries a maximum power of about 1.3 kilowatts per square meter (kW/m). A tiny fraction of this
is retained by Earth over the long term. Our consump tion rate of fossil fuels is far greater than the r ate at which they are stored, so
it is inevitable that they will be depleted. Power impl ies that energy is transferred, perhaps changing form. I t is never possible to
change one form completely into another without losi ng some of it as thermal energy. For example, a 60-W in candescent bulb
converts only 5 W of electrical power to light, with 5 5 W dissipating into thermal energy. Furthermore, the typical electric power
plant converts only 35 to 40 percent of its fuel in to electricity. The remainder becomes a huge amount of thermal energy that must
be dispersed as heat transfer, as rapidly as it is cr eated. A coal-fired power plant may produce 1,000 mega watts; 1 megawatt (MW)
is 106 W of electric power. But the power plant consum es chemical energy at a rate of about 2,500 MW, creati ng heat transfer to
the surroundings at a rate of 1,500 MW.
Coal-fired Power Plant: Tremendous amounts of electric power are generated by coal-fired power plants such as this one in
China, but an even larger amount of power goes into h eat transfer to the surroundings. The large cooling towers here are needed to
transfer heat as rapidly as it is produced. The transfe r of heat is not unique to coal plants but is an unav oidable consequence of
generating electric power from any fuel—nuclear, coal, o il, natural gas, or the like.
Humans: Work, Energy, and Power
The human body converts energy stored in food into work, thermal energy, and/or chemical energy that is stored i n fatty tissue.
Identify what factors play a role in basal metabolic rate (B MR)
Humans: Work, Energy, and Power
Our own bodies, like all living organisms, are energy conv ersion machines. Conservation of energy implies that t he chemical
energy stored in food is converted into work, thermal energy, or stored as chemical energy in fatty tissue, as shown in. Energy
consumed by humans is converted to work, thermal ene rgy, and stored fat. By far the largest fraction goes to thermal energy,
although the fraction varies depending on the type of physical activity. The fraction going into each form depends both on how
much we eat and on our level of physical activity. I f we eat more than is needed to do work and stay warm, the remainder goes into
body fat.2
learning objectives

6.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14471
Energy Conversion in Humans: Energy consumed by humans is converted to work, thermal energy, and stored fat. By far the
largest fraction goes to thermal energy, although the f raction varies depending on the type of physical activity.
Functions that Require Energy
All bodily functions, from thinking to lifting weight s, require energy. The many small muscle actions accom panying all quiet
activity, from sleeping to head scratching, ultimately become thermal energy, as do less visible muscle act ions by the heart, lungs,
and digestive tract. Shivering, in fact, is an involunt ary response to low body temperature that pits muscles against one another to
produce thermal energy in the body (and do no work). The kidneys and liver consume a surprising amount of energy, but the
biggest surprise of all it that a full 25% of all en ergy consumed by the body is used to maintain electr ical potentials in all living
cells. (Nerve cells use this electrical potential in n erve impulses.) This bioelectrical energy ultimately becomes mostly thermal
energy, but some is utilized to power chemical processes such a s in the kidneys and liver, and in fat production.
Basal Metabolic Rate
The rate at which the body uses food energy to susta in life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rate. The total
energy conversion rate of a person at rest is called the basal metabolic rate (BMR) and is divided among v arious systems in the
body. The largest fraction goes to the liver and spl een, with the brain coming next. Of course, during vigor ous exercise, the energy
consumption of the skeletal muscles and heart increase markedly. About 75% of the calories burned in a day go into these basic
functions. The BMR is a function of age, gender, tota l body weight, and amount of muscle mass (which burns more calories than
body fat). Athletes have a greater BMR due to this last factor.
Useful Work
Work done by a person is sometimes called useful work, which is work done on the outside world, such as lifti ng weights. Useful
work requires a force exerted through a distance on t he outside world, and so it excludes internal work, such as that done by the
heart when pumping blood. Useful work does include that done in climbing stairs or accelerating to a full r un, because these are
accomplished by exerting forces on the outside world. Forces exerted by the body are nonconservative, so that they can change the
mechanical energy (KE+PE) of the system worked upon, and th is is often the goal.
For example, what is the power output for a 60.0-kg wom an who runs up a 3.00 m high flight of stairs in 3.50 s, starting from rest
but having a final speed of 2.00 m/s?.

6.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14471
Woman Running Up Stairs: When this woman runs upstairs starting from rest, she conve rts the chemical energy originally from
food into kinetic energy and gravitational potential en ergy. Her power output depends on how fast she does this.
Her power output depends on how fast she does this. The work going into mechanical energy is W= KE + PE. At the bottom of the
stairs, we take both KE and PE as initially zero; thus,
where h is the vertical height of the stairs. Because all terms are given, we can calculate W and then di vide it by time to get power.
Substituting the expression for W into the definition of power given in the previous equation, yields
Entering known values yields
The woman does 1764 J of work to move up the stairs com pared with only 120 J to increase her kinetic energy; thus, most of her
power output is required for climbing rather than accele rating.
Energy consumption is directly proportional to oxyge n consumption because the digestive process is basica lly one of oxidizing
food. We can measure the energy people use during var ious activities by measuring their oxygen use. Approxi mately 20 kJ of
energy are produced for each liter of oxygen consumed, i ndependent of the type of food.
Key Points
Power implies that energy is transferred, perhaps changi ng form.
Energy transfer can be used to do work, so power is also the rate at which this work is performed.
The unit of power is the joule per second (J/s), known as the watt.
The rate at which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rat e, and the
corresponding rate when at rest is called the basal metabol ic rate (BMR).
The energy included in the basal metabolic rate is divi ded among various systems in the body, with the largest fra ction going to
the liver and spleen, and the brain coming next.
About 75% of food calories are used to sustain basic body fun ctions included in the basal metabolic rate.
Work done by a person is sometimes called useful work, wh ich is work done on the outside world, such as lifting weight s.
The energy consumption of people during various activiti es can be determined by measuring their oxygen use, because the
digestive process is basically one of oxidizing food.g

6.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14471Key Terms
power: A measure of the rate of doing work or transferring ene rgy.
watt: In the International System of Units, the derived unit of power; the power of a system in which one joule of energy i s
transferred per second.
basal metabolic rate: The amount of energy expended while at rest in a neutr ally temperate environment, in the post-absorptive
state.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Power (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Power (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
watt. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/watt. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Power. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK0FUxGKsG4. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Human power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_power. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
basal metabolic rate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basal_metabolic_rate. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Power. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK0FUxGKsG4. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license

6.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14471Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 4, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 6.6: Power is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

6.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154886.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
World Energy Use
The most prominent sources of energy used in the world are non-renewable (i.e., unsustainable).
Explain why renewable energy sources must be found and util ized
Energy Use
World energy consumption is the total amount of ene rgy used by all humans on the planet (measured on a per-year basis). This
measurement is the sum of all energy sources (and pu rposes) in use. Who measures this? Several organizatio ns publish this data,
including the International Energy Agency (IEA), the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), and the Eur opean
Environment Agency. This data is useful because evalua ting this information to discover trends might yield energy issues not
currently being addressed, thereby encouraging the search for solutions. The IEA established a goal of limiting global warming to 2
degrees Celsius, but this goal is becoming more diffic ult to reach each year that the necessary action is not taken. In global energy
use, fossil fuels make up a substantial portion. In 2 011 they received over $500 billion in subsidies—six times more than that
received by renewable energy sources.
Implementing new practices that will utilize differen t, renewable energy sources is important because hav ing access to energy is
important—it maintains our quality of life. Fossil fue ls, however, are not sustainable at the rate they are cu rrently used. About 40%
of the world’s energy comes from oil, but oil prices are dependent on uncertain factors (such as availab ility, politics, and world
events). The United States alone uses 24% of the world’s o il per year, yet it makes up only 4.5% of the world’s popula tion! In 2008,
total worldwide energy consumption was 474 exajoules (474×10 J=132,000 TWh)—equivalent to an average power usage of 15
terawatts (1.504×10 W). Potential renewable energy sour ces include: solar energy at 1600 EJ (444,000 TWh), win d power at 600
EJ (167,000 TWh), geothermal energy at 500 EJ (139,000 TWh), biomass at 250 EJ (70,000 TWh), hydropower at 50 EJ (14,000
TWh) and ocean energy at 1 EJ (280 TWh).
Types of Energy
shows a pie chart of world energy usage by category—bo th renewable and nonrenewable sources. Renewable energy comes from
sources with an unlimited supply. This includes energy from water, wind, the sun, and biomass. In the US, only 10 % of energy
comes from renewable sources (mostly hydroelectric e nergy). Nonrenewable sources makes up 85% of worldwide ene rgy usage—
from sources that eventually will be depleted, such as oil, natural gases and coal.
World Energy Use: This chart shows that the primary worldwide energy source s nonrenewable. If new practices are not put in
place now, this model will not be sustainable.
Energy Needs
In the last 50 years, the global energy demand has tr ipled due to the number of developing countries and innovations in technology.
It is projected to triple again over the next 30 ye ars. In Europe, many in such developing areas recogn ize that the need for
renewable energy sources, as the present course of ene rgy usage cannot be sustained indefinitely. While rene wable energy
development makes up a only small percentage of the field, strides are being made in natural energy, particularly win d energy.learning objectives

6.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15488For example, by the year 2020 Germany plans to meet 10 % of their total energy usage and 20% of its electri city usage with
renewable resources. While some countries are making im provements in this field, coal usage is still a huge problem. In China, two
thirds of the energy used each year is from commerci al coal energy. India imports 50% of its oil, and 70% of its electricity is
produced from coal, which is highly polluting.
Key Points
The energy consumption increases with the increasing numb er of developing areas. In order for this development to con tinue,
while maintaining quality of life, new and renewable energ y sources must be found and utilized.
Renewable energy comes from sources that will never deplet e, no matter how much is used. An example of this is wind en ergy,
which had been growing in popularity in countries like In dia and Germany.
Nonrenewable energy makes up 85% the energy used on earth —the most popular form of energy being oil.
Key Terms
fossil fuel: Any fuel derived from hydrocarbon deposits such as coal, pe troleum, natural gas and, to some extent, peat; these
fuels are irreplaceable, and their burning generates th e greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
renewable energy: Energy that can be replenished at the same rate as it is us ed.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, World Energy Use. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42154/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
World energy consumption. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/World_energy_consumption.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
renewable energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/renewable_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fossil fuel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fossil_fuel. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, World Energy Use. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42154/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/154896.8: Further Topics
Compare the different forms of energy interrelate to one another
Other Forms of Energy
Thermal, chemical, electric, radiant, nuclear, magn etic, elastic, sound, mechanical, luminous, and mass are forms that energy can
exist in. Energy can come in a variety of forms. These for ms include:
Thermal Energy: This is energy associated with the micr oscopic random motion of particles in the media under c onsideration.
An example of something that stores thermal energy is war m bath water.
Chemical Energy: This is energy due to the way that atoms ar e arranged in molecules and various other collections of mat ter.
An example of something that stores chemical energy is f ood. When your body digests and metabolizes food it ut ilizes its
chemical energy.
Electric Energy: This is energy that is from electrical potential energy, a result of Coulombic forces. Electrica l potential energy
is associated with the way that point charges in a system are a rranged. An example of something that stores electric ener gy is a
capacitor. A capacitor collects positive charge on one p late and negative charge on the other plate. Energy is th us stored in the
resulting electrostatic field.
Radiant Energy: This is any kind of electromagnetic radi ation (see key term). An example of an electromagnetic wave i s light.
Nuclear Energy: This type of energy is liberated during the nuclear reactions of fusion and fission. Examples of th ings that
utilize nuclear energy include nuclear power plants and nuclear weapons.
Magnetic Energy: Technically magnetic energy is electri c energy; the two are related by Maxwell’s equations. An examp le of
something that stores magnetic energy is a superconduc ting magnet used in an MRI.
Elastic Energy: This is potential mechanical energy th at is stored in the configuration of a material or phys ical system as work is
performed to distort its volume or shape. An example of som ething that stores elastic energy is a stretched rubber band.
Sound Energy: This is energy that is associated with the vibration or disturbance of matter. An example of somet hing that
creates sound energy is your voice box (larynx).
Mechanical Energy: This is energy that is associated with th e motion and position of an object. It is the sum of all of the kinetic
and potential energy that the object has. An example of so mething that utilizes mechanical energy is a pendulum.
Luminous Energy: This is energy that can be seen becaus e it is visible light. An example of luminous energy is ligh t from a
flashlight.
Mass: Can be converted to energy via:. For example, mass is co nverted into energy when a nuclear bomb explodes.learning objectives

6.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489
Atomic bomb explosion: The mushroom cloud of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, Ja pan
In each of the aforementioned forms, energy exists as either kinetic energy, potential energy, or a comb ination of both. It is
important to note that the above list is not necess arily complete as we may discover new forms of energy in the future such as “dark
energy. ” Also, each of the forms that energy can ta ke on (as listed above) are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example,
luminous energy is radiant energy.
High School Phy sics - T y pes of EnergyHigh School Phy sics - T y pes of Energy

6.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489Types of Energy: A brief overview of energy, kinetic energy, gravita tional potential energy, and the work-energy theorem for
algebra-based physics students.
Energy Transformations
Energy transformation occurs when energy is changed from one form to another, and is a consequence of th e first law of
thermodynamics.
Summarize the consequence of the first law of thermodynam ics on the total energy of a system
Energy transformation occurs when energy is changed from one form to another. It is a consequence of the first law of
thermodynamics that the total energy of a given syst em can only be changed when energy is added or subtra cted from the system.
Often it appears that energy has been lost from a syst em when it simply has been transformed. For example, a n internal combustion
engine converts the potential chemical energy in ga soline and oxygen into heat energy. This heat energy is then converted to kinetic
energy, which is then used to propel the vehicle tha t is utilizing the engine. The technical term for a d evice that converts energy
from one form to another is a transducer.
Energy Transformation: These figures illustrate the concepts of energy loss an d useful energy output.
When analyzing energy transformations, it is important to consider the efficiency of conversion. The effic iency of conversions
describes the ratio between the useful output and in put of an energy conversion machine. Some energy tra nsformations can occur
with an efficiency of essentially 100%. For example, im agine a pendulum in a vacuum. As illustrated in, when t he pendulum’s
learning objectives

6.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489mass reaches its maximum height, all if its energy ex ists in the form of potential energy. However, when the pendulum is at its
lowest point, all of its energy exists in the form of kineti c energy.
Pendulum: This animation shows the velocity and acceleration vect ors for a pendulum. One may note that at the maximum heigh t
of the pendulum’s mass, the velocity is zero. This correspo nds to zero kinetic energy and thus all of the energy of the pendulum is
in the form of potential energy. When the pendulum’s ma ss is at its lowest point, all of its energy is in the form of ki netic energy
and we see its velocity vector has a maximum magnitude he re.
Other energy transformations occur with a much lower e fficiency of conversion. For example, the theoretical limit of the energy
efficiency of a wind turbine (converting the kinetic energy of the wind to mechanical energy) is 59%. The process of
photosynthesis is able to transform the light energy o f the sun into chemical energy that can be used by a plant with an efficiency of
conversion of a mere 6%.
Potential Energy Curves and Equipotentials
A potential energy curve plots potential energy as a fu nction of position; equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential energy.
Derive the potential of a point charge
A potential energy curve plots the potential energy of an object as a function of that object’s position. For example, see. The system
under consideration is a closed system, so the tota l energy of the system remains constant. This means that the kinetic and potential
energy always have to sum to be the same value. We obs erve that the potential energy increases as the kinet ic energy decreases and
vice versa. The utility of a potential energy curve is that we can quickly determine the potential ener gy of the object in question at a
given position.
Potential Energy Curve: This figure illustrates the potential energy of a part icle as a function of position. The kinetic energy is
also shown and is abbreviated K.learning objectives

6.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489Equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential energy. In, if you were to draw a straight horizontal line through the center, that
would be an equipotential line. In and, if you travel alon g an equipotential line, the electric potential will be co nstant.
Equipotential Lines for Two Equal and Opposite Point Charges: Electric field (blue) and equipotential lines (gr een) for two
equal and opposite charges
Let us examine the physical explanation for the equi potentials lines in. The equation for the potential of a point charge is,
where V is the potential, k is a constant with a value of 8.99 · 10 N m /C, Q is the magnitude of the point charge, and ris the
distance from the charge. So, every point that is the same distance from the point charge will have the s ame electric potential
energy. Therefore, if we draw a circle around the point c harge, every point on the circle will have the same potent ial energy.
Work (W) is a measure of the change in potential energy. Sin ce the potential energy does not change along
an equipotential line, you do not need to do any work to move along one. However, you do need to do work to move from one
equipotential line to another. Recall that work is z ero if force is perpendicular to motion; in the fig ures shown above, the forces
resulting from the electric field are in the same d irection as the electric field itself. So we note that each of the equipotential lines
must be perpendicular to the electric field at every p oint.
Key Points
Thermal, chemical, electric, radiant, nuclear, magnetic, elastic, sound, mechanical, luminous, and mass are forms tha t energy
can exist in.
Energy exists as either kinetic energy, potential energ y, or a combination of both.
We may discover new forms of energy (like “dark energy”) i n the future.
The total energy of a given system can only be changed when e nergy is added or subtracted from the system.
Often it appears that energy has been lost from a system when it simply has been transformed.
The efficiency of conversions describes the ratio betwe en the useful output of an energy conversion machine and the input.
A potential energy curve plots the potential energy of an object as a function of its position.
Equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential ene rgy.
You do not need to do any work to move along an equipotent ial line.
Key Terms
fusion: A nuclear reaction in which nuclei combine to form more massive nuclei with the concomitant release of energy.
electromagnetic radiation: radiation (quantized as photons) consisting of oscillat ing electric and magnetic fields oriented
perpendicularly to each other, moving through space
fission: The process of splitting the nucleus of an atom into sm aller particles; nuclear fission.
pendulum: A body suspended from a fixed support so that it swings fr eely back and forth under the influence of gravity; it is
commonly used to regulate various devices such as clocks.
first law of thermodynamics: A version of the law of conservation of energy, special ized for thermodynamical systems. It is
usually formulated by stating that the change in the int ernal energy of a closed system is equal to the amount of h eat supplied to
the system, minus the amount of work done by the system o n its surroundings.9 2 2

6.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Forms of energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Forms_of_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fusion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fusion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
fission. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fission. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conversion efficiency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_conversion_efficiency.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Energy transformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_transformation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
pendulum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pendulum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
first law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/first%20law%20of%20thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pendulum. License: CC BY: Attribution
EnergyTransformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EnergyTransformation.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Module 9 -- Potential Energy Graphs - PER wiki. Provided by: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Located at:
http://scripts.mit.edu/~srayyan/PERwiki/index.php?title=Module_9_--_ Potential_Energy_Graphs. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pendulum. License: CC BY: Attribution

6.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15489EnergyTransformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EnergyTransformation.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Module 9 -- Potential Energy Graphs - PER wiki. Provided by: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Located at:
http://scripts.mit.edu/~srayyan/PERwiki/index.php?title=Module_9_--_ Potential_Energy_Graphs. License: CC BY:
Attribution
6.8: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Linear Momentum and Collisions
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
7.3: Collisions
7.4: Rocket Propulsion
7.5: Center of Mass
Thumbnail: A pool break-off shot. (CC-SA-BY; No-w-ay).
This page titled 7: Linear Momentum and Collisions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144737.1: Introduction
Linear Momentum
Linear momentum is the product of the mass and velocity of an object, it is conserved in elastic and inelastic col lisions.
Calculate the momentum of two colliding objects
In classical mechanics, linear momentum, or simply mo mentum (SI unit kg m/s, or equivalently N s), is the product of the mass
and velocity of an object. Mathematically it is stated as:
(Note here that p and v are vectors.) Like velocity, linear momentum is a vector quantity, possessing a direction as well as a
magnitude. Linear momentum is particularly importan t because it is a conserved quantity, meaning that in a closed system (without
any external forces) its total linear momentum cannot change.
Because momentum has a direction, it can be used to predict the resulting direction of objects after th ey collide, as well as their
speeds. Momentum is conserved in both inelastic and el astic collisions. (Kinetic energy is not conserved i n inelastic collisions but
is conserved in elastic collisions.) It important to note that if the collision takes place on a surface wi th friction, or if there is air
resistance, we would need to account for the momentum of the bodies that would be transferred to the surface and/or air.
Let’s take a look at a simple, one-dimensional exampl e: The momentum of a system of two particles is the sum of their momenta.
If two particles have masses m and m, and velocities v and v, the total momentum is:
Keep in mind that momentum and velocity are vectors. T herefore, in 1D, if two particles are moving in the sa me direction, v1 and
v2 have the same sign. If the particles are moving in opp osite directions they will have opposite signs.
If two particles were moving on a plane we would choose our xy-plane to be on the plane of motion. We can t hen write the x and y
component of the total momentum as:
If the 2D momentum vector is decomposed into two compo nents, the equations for each component are reduced t o its 1D
equivalents.
Momentum, like energy, is important because it is conser ved. “Newton’s cradle” shown in is an example of conser vation of
momentum. As we will discuss in the next concept (on Mom entum, Force, and Newton’s Second Law), in classical mech anics,
conservation of linear momentum is implied by Newton’s laws. Only a few physical quantities are conserved in na ture. Studying
these quantities yields fundamental insight into how nature works.
Newton’s Cradle: Total momentum of the system (or Cradle) is conserved. (neglecting frictional loss in the system.)learning objectives
1 2 1 2

7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14473Momentum, Force, and Newton’s Second Law
In the most general form, Newton’s 2 law can be written as.
Relate Newton’s Second Law to momentum and force
In a closed system (one that does not exchange any m atter with the outside and is not acted on by outside forces), the total
momentum is constant. This fact, known as the law of con servation of momentum, is implied by Newton’s laws of mo tion.
Suppose, for example, that two particles interact. Beca use of the third law, the forces between them are equ al and opposite. If the
particles are numbered 1 and 2, the second law states tha t
or
Therefore, total momentum (p+p) is constant. If the velocities of the particles are u and ubefore the interaction, and afterwards
they are v and v, then
This law holds regardless of the nature of the interpa rticle (or internal) force, no matter how complicate d the force is between
particles. Similarly, if there are several particles, the momentum exchanged between each pair of partic les adds up to zero, so the
total change in momentum is zero.
Newton’s Second Law
Newton actually stated his second law of motion in ter ms of momentum: The net external force equals the c hange in momentum of
a system divided by the time over which it changes. Using symbols, this law is
where is the net external force, is the change in mome ntum, and is the change in time.
This statement of Newton’s second law of motion includes t he more familiar
is given by. If
the mass of the system is constant, then. So for constant mass, Newton’s second law of motion becomes
Because, we get the familiar equation when the mass of the system is constant. Newton’s second law of mot ion
stated in terms of momentum is more generally appli cable because it can be applied to systems where the mass is changing, such as
rockets, as well as to systems of constant mass.nd
learning objectives
1 2 1 2
1 2

7.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14473
Momentum in a Closed System: In a game of pool, the system of entire balls can be con sidered a closed system. Therefore, the
total momentum of the balls is conserved.
Impulse
Impulse, or change in momentum, equals the average net extern al force multiplied by the time this force acts.
Explain the relationship between change in momentum and the amount of time a force acts
Impulse
Forces produce either acceleration or deceleration o n moving bodies, and the greater the force acting on an object, the greater its
change in velocity and, hence, the greater its chang e in momentum. However, changing momentum is also relat ed to how long a
time the force acts. If a brief force is applied to a stalled automobile, a change in its momentum is pr oduced. The same force
applied over an extended period of time produces a g reater change in the automobile’s momentum. The quan tity of impulse is force
× time interval, or in shorthand notation:
High School Phy sics - Momentum & ImpulseHigh School Phy sics - Momentum & Impulselearning objectives

7.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14473Momentum & Impulse: A brief overview of momentum and impulse for high sch ool physics students.
where F is the net force on the system, and Δt is the duration of the force.
From Newton’s 2nd law:
change in momentum equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force acts.
Therefore, impulse as defined in the previous paragraph is simply equivalent to p.
A force sustained over a long time produces more chan ge in momentum than does the same force applied brie fly. A small force
applied for a long time can produce the same moment um change as a large force applied briefly because it is the product of the
force and the time for which it is applied that is i mportant. Impulse is always equal to change in moment um and is measured in Ns
(Newton seconds), as both force and the time interval are important in changing momentum.
Our definition of impulse includes an assumption tha t the force is constant over the time interval. Forc es are usually not
constant. Forces vary considerably even during the bri ef time intervals considered. It is, however, possible t o find an average
effective force that produces the same result as the corresponding time-varying force. shows a graph of what an actual force
looks like as a function of time for a ball bouncing off the floor. The area under the curve has units o f momentum and is equal to
the impulse or change in momentum between times and. That area is equal to the area inside the rectan gle bounded by
and. Thus, the impulses and their effects are the sa me for both the actual and effective forces. Equiva lently, we can simple find
the area under the curve F(t) between and to compute th e impulse in mathematical form:
Force vs. Time: A graph of force versus time with time along the x-axis and f orce along the y-axis for an actual force and an
equivalent effective force. The areas under the two cu rves are equal.

7.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14473Key Points
Like velocity, linear momentum is a vector quantity, posse ssing a direction as well as a magnitude.
Momentum, like energy, is important because it is a conserve d quantity.
The momentum of a system of particles is the sum of thei r momenta. If two particles have masses m and m, and velocitie s v
and v, the total momentum is.
In a closed system, without any external forces, the tota l momentum is constant.
The familiar equation is a special case of the more gener al form of the 2 law when the mass of the system is constant.
Momentum conservation holds (in the absence of external force) regardless of the nature of the interparticle (or internal) force,
no matter how complicated the force is between particles.
A small force applied for a long time can produce the sam e momentum change as a large force applied briefly, because it is the
product of the force and the time for which it is applied that is important.
A force produces an acceleration, and the greater th e force acting on an object, the greater its change in v elocity and, hence, the
greater its change in momentum. However, changing momentum i s also related to how long a time the force acts.
In case of a time-varying force, impulse can be calcula ted by integrating the force over the time duration..
Key Terms
inelastic: (As referring to an inelastic collision, in contrast to a n elastic collision.) A collision in which kinetic ene rgy is not
conserved.
elastic collision: An encounter between two bodies in which the total kinetic en ergy of the two bodies after the encounter is
equal to their total kinetic energy before the encounter. Elastic collisions occur only if there is no net conversio n of kinetic
energy into other forms.
conservation: A particular measurable property of an isolated physic al system does not change as the system evolves.
closed system: A physical system that doesn’t exchange any matter with i ts surroundings and isn’t subject to any force whose
source is external to the system.
momentum: (of a body in motion) the product of its mass and veloci ty.
impulse: The integral of force over time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Introduction to Linear Momentum and Coll isions. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42155/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
inelastic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/inelastic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
conservation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/elastic%20collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42156/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution1 2 1
nd

7.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14473closed system. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/closed%20system. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42159/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Impulse (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Impulse_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
impulse. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/impulse. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 26, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42159/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Momentum & Impulse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XSR7khMBW64. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 7.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144747.2: Conservation of Momentum
Internal vs. External Forces
Net external forces (that are nonzero) change the total mom entum of the system, while internal forces do not.
Contrast the effects of external and internal forces on li near momentum and collisions
Linear Momentum and Collisions
Newton’s 2nd law, applied to an isolated system compose d of particles, indicates that the total momentum of the
entire system should be constant in the absence of n et external forces. Forces external to the system may c hange the total
momentum when their sum is not 0, but internal forces, regardless of the nature of the forces, will not con tribute to the change in
the total momentum. To analyze a mechanical system, i t is important to recognize which forces are interna l and which are external.
Once a mechanical system is clearly defined, it’s not hard to understand what part should be considered external.
Newton’s Cradle: Total momentum of the system (or Cradle) is conserved. (neglecting frictional loss in the system.)
External forces: forces caused by external agent outs ide of the system.
Internal forces: forces exchanged by the particles in the s ystem.
To give you a better idea, let’s consider a simple e xample. We have two hockey pucks sliding across a fri ctionless surface, and we
neglect air resistance for simplicity. They collide wit h each other at t=0.
Let’s first list all the forces present in the syste m. There are mainly three kinds of forces: Gravity, n ormal force (between ice &
pucks), and frictional forces during the collision bet ween the pucks
How should we define our system? In most cases, we would be interested in the motion of the pucks (and nothi ng else). Therefore,
our system consists of two pucks (and nothing else). All the rest of the universe becomes external. With th is in mind, we can see
that gravity and normal forces are external, while th e frictional forces between pucks are internal. Since a ll the external forces
cancel out with each other, there are no net externa l forces. (Gravity and normal force on each puck have the same magnitude, but
are in the opposite directions) Therefore, we conclud e that the total momentum of the two pucks should be a conse rved quantity.
In the previous example, it is worthwhile to note that we d idn’t assume anything about the nature of the collision between the
two pucks. Without knowing anything about the internal for ces (frictional forces during contact), we learned that th e total
momentum of the system is a conserved quantity (p1 and p2 are momentum vectors of the pucks.) In fact, this relation holds
true both in elastic or inelastic collisions. Whether th e total kinetic energy of the pucks is conserved or not, total momentum is
conserved.
Also note that, in the previous example, if we include th e rest of the Earth in our system, the gravity and normal f orces
themselves become internal.learning objectives

7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14474Key Points
External forces are forces caused by external agent o utside of the system.
Internal forces are forces exchanged by the objects in the system.
To determine what part should be considered external and i nternal, mechanical system should be clearly defined.
Key Terms
inelastic: (As referring to an inelastic collision, in contrast to a n elastic collision.) A collision in which kinetic ene rgy is not
conserved.
elastic: referring to elastic collision, in contrast to inelasti c collision. A collision in which kinetic energy is conse rved
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
elastic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elastic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inelastic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/inelastic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Momentum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 7.2: Conservation of Momentum is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144757.3: Collisions
Conservation of Energy and Momentum
In an inelastic collision the total kinetic energy afte r the collision is not equal to the total kinetic energy before the collision.
Assess the conservation of total momentum in an inelastic c ollision
At this point we will expand our discussion of inelastic collisions in one dimension to inelastic collisions i n multiple dimensions. It
is still true that the total kinetic energy after th e collision is not equal to the total kinetic energ y before the collision. While inelastic
collisions may not conserve total kinetic energy, they do conserve total momentum.
We will consider an example problem in which one mass () slides over a frictionless surface into another ini tially stationary
mass (). Air resistance will be neglected. The following thi ngs are known:
where is the initial velocity of the first mass, is th e final velocity of the first mass, is the initial veloc ity of the second mass,
and is the angle between the velocity vector of the fir st mass and the x-axis.
The object is to calculate the magnitude and direct ion of the velocity of the second mass. After this, we wil l calculate whether this
collision was inelastic or not.
Since there are no net forces at work (frictionless sur face and negligible air resistance), there must be co nservation of total
momentum for the two masses. Momentum is equal to the pr oduct of mass and velocity. The initially stationary mass contributes
no initial momentum. The components of velocities al ong the x-axis have the form, where θ is the angle b etween the
velocity vector of the mass of interest and the x-axis.
Expressing these things mathematically:
The components of velocities along the y-axis have th e form, where θ is the angle between the velocity vec tor of the mass
of interest and the x-axis. By applying conservation o f momentum in the y-direction we find:
If we divide Eq. 3 by Eq. 2, we will find:
Eq. 4 can then be solved to find approx. 312º.
Now let’ use Eq. 3 to solve for. Re-arranging Eq. 3, we find:
After plugging in our known values, we find that.
We can now calculate the initial and final kinetic energ y of the system to see if it the same.learning objectives

7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475Since these values are not the same we know that it was an inelast ic collision.
Collision Example: This illustrates the example problem in which one mass c ollides into another mass that is initially stationary.
Glancing Collisions
Glancing collision is a collision that takes place under a small angle, with the incident body being nearly paralle l to the surface.
Identify necessary conditions for a “glancing collision”
A collision is short duration interaction between two bodies or more than two bodies simultaneously causing change in motion of
bodies involved due to internal forces acted between them during this. Collisions involve forces (there is a change in velocity). The
magnitude of the velocity difference at impact is ca lled the closing speed. All collisions conserve moment um. What distinguishes
different types of collisions is whether they also con serve kinetic energy. Line of impact – It is the lin e which is common normal
for surfaces are closest or in contact during impact. This is the line along which internal force of colli sion acts during impact and
Newton’s coefficient of restitution is defined only alon g this line.
When dealing with an incident body that is nearly par allel to a surface, it is sometimes more useful to r efer to the angle between the
body and the surface, rather than that between the bod y and the surface normal (see), in other words 90° m inus the angle of
incidence. This small angle is called a glancing angle. Coll ision at glancing angle is called “glancing collision”.learning objectives

7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475
Collision: Object is deflected after the collision withthe surface. T he angles between the body and the surface normal areindic ated
as α and β. The angles between the body and the surface are and.
Collisions can either be elastic, meaning they conse rve both momentum and kinetic energy, or inelastic, m eaning they conserve
momentum but not kinetic energy. An inelastic collisio n is sometimes also called a plastic collision.
A “perfectly-inelastic” collision (also called a “p erfectly-plastic” collision) is a limiting case of inelastic collision in which the two
bodies stick together after impact.
The degree to which a collision is elastic or inelas tic is quantified by the coefficient of restitution, a value that generally ranges
between zero and one. A perfectly elastic collision h as a coefficient of restitution of one; a perfectly- inelastic collision has a
coefficient of restitution of zero.
Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
An elastic collision is a collision between two or more bod ies in which kinetic energy is conserved.
Assess the relationship among the collision equations to derive elasticity
An elastic collision is a collision between two or more bodies in which the total kinetic energy of the bodi es before the collision is
equal to the total kinetic energy of the bodies afte r the collision. An elastic collision will not occur if kinetic energy is converted
into other forms of energy. It important to understa nd how elastic collisions work, because atoms often un dergo essentially elastic
collisions when they collide. On the other hand, molec ules do not undergo elastic collisions when they coll ide. In this atom we will
review case of collision between two bodies.
The mathematics of an elastic collision is best demon strated through an example. Consider a first particl e with mass and
velocity and a second particle with mass and velocit y. If these two particles collide, there must be con servation of
momentum before and after the collision. If we know th at this is an elastic collision, there must be conserv ation of kinetic energy
by definition. Therefore, the velocities of particl es 1 and 2 after the collision (and respectively) will be related to the initial
velocities by:
(due to conservation of kinetic energy)
and
(due to conservation of momentum).
Since we have two equations, we are able to solve for a ny two unknown variables. In our case, we will solve for t he final velocities
of the two particles.
By grouping like terms and canceling out the ½ terms, we can rewrite our conservation of kinetic energy equation as:
By grouping like terms from our conservation of momentu m equation we can find:
If we then divide Eq. 1 by Eq. 2 and perform some cancelatio ns we will find:learning objectives

7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475We can solve for as:
At this point we see that is still an unknown variable. So we can fix this by plugging Eq. 4 into our initial conservation of
momentum equation. Our conservation of momentum equatio n with Eq. 4 substituted in looks like:
After doing a little bit of algebra on Eq. 5 we find:
At this point we have successfully solved for the final velocity of the second particle. We still need to s olve for the velocity of the
first particle, so let us do that by plugging Eq. 6 into Eq. 4.
After performing some algebraic manipulation of Eq. 7, we finally find:
Elastic Collision of Two Unequal Masses: In this animation, two unequal masses collide and recoil.
Elastic Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
To solve a two dimensional elastic collision problem, deco mpose the velocity components of the masses along perpend icular axes.
Construct an equation for elastic collision
Overview
As stated previously, there is conservation of total ki netic energy before and after an elastic collision. I f an elastic collision occurs
in two dimensions, the colliding masses can travel side to side after the collision (not just along the sa me line as in a one
dimensional collision). The general approach to solvi ng a two dimensional elastic collision problem is to choose a coordinate
system in which the velocity components of the masses can be d ecomposed along perpendicular axes.learning objectives

7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475
AP Phy sics - Collisions in Multiple DimensionsAP Phy sics - Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
Collisions in Multiple Dimensions: A brief introduction to problem solving of collisions i n two dimensions using the law of
conservation of momentum.
In this example, we consider only point masses. These ar e structure-less particles that cannot spin or rotate. We will consider a
case in which no outside forces are acting on the sys tem, meaning that momentum is conserved. We will con sider a situation in
which one particle is initially at rest. This situation is il lustrated in.
Illustration of Elastic Collision in Two Dimensions: In this illustration, we see the initial and final config urations of two
masses that undergo an elastic collision in two dimension s.
Example:

7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475By defining the x-axis to be along the direction of the incoming particle, we save ourselves time in break ing that velocity
vector into its x- and y- components. Now let us consider c onservation of momentum in the x direction:
In Eq. 1, the initial momentum of the incoming parti cle is represented by the initial momentum of the st ationary particle is
represented by the final momentum of the incoming pa rticle is represented by and the final momentum of t he initially
stationary particle is represented by
We can expand Eq. 1 by taking into account that mome ntum is equal to the product of mass and velocity. Al so, we know that
because the initial velocity of the stationary particle is 0.
The components of velocities along the x-axis have t he form, where θ is the angle between the velocity v ector of the
particle of interest and the x-axis.
Therefore:
The components of velocities along the y-axis have th e form, where θ is the angle between the velocity vec tor of the
particle of interest (denoted in the following equati ons by subscript 1 or 2) and the x-axis. We can apply conservation of
momentum in the y-direction in a similar way to yield:
In finding Eq. 3, it was taken into consideration that th e incoming particle had no component of velocity along t he y-axis.
Solving for Two Unknowns
Now we have gotten to a point where we have two equations, this means that we can solve for any two unknowns tha t we want. We
also know that because the collision is elastic that the re must be conservation of kinetic energy before and after the collision. This
means that we may also write Eq. 4, which gives us three equatio ns to solve for three unknowns:
The general approach to finding the defining equati ons for an n-dimensional elastic collision problem is to apply conservation of
momentum in each of the n- dimensions. You can generate an additional equation by utilizing conservation of ki netic energy.
Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
Collisions may be classified as either inelastic or ela stic collisions based on how energy is conserved in the collision.
Distinguish examples of inelastic collision from elastic coll isions
Overview
In an inelastic collision the total kinetic energy a fter the collision is not equal to the total kineti c energy before the collision. This is
in contrast to an elastic collision in which conserva tion of total kinetic energy applies. While inelast ic collisions may not conserve
total kinetic energy, they do conserve total momentum.
Collisions
If two objects collide, there are many ways that kinet ic energy can be transformed into other forms of ene rgy. For example, in the
collision of macroscopic bodies, some kinetic energy is turned into vibrational energy of the constituen t atoms. This causes a
heating effect and results in deformation of the bod ies. Another example in which kinetic energy is transfo rmed into another form
of energy is when the molecules of a gas or liquid co llide. When this happens, kinetic energy is often excha nged between the
molecules’ translational motion and their internal de grees of freedom.,
learning objectives

7.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475A perfectly inelastic collision happens when the maxi mum amount of kinetic energy in a system is lost. In such a collision, the
colliding particles stick together. The kinetic energy is used on the bonding energy of the two bodies.
Sliding Block Example
Let us consider an example of a two-body sliding bloc k system. The first block slides into the second (in itially stationary block). In
this perfectly inelastic collision, the first block bo nds completely to the second block as shown. We assum e that the surface over
which the blocks slide has no friction. We also assume t hat there is no air resistance. If the surface had f riction or if there was air
resistance, one would have to account for the bodies’ mo mentum that would be transferred to the surface and/or a ir.
Inelastic Collision: In this animation, one mass collides into another initi ally stationary mass in a perfectly inelastic collision.
Writing about the equation for conservation of momentu m, one finds:
where mis the mass of the incoming block, u is the velocity of the incoming block, mis the mass of the initially stationary block,
uis the velocity of initially stationary block (0 m/s), an d v is the final velocity the two body system. Solving for t he final velocity,
Taking into account that the blocks have the same m ass and that the one of the blocks is initially stati onary, the expression for the
final velocity of the system may be defined as:
Inelastic Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
While inelastic collisions may not conserve total kine tic energy, they do conserve total momentum.
Relate inelastic collision multiple dimension equations to the one dimension collisions you learned earlier
At this point we will expand our discussion of inelastic collisions in one dimension to inelastic collisions i n multiple dimensions. It
is still true that the total kinetic energy after th e collision is not equal to the total kinetic energ y before the collision. While inelastic
collisions may not conserve total kinetic energy, they do conserve total momentum.
Examples of Collisions | Doc Phy sicsExamples of Collisions | Doc Phy sicsDouble subscripts: use braces to clarify
a a b
b
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
learning objectives

7.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475Examples of Collisions
We will consider an example problem, illustrated in, in which one mass (m1m1) slides over a frictionless surface into another
initially stationary mass (m2m2). Air resistance will be negl ected. The following quantities are known:
Collision Example: This illustrates the example problem in which one mass c ollides into another mass that is initially
stationary.
where v1v1 is the initial velocity of the first mass, v′1v1′ is the final velocity of the first mass, v2v2 is the initial velocity of the
second mass, and θ′1θ1′ is the angle between the velocity v ector of the first mass and the x-axis.
The object is to calculate the magnitude and direct ion of the velocity of the second mass. After this, we wil l calculate whether
this collision was inelastic or not.
Since there are no net forces at work (frictionless su rface and negligible air resistance), there must be conservation of total
momentum for the two masses. Momentum is equal to the pr oduct of mass and velocity. The (initially) stationary mass
contributes no initial momentum. The components of ve locities along the x-axis have the form v ⋅cosθv ⋅cosθ, where θ is the
angle between the velocity vector of the mass of interest a nd the x-axis.
Example:

7.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475Expressing these things mathematically:
The components of velocities along the y-axis have th e form, where θ is the angle between the velocity vec tor of the
mass of interest and the x-axis. By applying conservation o f momentum in the y-direction we find:
If we divide Eq. 3 by Eq. 2, we will find:
Eq. 4 can then be solved to find approx. 312º.
Now let’ use Eq. 3 to solve for. Re-arranging Eq. 3, we find:
After plugging in our known values, we find that.
We can now calculate the initial and final kinetic energ y of the system to see if it the same.
As these values are not the same, we know this was an inelastic col lision.
Key Points
In an inelastic collision the total kinetic energy afte r the collision is not equal to the total kinetic energy before the collision.
If there are no net forces at work (collision takes place on a frictionless surface and there is negligible air resista nce), there
must be conservation of total momentum for the two masses.
The variable θ is the angle between the velocity vector of the mass of interest and the x-axis in traditional Carte sian coordinate
systems.
Collision is short duration interaction between two bodi es or more than two bodies simultaneously causing change in motion of
bodies involved due to internal forces acted between th em during this.
Collisions can either be elastic, meaning they conser ve both momentum and kinetic energy, or inelastic, mea ning they conserve
momentum but not kinetic energy.
When dealing with an incident body that is nearly parall el to a surface, it is sometimes more useful to refer to t he angle between
the body and the surface, rather than that between the body and the surface normal.
An elastic collision will not occur if kinetic energy is c onverted into other forms of energy.
While molecules do not undergo elastic collisions, atoms o ften undergo elastic collisions when they collide.
If two particles are involved in an elastic collision, th e velocity of the first particle after collision can be e xpressed as:
If two particles are involved in an elastic collision, th e velocity of the second particle after collision can be e xpressed as:
If an elastic collision occurs in two dimensions, the col liding masses can travel side to side after the collision.
By defining the x- axis to be along the direction of the incoming particle, we can simplify the defining equation s.
The general approach to finding the defining equations for an n-dimensional elastic collision problem is to appl y conservation
of momentum in each of the n- dimensions. You can genera te an additional equation by utilizing conservation of k inetic energy.
In an inelastic collision, the total kinetic energy after the collision is not equal to the total kinetic energy b efore the collision.
While inelastic collisions may not conserve total kine tic energy, they do conserve total momentum.
A perfectly inelastic collision happens when the maximum amount of kinetic energy in a system is lost.
In an inelastic collision the total kinetic energy afte r the collision is not equal to the total kinetic energy before the collision.

7.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475If there are no net forces at work (i.e., collision takes p lace on a frictionless surface and there is negligible air resistance), there
must be conservation of total momentum for the two masses.
The variable θ is the angle between the velocity vector of the mass of interest and the x-axis in traditional Carte sian coordinate
systems.
Key Terms
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
momentum: (of a body in motion) the product of its mass and veloci ty.
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body which is measured in a unit dim ensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
elastic collision: An encounter between two bodies in which the total kinetic en ergy of the two bodies after the encounter is
equal to their total kinetic energy before the encounter. Elastic collisions occur only if there is no net conversio n of kinetic
energy into other forms.
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
degrees of freedom: A degree of freedom is an independent physical param eter, often called a dimension, in the formal
description of the state of a physical system. The set of all dimensions of a system is known as a phase space.
friction: A force that resists the relative motion or tendency to such motion of two bodies in contact.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Inelastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inelastic_collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Collision. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Angle of incidence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angle_of_incidence. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

7.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/34/Deflection.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/elastic%20collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/34/Deflection.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_collision. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/34/Deflection.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_collision. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 10, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Collisions in Multiple Dimensions. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yo7Izga1q8. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
degrees of freedom. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/degrees_of_freedom. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Inelastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inelastic_collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/34/Deflection.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_collision. License: CC BY: Attribution

7.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14475OpenStax College, College Physics. February 10, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Collisions in Multiple Dimensions. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yo7Izga1q8. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Inelastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inelastic_collision. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Inelastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inelastic_collision. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. January 16, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Energy and Momentum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meDqfux_zLU. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/34/Deflection.png. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_collision. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 10, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Collisions in Multiple Dimensions. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yo7Izga1q8. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Inelastic collision. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Inelastic_collision. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 10, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42165/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Examples of Collisions. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1bxsUfurZMc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 7.3: Collisions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144767.4: Rocket Propulsion
Rocket Propulsion, Changing Mass, and Momentum
In rocket propulsion, matter is forcefully ejected from a system, producing an equal and opposite reaction on wha t remains.
Identify physical principles of rocket propulsion
Rocket Propulsion, Changing Mass, and Momentum
Rockets range in size from fireworks so small that or dinary people use them to immense Saturn Vs that once propelled massive
payloads toward the Moon. The propulsion of all rocke ts, jet engines, deflating balloons, and even squids and octopuses is
explained by the same physical principle: Newton’s thir d law of motion. Matter is forcefully ejected from a s ystem, producing an
equal and opposite reaction on what remains. Another common example is the recoil of a gun. The gun exer ts a force on a bullet to
accelerate it and consequently experiences an equal and op posite force, causing the gun’s recoil or kick.
shows a rocket accelerating straight up. In part (a), t he rocket has a mass m and a velocity v relative to Earth, and hence a
momentum mv. In part (b), a time Δt has elapsed in whi ch the rocket has ejected a mass Δm of hot gas at a velocity v relative to
the rocket. The remainder of the mass () now has a gr eater velocity (). The momentum of the entire syste m (rocket
plus expelled gas) has actually decreased because the force of gravity has acted for a time Δt, producing a negative impulse
. (Remember that impulse is the net external force on a system multiplied by the time it acts, and it e quals the change
in momentum of the system.) So the center of mass of the system is in free fall but, by rapidly expelling mass, part of the system
can accelerate upward. It is a commonly held misconc eption that the rocket exhaust pushes on the ground. If we consider thrust;
that is, the force exerted on the rocket by the exha ust gases, then a rocket’s thrust is greater in outer sp ace than in the atmosphere or
on the launch pad. In fact, gases are easier to expel into a vacuum.
Free-body diagram of rocket propulsion: (a) This rocket has a mass m and an upward velocity v. The net external force on the
system is −mg, if air resistance is neglected. (b) A time Δt later the system has two main parts, the ejected gas and the remainder of
the rocket. The reaction force on the rocket is what overco mes the gravitational force and accelerates it upward.
By calculating the change in momentum for the entir e system over Δt, and equating this change to the imp ulse, the following
expression can be shown to be a good approximation for the a cceleration of the rocket.learning objectives
e

7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14476where a is the acceleration of the rocket, v is the esc ape velocity, m is the mass of the rocket, Δm is the mass of the ejected gas,
and Δt is the time in which the gas is ejected.
Factors of Acceleration
A rocket’s acceleration depends on three major facto rs, consistent with the equation for acceleration of a rocket. First, the greater
the exhaust velocity of the gases relative to the r ocket, v, the greater the acceleration is. The practi cal limit for v is about
2.5×10 m/s for conventional (non-nuclear) hot-gas prop ulsion systems. The second factor is the rate at whic h mass is ejected from
the rocket. This is the factor in the equation. The quantity, with units of newtons, is called “thrust.” T he faster the
rocket burns its fuel, the greater its thrust, and t he greater its acceleration. The third factor is the mass m of the rocket. The smaller
the mass is (all other factors being the same), the gr eater the acceleration. The rocket mass m decreases dramatically during flight
because most of the rocket is fuel to begin with, so t hat acceleration increases continuously, reaching a maximum just before the
fuel is exhausted.
To achieve the high speeds needed to hop continents, obtain orbit, or escape Earth’s gravity altogether, t he mass of the rocket other
than fuel must be as small as possible. It can be shown t hat, in the absence of air resistance and neglecting gravity, the final velocity
of a one-stage rocket initially at rest is
where ln(m /m) is the natural logarithm of the ratio o f the initial mass of the rocket (m) to what is left (m) after all of the fuel is
exhausted. (Note that v is actually the change in velo city, so the equation can be used for any segment of the flight. If we start from
rest, the change in velocity equals the final velocity.)
Key Points
The propulsion of all rockets is explained by the same ph ysical principle: Newton’s third law of motion.
A rocket’s acceleration depends on three major factors: the exhaust velocity, the rate the exhaust is ejected, a nd the mass of the
rocket.
To achieve the high speeds needed to hop continents, obt ain orbit, or escape Earth’s gravity altogether, the mas s of the rocket
other than fuel must be as small as possible.
Key Terms
Newton’s third law of motion: states that all forces exist in pairs: if one object A exerts a force FA on a second object B, then
B simultaneously exerts a force FB on A, and the two force s are equal and opposite:.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Introduction to Rocket Propulsion. Septemb er 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42166/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Rocket. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14866/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Introduction to Rocket Propulsion. Septemb er 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42166/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Introduction to Rocket Propulsion. Septemb er 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42166/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's third law of motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's%20third%20law%20of%20motion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikee
e e
0 r 0 r

7.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14476OpenStax College, Introduction to Rocket Propulsion. Novembe r 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42166/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 7.4: Rocket Propulsion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

7.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144777.5: Center of Mass
Identify the center of mass for an object with continuous m ass distribution
In the previous modules on “Center of Mass and Transl ational Motion,” we learned why the concept of center of mass (COM)
helps solving mechanics problems involving a rigid bo dy. Here, we will study the rigorous definition of COM an d how to
determine the location of it. The position of COM is mass we ighted average of the positions of particles.
The center of mass is a statement of spatial arrangement of mass (i.e. distribution of mass within the system). The position of
COM is given a mathematical formulation which involves di stribution of mass in space:
where r and r are vectors representing the position o f COM and i-th particle respectively, and M and mi are t he total mass
and mass of the i-th particle, respectively. This m ean means that position of COM is mass weighted average of the positions of
particles.
Object with Continuous Mass Distribution
If the mass distribution is continuous with the density ρ(r) within a volume V, the position of COM is given as
where M is the total mass in the volume. If a continuo us mass distribution has uniform density, which means ρ is constant, then the
center of mass is the same as the center of the volume.
Locating the Center of Mass
The experimental determination of the center of mas s of a body uses gravity forces on the body and rel ies on the fact that in the
parallel gravity field near the surface of Earth the cen ter of mass is the same as the center of gravity.
The center of mass of a body with an axis of symmetry and constant density must lie on this axis. Thus, th e center of mass of a
circular cylinder of constant density has its center of mass on the axis of the cylinder. In the same way, the center of mass of a
spherically symmetric body of constant density is at the center of the sphere. In general, for any symmetr y of a body, its center of
mass will be a fixed point of that symmetry.
In two dimensions: An experimental method for locatin g the center of mass is to suspend the object from two locations and to drop
plumb lines from the suspension points. The intersect ion of the two lines is the center of mass.
Plumb Line Method for Center of Mass: Suspend the object fro m two locations and to drop plumb lines from the suspension points.
The intersection of the two lines is the center of mass.learning objectives
Definition: center of mass
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
COM i

7.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477In three dimensions: By supporting an object at thre e points and measuring the forces that resist the we ight of the object, COM of
the three-dimensional coordinates of the center of mas s can be determined.
Motion of the Center of Mass
We can describe the translational motion of a rigid body as if it is a point particle with the total mas s located at the COM—center
of mass.
Derive the center of mass for the translational motion of a rigid body
We can describe the translational motion of a rigid body as if it is a point particle with the total mass located at the center of mass
(COM). In this Atom. we will prove that the total mass (M) times the acceleration of the COM (a), indeed, equals the sum of
external forces. That is,
You can see that the Newton’s 2nd law applies as if we a re describing the motion of a point particle (with m ass M) under the
influence of the external force.
Derivation
From the definition of the center of mass,
we get by taking time derivative twice on each side.
Note that.
In a system of particles, each particle may feel bo th external and internal forces. Here, external forces are forces from external
sources, while internal forces are forces between parti cles in the system. Since the sum of all internal forc es will be 0 due to the
Newton’s 3rd law,
. Therefore, we get
For example, when we confine our system to the Earth an d the Moon, the gravitational force due to the Sun wou ld be external,
while the gravitational force on the Earth due to th e Moon (and vice versa) would be internal. Since the gr avitational forces
between the Earth and the Moon are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, they will cancel out each other in the sum (see).
COM of the Earth and Moon: Earth and Moon orbiting a COM in side the Earth. The red cross represents the COM of the two-b ody
system. The COM will orbit around the Sun as if it is a poin t particle.
When there is no external force, the COM momentum is conse rved.
Proof: Since there is no external force,. Therefore,learning objectives
COM
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Corollary

7.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477Since there is no external force,
Therefore,
Center of Mass of the Human Body
The center of mass (COM) is an important physical concept —it is the point about which objects rotate.
Estimate the COM of a given object
The center of mass (COM) is an important physical concep t. It is the point on an object at which the weighted relative position of
the distributed mass sums to zero—the point about which object s rotate.
Human proportions have been important in art, measure ment, and medicine (a well known drawing of the human b ody is seen in).
Although the human body has complicated features, th e location of the center of mass (COM) could be a goo d indicator of body
proportions. The center of mass of the human body depe nds on the gender and the position of the limbs. In a standing posture, it is
typically about 10 cm lower than the navel, near the top of the hip bones. In this Atom, we will learn how to m easure the COM of a
human body.
Leonardo da Vinci’s “The Vitruvian Man”: Vitruvian Man: A drawing created by Leonardo da Vinci. The drawing is based on
the correlations of ideal human proportions with geometry described[4] by the ancient Roman architect Vitruvius in Book III of hisProof
learning objectives

7.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477treatise De Architectura.
First, let’s take two scales and a wooden beam (H meter l ong), long enough to contain the entire body of the subject. Put the
scales H meters apart, and place the beam across the scales, as illustrated in. Now, let the subject lie on the beam. Make sure
that his/her heels are aligned with one end of the beam. Me asure the readings (F, F) on the scale.
The COM of a Human Body: This figure demonstrates measuring the COM of a human body.
The system (person+beam) has three external forces: gravity on the subject (F), and normal forces from t he scales F and F.
The equation of motion for force (F=ma) will give us:
where M is mass of the subject. (We assume that the wood en beam has no mass.) This equation doesn’t provide all the
information to locate the COM. However, the equation of mot ion for torque helps.
Since the net torque of the system is zero (hence no rotati onal acceleration),
The COM is chosen as the origin for the torque. Theref ore, gravity contributes nothing as a torque. Solving for h and using the
equation of motion for force, we get
Center of Mass and Translational Motion
The COM (center of mass) of a system of particles is a geometric point that assumes all the mass and exte rnal force(s) during
motion.
Support the presence of COM in three dimensional bodies in motion
Introduction: COM, Linear Momentum, and Collisions
Our study of motion has been limited up to this point. We have referred to particle, object and body in th e same way. We considered
that actual three dimensional rigid bodies move such that all constituent particles had the same motion (i.e., same trajectory,
velocity and acceleration). By doing this, we have essentia lly considered a rigid body as a point particle.
Center of Mass (COM)
An actual body, however, can move differently than thi s simplified paradigm. Consider a ball rolling down an incline plane or a
stick thrown into air. Different parts of a body have different motions. While translating in the air, th e stick rotates about a moving
axis, as shown in. This means that such bodies may not behave l ike a point particle, as earlier suggested.Example:
1 2
CM 1 2
learning objectives

7.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477
Forces on the COM: Left: The force appears to operate on the COM is “mgsin θ. Right: The force appears to operate on the COM
is “mg”.
Describing motions of parts or particles that have dif ferent motions would be quite complicated to do in a n integrated manner.
However, such three dimensional bodies in motion have one surprising, simplifying characteristic—a geometri c point that behaves
like a particle. This point is known as center of mass, abbreviated COM (the mathematical definition of COM wil l be introduced in
the next Atom on “Locating the Center of Mass”). It has the following two characterizing aspects:
The center of mass appears to carry the whole mass of t he body.
At the center of mass, all external forces appear to apply.
Significantly, the center of a ball (the COM of a rolli ng ball) follows a straight linear path; whereas the COM of a stick follows a
parabolic path (as shown in the figure above). Second ly, the forces appear to operate on the COMs in two ca ses (“mgsinθ and
“mg”) as if they were indeed particle-like objects. This concept of COM, therefore, eliminate the complexit ies otherwise present in
attempting to describe motions of rigid bodies.
Describing Motion in a Rigid Body
We can describe general motion of an object (with mass m) a s follows:
We describe the translational motion of a rigid body as if it is a point particle with mass m loca ted at COM.
Rotation of the particle, with respect to the COM, is described indepe ndently.
We “separate” the translational part of the motion fr om the rotational part. By introducing the concept o f COM, the translational
motion becomes that of a point particle with mass m. Thi s simplifies significantly the mathematical complexit y of the problem.
Key Points
The center of mass (COM) is a statement of spatial arrang ement of mass (i.e. distribution of mass within the system).
The experimental determination of the center of mass of a body uses gravity forces on the body and relies on the fact that in the
parallel gravity field near the surface of the earth the center of mass is the same as the center of gravity.
For a 2D object, an experimental method for locating the center of mass is to suspend the object from two locations a nd to drop
plumb lines from the suspension points. The intersect ion of the two lines is the center of mass.
The total mass times the acceleration of the center of m ass equals the sum of external forces.
For the translational motion of a rigid body with mass M, Ne wton’s 2nd law applies as if we are describing the motion of a
point particle (with mass M) under the influence of the external force.
When there is no external force, the center of mass moment um is conserved.
Although a human body has complicated features, the locatio n of the center of mass (COM) could be a good indicator of the
body proportions.
We can measure the location of COM with two scales and a wo oden beam. The linear and rotational equations of motion gives
us the location.
The center of mass of the human body depends on the gend er and the position of the limbs. In a standing posture, it is typically
about 10 cm lower than the navel, near the top of the hip b ones.
In a motion of a rigid body, different parts of the bod y have different motions.This means that these bodies may not behave like
a point particle.
There is a characteristic geometric point of the three d imensional body in motion. This point behaves as a parti cle, and is known
as center of mass, abbreviated COM. COM appears to carry the wh ole mass of the body. All external forces appear to apply at

7.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477COM.
To describe the motion of a rigid body (with possibly a comp licated geometry), we separate the translational part of the m otion
from the rotational part.
Key Terms
plumb line: A cord with a weight attached, used to produce a vertica l line.
rigid body: An idealized solid whose size and shape are fixed and r emain unaltered when forces are applied; used in Newtonian
mechanics to model real objects.
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
point particle: An idealization of particles heavily used in physics. I ts defining feature is that it lacks spatial extension,
meaning that geometrically the particle is equivalent to a point.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass%23Locating_the_center_of_ma ss. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass%23Locating_the_center_of_ma ss. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
plumb line. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plumb_line. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
File:Center gravity 2.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Center_gravity_2.svg&page= 1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
rigid body. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rigid_body. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Center gravity 2.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Center_gravity_2.svg&page= 1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vitruvian Man. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitruvian_Man. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Center gravity 2.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Center_gravity_2.svg&page= 1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51119464e4b0f11e4bcb2448/ 1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Da Vinci Vitruve Luc Viatour. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Da_Vinci_Vitruve_Luc_Viatour.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

7.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14477Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
point particle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/point%20particle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
rigid body. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rigid_body. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
File:Center gravity 2.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Center_gravity_2.svg&page= 1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51119464e4b0f11e4bcb2448/ 1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Da Vinci Vitruve Luc Viatour. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Da_Vinci_Vitruve_Luc_Viatour.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 7.5: Center of Mass is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque
This page titled 8: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.8.1: Introduction
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
8.3: Stability
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
8.5: Applications of Statics
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
8.7: The Center of Gravity
8.8: Torque and Angular AccelerationTopic hierarchy

8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144808.1: Introduction
Describe the effect of the torque on an object
Torque about a point is a concept that denotes the tendenc y of force to turn or rotate an object in motion. T his tendency is measured
in general about a point, and is termed as moment of force. The torque in angular motion corresponds to force i n translation. It is the
“cause” whose effect is either angular acceleration or angular deceleration of a particle in general mo tion. Quantitatively, it is
defined as a vector given by:
AP Phy sics 1 - T orqueAP Phy sics 1 - T orque
Torque: A brief introduction to torque for students studying rotational motion in algebra-based physics courses such a s AP Physics
1 and Honors Physics.
Rotation is a special case of angular motion. In the case of rotation, torque is defined with respect to an axis such that vector “r” is
constrained as perpendicular to the axis of rotatio n. In other words, the plane of motion is perpendicula r to the axis of rotation.
Clearly, the torque in rotation corresponds to force in t ranslation.
Torque is the cross product of force cross length of the moment arm; it is involved whenever there is a r otating object. Torque can
also be expressed in terms of the angular acceleration of t he object.learning objectives

8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14480The determination of torque’s direction is relativel y easier than that of angular velocity. The reason f or this is simple: the torque
itself is equal to vector product of two vectors, unlik e angular velocity which is one of the two operands of the vector product.
Clearly, if we know the directions of two operands here, the d irection of torque can easily be interpreted.
Since torque depends on both the force and the distance from the axis of rotation, the SI units of torque are newt on-meters.
Torque: Torque in terms of moment arm.
Key Points
Torque is found by multiplying the applied force by the distance to the axis of rotation, called the moment arm.
Torque is to rotation as force is to motion.
The unit of torque is the newton-meter.
Key Terms
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
angular motion: The motion of a body about a fixed point or fixed axis (as of a planet or pendulum). It is equal to the angle
passed over at the point or axis by a line drawn to the body.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Torque. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14402/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
angular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/angular%20motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Torque. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14402/latest/tp4.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Torque. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMjtN5l08-w. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 8.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144818.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
Identify the first condition of equilibrium
First Condition of Equilibrium
For an object to be in equilibrium, it must be experi encing no acceleration. This means that both the net force and the net torque on
the object must be zero. Here we will discuss the first condit ion, that of zero net force.
In the form of an equation, this first condition is:
In order to achieve this conditon, the forces acting along each axis of motion must sum to zero. For example, the net external forces
along the typical x– and y-axes are zero. This is written as
and.
The condition must be true for both static equilib rium, where the object’s velocity is zero, and dynami c equilibrium, where
the object is moving at a constant velocity.
Below, the motionless person is in static equilibrium. T he forces acting on him add up to zero. Both forces are ve rtical in this case.
Person in Static Equilibrium: This motionless person is in static equilibrium.
Below, the car is in dynamic equilibrium because it is moving at constant velocity. There are horizontal and vertical forces, but the
net external force in any direction is zero. The appl ied force between the tires and the road is balanced by air friction, and the
weight of the car is supported by the normal forces, here sh own to be equal for all four tires.
learning objectives

8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14481A Car in Dynamic Equilibrium: This car is in dynamic equilibrium because it is movin g at constant velocity. The forces in all
directions are balanced.
Second Condition
The second condition of static equilibrium says that t he net torque acting on the object must be zero.
Identify the second condition of static equilibrium
A child’s seesaw, shown in, is an example of static e quilibrium. An object in static equilibrium is one th at has no acceleration in any
direction. While there might be motion, such motion is co nstant.
Two children on a seesaw: The system is in static equilibrium, showing no accele ration in any direction.
If a given object is in static equilibrium, both the net for ce and the net torque on the object must be zero. Let’s b reak this down:
Net Force Must Be Zero
The net force acting on the object must be zero. The refore all forces balance in each direction. For exam ple, a car moving along a
highway at a constant speed is in equilibrium, as it is not accelerating in any forward or vertical direc tion. Mathematically, this is
stated as.
Net Torque Must Be Zero
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibriu m involves avoiding accelerated rotation (maintaini ng a constant angular
velocity). A rotating body or system can be in equi librium if its rate of rotation is constant and remain s unchanged by the forces
acting on it.
To understand what factors affect rotation, let us thi nk about what happens when you open an ordinary door by rotating it on its
hinges.The magnitude, direction, and point of applicat ion of the force are incorporated into the definiti on of the physical quantity
called torque—the rotational equivalent of a force. It is a measure of the effectiveness of a force in changing or accelerating a
rotation (changing the angular velocity over a period of time).
In equation form, the magnitude of torque is defined to be where τ (the Greek letter tau) is the symbol for torque, r is
the distance from the pivot point to the point where the force is applied, F is the magnitude of the forc e, and θ is the angle between
the force and the vector directed from the point of a pplication to the pivot point.
Two-Component Forces
In equilibrium, the net force and torque in any particu lar direction equal zero.learning objectives

8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14481Calculate the net force and the net torque for an object in equilibrium
An object with constant velocity has zero acceleratio n. A motionless object still has constant (zero) veloci ty, so motionless objects
also have zero acceleration. Newton’s second law states that:
so objects with constant velocity also have zero net external force. This means that all the forces acting on the object are balanced
— that is to say, they are in equilibrium.
This rule also applies to motion in a specific direct ion. Consider an object moving along the x-axis. If no net force is applied to the
object along the x-axis, it will continue to move along the x-axis at a constant velocity, with no acceleration.
Car Moving at Constant Velocity: A moving car for which the net x and y force components a re zero
We can easily extend this rule to the y-axis. In any system, unless the applied forces cancel e ach other out (i.e., the resultant force is
zero), there will be acceleration in the direction o f the resultant force. In static systems, in which motio n does not occur, the sum of
the forces in all directions always equals zero. This c oncept can be represented mathematically with the following equations:
This rule also applies to rotational motion. If the r esultant moment about a particular axis is zero, the object will have no rotational
acceleration about the axis. If the object is not spin ning, it will not start to spin. If the object is spin ning, it will continue to spin at
the same constant angular velocity. Again, we can exte nd this to moments about the y-axis as well. We can represent this rule
mathematically with the following equations:
Key Points
There are two conditions that must be met for an object to b e in equilibrium.
The first condition is that the net force on the objec t must be zero for the object to be in equilibrium.
If net force is zero, then net force along any direction i s zero.
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium involves avoiding accelerated rotation.
A rotating body or system can be in equilibrium if its rate of rotation is constant and remains unchanged by the forces acting on
it.
The magnitude of torque about a axis of rotation is def ined to be.
In equilibrium, the net force in all directions is zero.
If the net moment of inertia about an axis is zero, the objec t will have no rotational acceleration about the axis.
In each direction, the net force takes the form: and t he net torque take the form: where the sum
represents the vector sum of all forces and torques ac ting.learning objectives

8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14481Key Terms
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body which is measured in a unit dim ensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
translation: Motion of a body on a linear path, without deformation or r otation, i.e. such that every part of the body moves at
the same speed and in the same direction; also (in phy sics), the linear motion of a body considered independentl y of its rotation.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
translation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/translation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Statics/Newton's Laws and Equilibrium. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Statics/Newton's_Laws_and_Equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42167/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14481OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144828.3: Stability
Explain the relationship between how center of mass is de fined and static equilibrium
For an object to be in static equilibrium, we expect it to stay in the same state indefinitely. If it sta rts accelerating away from its
current position, it would hardly be in equilibrium. To qua ntify equilibrium for a single object, there are two condit ions:
1. The net external force on the object is zero:
2. The net external torque, regardless of choice of origi n, is also zero:
Those two conditions hold regardless of whether the ob ject we are talking about is a single point particle, a rigid body, or a
collection of discrete particles. Being in equilibri um means that we expect no changes to the linear mom entum or the angular
momentum. Note that this does not mean that the syste m is not moving or rotating; instead it simply means t hat its movement will
not change as time goes on.
In a special case when the external forces are govern ed by some potential (e.g. gravitational potential) we can gain insight into the
nature of the equilibrium. From the definition of a p otential we know that. When the first derivative is zero, we can
take the second derivative to find whether the equili brium is stable or unstable. Explicitly, if the poten tial is concave-up at x,
, then the system is stable; conversely, if the potent ial is concave-down, then the equilibrium is unstable. If the second
derivative is zero or does not exist, then the equilib rium is neutral—neither stable nor unstable.
Mathematically, we can view this as a Taylor series expansion on the force slightly away from equilibrium,
and when it is initially at equilibrium,
If the ball is at the top of the hill (where the pote ntial is concave-down) it is possible for it to be p erfectly balanced, and therefore at
equilibrium. But if it gets pushed just slightly to the side, then it will roll down the hill with increasing speed, and the equilibrium is
unstable.
Unstable Equilibrium: A ball on top of a hill can initially be balanced, but if it moves slightly left or right, it gets pushed furth er
and further away from the initial equilibrium position. T his is an example of unstable equilibrium.
Our notion of “balance” comes directly from the form ulation of equilibrium. For something to be “balance d” means that the net
external forces are zero. For example, a coin could ba lance standing up on a table. Initially the coin wil l feel no net external force
or torque; it is in equilibrium. But if pushed slight ly to the side, it will become “off-balance,” experi encing both a force and a
torque causing it to fall to the table. It might hav e been initially “balanced” and at equilibrium, but it was an unstable equilibrium,
prone to being disturbed. But why all this talk of ex ternal forces, with no mention of internal forces? The reason is that all the
internal forces must sum to zero. This follows directl y from Newton’s Third Law,. Every time we consider a f orce from
particle 1 on particle 2 inside of a system, we know t hat it will later be cancelled out by the correspond ing force from particle 2 on
particle 1. We could include those forces in the sum, but it is unnecessary and internal forces are often more complicated than
internal forces.
This differentiation between internal and external fo rces is a powerful one. It also implies that you can trace the motion of the
system as a whole (ignoring motion inside the system) through the net external force acting on a center o f mass. A center of mass
acts as if it has the entire mass of the system, locat ed at one point, and only feels external forces. Its position is defined as thelearning objectives
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14482weighted average of all the particles in the system: or if we have a continuous density of mass,,
then we can integrate:. The power of the center of m ass is that it hides all the details of what is happe ning internally.
We do not always want to lose the information of what i s happening internally, but it is a useful tool to re member, when dealing
with a number of complicated interactions.
Key Points
Equilibrium is defined by no net forces or torques.
Stability of an equilibrium can be determined by the seco nd derivative of the potential.
Defining a center of mass allows a simple way to study the beh avior of a system or object as a whole.
Stable equilibrium requires a restoring force. This res toring force can be derived by a Taylor expansion of the force, F(x).
Key Terms
stable equilibrium: The response [of a system in static equilibrium] to a sm all perturbation is forces that tend to restore the
equilibrium.
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
stable equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/stable%20equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Unstable equilibrium. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Unstable_equilibrium.svg.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 8.3: Stability is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144838.4: Solving Statics Problems
Formulate and apply six steps to solve static problems
Statics is the study of forces in equilibrium. Recall t hat Newton’s second law states:
Therefore, for all objects moving at constant velocit y (including a velocity of 0 — stationary objects), the net external force is zero.
There are forces acting, but they are balanced — that is t o say, they are “in equilibrium. ”
When solving equilibrium problems, it might help to use the following steps:
1. First, ensure that the problem you’re solving is in fa ct a static problem—i.e., that no acceleration (including a ngular
acceleration) is involved Remember: for these situation s. If rotational motion is involved, the condition
must also be satisfied, where is torque, is the moment of inertia, and is the angular acceleration.
2. Choose a pivot point. Often this is obvious because the problem involves a hinge or a fixed point. If the choice is not obvious,
pick the pivot point as the location at which you have the m ost unknowns. This simplifies things because forces at the p ivot
point create no torque because of the cross product:
3. Write an equation for the sum of torques, and then write equations for the sums of forces in the x and y directions. Set these
sums equal to 0. Be careful with your signs.
4. Solve for your unknowns.
5. Insert numbers to find the final answer.
6. Check if the solution is reasonable by examining the ma gnitude, direction, and units of the answer. The importa nce of this last
step cannot be overstated, although in unfamiliar appli cations, it can be more difficult to judge reasonable ness. However, these
judgments become progressively easier with experience.
Key Points
First, ensure that the problem you’re solving is in fact a static problem—i.e., that no acceleration (including ang ular
acceleration) is involved.
Choose a pivot point — use the location at which you have the most unknowns.
Write equations for the sums of torques and forces in the x and y directions.
Solve the equations for your unknowns algebraically, and in sert numbers to find final answers.
Key Terms
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
moment of inertia: A measure of a body’s resistance to a change in its an gular rotation velocity
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42173/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42167/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
moment of inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/moment_of_inertia. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlikelearning objectives

8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14483This page titled 8.4: Solving Statics Problems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144848.5: Applications of Statics
Develop an understanding of how a machine applies forc e to work against a load force
Simple Machines
A simple machine is a device that changes the direc tion or magnitude of a force. They can be described as the simplest mechanisms
that use mechanical advantage (or leverage) to mult iply force. Usually, the term “simple machine” is refer ring to one of the six
classical simple machines, defined by Renaissance scient ists.
Simple Machines (1 of 7) Pulley s; De ning Forces, DSimple Machines (1 of 7) Pulley s; De ning Forces, D
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA: Describes the following terms as they relate to simple ma chine; input
force, output force, input distance, output distance, mech anical advantage.
Simple machines are devices used to multiply or augm ent a force that we apply—often at the expense of a d istance through which
we apply the force. Some common examples include:
Leverlearning objectives

8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484Wheel and Axle
Pulley
Inclined Plane
Wedge
Screw
When a device with a specific movement, called a mecha nism, is joined with others to form a machine, these mac hines can be
broken down into elementary movements. For example, a bic ycle is a mechanism made up of wheels, levers, and pulleys.
Simple Machines: Table of simple mechanisms, from Chambers’ Cyclopedia, 1728. [1] Simple machines provide a “vocabulary”
for understanding more complex machines.
Mechanics
A simple machine has an applied force that works again st a load force. If there are no frictional losses, the work done on the load is
equal to the work done by the applied force. This all ows an increase in the output force at the cost of a proportional decrease in
distance moved by the load. The ratio of the output force to the input force is the mechanical advantag e of the machine. If the
machine does not absorb energy, its mechanical advant age can be calculated from the machine’s geometry. Fo r instance, the
mechanical advantage of a lever is equal to the ratio of i ts lever arms.
Simple machines which do not experience frictional lo sses are called ideal machines. For these ideal mach ines, the power in (rate
of energy input) in equal to the power out (rate of energy output): Pin=PoutPin=Pout.

8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484
Lever: The amount of force produced by a machine can not be greater than the amount of force put into it.
Further Examples
Wheelbarrows and shovels are also examples of simple machines (these utilize levers). They use only three forces: the input force,
output force, and force on the pivot. In the case of wheelbarrows, the output force is between the pivot (wh eel’s axle) and the input
force. In the shovel, the input force is between the pivot and the load.
Examples of Simple Machines: Both of these machines use the concept of levers.

8.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484Arches and Domes
Arches and domes are structures that exhibit structural strength and can span large areas with no intermediate su pports.
Explain how an arch exhibits structural strength and how a dome c an span a large area without intermediate supports
Arches and domes are structures that exhibit structur al strength and can span large areas with no interme diate supports. In this
atom, we will discuss the history and physics behind arches and domes.
Arches
An arch is a structure that spans a space, and supports structure and weight above it. Arches have been being bu ilt from as long ago
as the second millennium, but were not used for a var iety of structures until the Romans took advantage of their capabilities.
Arches are a pure compression form. They span large a reas by resolving forces into compressive stresses and eliminating tensile
stresses (referred to as arch action). As the forces in an arch are carried toward the ground, the arch wi ll push outward at the base
(called thrust). As the height of the arch decreases, t he outward thrust increases. To prevent the arch from co llapsing, the thrust
needs to be restrained, either with internal ties or externa l bracing. This external bracing is often called an abutme nt, as shown in.
Arches: A masonry arch1. Keystone 2. V oussoir 3. Extrados 4. Impos t 5. Intrados 6. Rise 7. Clear span 8. Abutment
The most common true arch configurations are the fi xed arch, the two-hinged arch and the three-hinged ar ch. The fixed arch is
most often used in reinforced concrete bridge and t unnel construction, where the spans are short. Because it is subject to additional
internal stress caused by thermal expansion and cont raction, this type of arch is considered to be stati cally indeterminate. The twohinged arch is most often used to bridge long spans. This type of arch has pinned connections at the base. Unlike the fixed arch, the
pinned base is able to rotate, allowing the structure to move freely and compensate for the thermal expan sion and contraction
caused by changes in outdoor temperature. Because the structure is pinned between the two base connections, which can result in
additional stresses, the two-hinged arch is also statically i ndeterminate, although not to the degree of the fixed ar ch.
Domes
A dome is an element of architecture that resembles the hollow upper half of a sphere. Dome structures made of various materials
(from mud to stone, wood, brick, concrete, metal, glass and pl astic) and have a long architectural lineage extending into prehistory.
A dome is basically an arch that has been rotated ar ound its central vertical axis. Domes have the same pro perties and capabilities
of arches, they can span large areas without interme diate supports and have a great deal of structural st rength. When the base of a
dome is not the same shape as its supporting walls, for example when a circular dome is on a square structu re, techniques are
employed to transition between the two. Pendentives are triangular sections of a sphere used to transition f rom the flat surfaces of
supporting walls to the round base of a dome.
Domes can be divided into two kinds, simple and compo und. Simple domes use pendentives that are part of t he same sphere as the
dome itself. Compound domes are part of the structure of a large sphere below that of the dome itself, forming a circular base, as
shown in.learning objectives

8.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484
Compound Dome: A compound dome (red) with pendentives (yellow) fro m a sphere of greater radius than the dome.
Muscles and Joints
Most skeletal muscles and joints exert much larger forces wi thin the body than the limbs will apply to the outside wor ld.
Explain the forces exerted by muscles
Muscles and Joints
Muscles and joints involve very interesting applicatio ns of statics. Muscles can only contract, so they occur in pairs. In the arm, the
biceps muscle is a flexor: it closes the limb. The tri ceps muscle is an extensor that opens the limb. This configuration is typical of
skeletal muscles, bones, and joints in humans and oth er vertebrates. Most skeletal muscles exert much larg er forces within the body
than the limbs will apply to the outside world. The rea son is clear, since most muscles are attached to bones via tendons close to
joints, causing these systems to have mechanical adv antages much less than one. Viewing them as simple ma chines, the input force
is much greater than the output force, as seen in.
learning objectives

8.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484The Forearm of a Person Holding a Book: (a.) The biceps exert a force FB to support the weight of t he forearm and the book.
The triceps are assumed to be relaxed. (b.) An approximatel y equivalent mechanical system with the pivot at the elbow joint
Very large forces are also created in the joints. Bec ause muscles can contract but not expand beyond the ir resting length, joints and
muscles often exert forces that act in opposite dire ctions, and thus subtract. Forces in muscles and joint s are largest when their load
is far from the joint. For example, in racquet sport s like tennis, the constant extension of the arm du ring game play creates large
forces. The mass times the lever arm of a tennis racqu et is an important factor, and many players use the heaviest racquet they can
handle. It is no wonder that joint deterioration and d amage to the tendons in the elbow, such as ‘tennis e lbow,’ can result from
repetitive motion, undue torques, and possible poor racque t selection in such sports.
Various tried techniques for holding and using a rac quet, bat, or stick can not only increase sporting pr owess but can minimize
fatigue and long-term damage to the body. Training coaches and physical therapists use the knowledge of the relationships between
forces and torques in the treatment of muscles and j oints. In physical therapy, an exercise routine can apply a particular force and
torque, which can revive muscles and joints in time. Some exercises should be performed under water, thus r equiring the exertion
of more force and further strengthening muscles.
Key Points
The six classifications of simple machines were establish ed by renaissance scientists; they are as follows: lever, whee l and axle,
pulley, inclined plane, wedge and screw.
Simple machines can be joined with other devices to create a m ore complicated machine. These building blocks are used to
explain how machines work.
The force output by a simple machine can exceed the force that was put into the machine.
Arches span large areas by resolving forces into compressive s tresses and eliminating tensile stresses.
The most common true arch configurations are the fixed ar ch, the two-hinged arch, and the three-hinged arch.
A dome is basically an arch that has been rotated aroun d its central vertical axis.
Domes are basically arches that have been rotated on the ir vertical axis, and have the same capabilities and pro perties of arches.
Domes can be divided into two kinds, simple and compound.
It is helpful to view muscles as a simple machines and draw the m as free body diagrams.
In muscles, the input force is often much greater than the output force.
Very large forces are also created in the joints. Becau se muscles can contract but not expand beyond their res ting length, joints
and muscles often exert forces that act in opposite directi ons, and thus subtract.
Key Terms
machine: A mechanical or electrical device that performs or ass ists in the performance of human tasks, whether physical or
computational, laborious or for entertainment.
leverage: A force amplified by means of a lever rotating around a pivot.
mechanical advantage: In a simple machine, the ratio of the output force to t he input force.
compressive stress: Stress on materials that leads to a smaller volume.
tensile stress: Stress state leading to expansion; that is, the length of a material tends to increase in the tensile direction wh ile
the volume remains constant.
pendentive: The concave triangular sections of vaulting that pro vide the transition between a dome and the square base on
which it is set and transfer the weight of the dome.
muscle: A contractile form of tissue which animals use to effe ct movement.
joint: Any part of the body where two bones join, in most cases al lowing that part of the body to be bent or straightened.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION

8.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484OpenStax College, Simple Machines. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple machines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_machines. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
leverage. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leverage. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
machine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/machine. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dome%23General_types. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
pendentive. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pendentive. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
compressive stress. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/compressive%20stress. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
tensile stress. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/tensile%20stress. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pendentive and Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pendentive_and_Dome.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints. Sep tember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42175/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
muscle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/muscle. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
joint. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/joint. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

8.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14484Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pendentive and Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pendentive_and_Dome.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints. Feb ruary 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42175/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 8.5: Applications of Statics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144858.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
Identify properties of elastic objects
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wa ll, the car will not move once it hits the wall, but it will noticeably change
shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is a deformation. Even very small forces are k nown to cause some
deformation. For small deformations, two important chara cteristics are observed. First, the object returns to it s original shape when
the force is removed—that is, the deformation is ela stic for small deformations. Second, the size of the de formation is proportional
to the force—that is, for small deformations, Hooke’ s law is obeyed. In equation form, Hooke’s law is given b y, where
is the change in length.
Elasticity is a measure of how difficult it is to stre tch an object. In other words it is a measure of how small kk is. Very elastic
materials like rubber have small kk and thus will stretch a lot with only a small force.
Stress is a measure of the force put on the object over the ar ea.
Strain is the change in length divided by the original len gth of the object.
Experiments have shown that the change in length (ΔL) depends on only a few variables. As already noted, ΔL i s proportional to
the force F and depends on the substance from which th e object is made. Additionally, the change in length is proportional to the
original length L0 and inversely proportional to th e cross-sectional area of the wire or rod. For example, a long guitar string will
stretch more than a short one, and a thick string will stret ch less than a thin one.
learning objectives

8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14485Tension/Compression: Tension: The rod is stretched a length ΔL when a force is applied parallel to its length. (b) Compression:
The same rod is compressed by forces with the same magni tude in the opposite direction. For very small deformations and uniform
materials, ΔL is approximately the same for the same magnitu de of tension or compression. For larger deformations, the crosssectional area changes as the rod is compressed or stretche d.
Fracture
Fracture is caused by a strain placed on an object such that it deforms beyond its elastic limit and breaks.
Relate fracture with the elastic limit of a material
Materials cannot stretch forever. When a strain is applie d to a material it deforms elastically proportional to the force applied.
However, after it has deformed a certain amount, the ob ject can no longer take the strain and will break or fracture. The zone in
which it bends under strain is called the elastic regi on. In that region the object will bend and then retu rn to its original shape when
the force is abated. Past that point, if more strain is adde d, the object may permanently deform and eventually fract ure.
Fracture strength, also known as breaking strength, is the stress at which a specimen fails via fracture. This is usually determined
for a given specimen by a tensile test, which charts the stres s-strain curve. The final recorded point is the fracture st rength.
Fracture: This is a graph of deformation ΔL versus applied force F. The straight segment is the linear region where Hooke’s la w is
obeyed. The slope of the straight region is 1k. For larger forces, the graph is curved but the deformation is still elastic—L will
return to zero if the force is removed. Still greater f orces permanently deform the object until it finally fractures. The shape of the
curve near fracture depends on several factors, includ ing how the force F is applied. Note that in this graph the slop e increases just
before fracture, indicating that a small increase in F is p roducing a large increase in L near the fracture.
Bones, on the whole, do not fracture due to tension or compression. Rather they generally fracture due to s ideways impact or
bending, resulting in the bone shearing or snapping. Th e behavior of bones under tension and compression is important because it
determines the load the bones can carry. Bones are classified as weight-bearing structures such as columns i n buildings and trees.
Weight-bearing structures have special features; column s in building have steel-reinforcing rods while trees and bones are fibrous.
The bones in different parts of the body serve diff erent structural functions and are prone to differen t stresses. Thus, the bone in the
top of the femur is arranged in thin sheets separate d by marrow while, in other places, the bones can be cy lindrical and filled with
marrow or just solid. Overweight people have a tendenc y toward bone damage due to sustained compressions in bone joints and
tendons.learning objectives

8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14485Key Points
Elasticity is a measure of the deformation of an object when a force is applied. Objects that are very elastic like ru bber have
high elasticity and stretch easily.
Stress is force over area.
Strain is change in length over original length.
Most objects behave elastically for small strains and return to their original shape after being bent.
If the strain on an object is greater than the elastic lim it of the object, it will permanently deform or eventually fracture.
Fracture strength is a measure of the force needed to bre ak an object.
Key Items
deformation: A transformation; change of shape.
strain: The amount by which a material deforms under stress or force, given as a ratio of the deformation to the initial
dimension of the material and typically symbolized by ε is termed the engineering strain. The true strain is def ined as the
natural logarithm of the ratio of the final dimension to the initial dimension.
elastic: Capable of stretching; particularly, capable of stretch ing so as to return to an original shape or size when forc e is
released.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
deformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deformation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 16, 20 15. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fracture. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fracture. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
strain. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strain. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
elastic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elastic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 16, 20 15. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

8.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155048.7: The Center of Gravity
Describe how the center of mass of an oddly shaped object is f ound
Center of Gravity
When people think of objects, they think of them as singular particles of matter. In fact, every object is m ade up of millions of
particles, all of which behave differently when moved. When people observe a stick being thrown in the air, it seems as though the
entire object is moving at the same trajectory and ve locity, but each particle is being subjected to a d ifferent motion in space and
acceleration, depending on its place. The different p arts of the body have different motions. shows the mo tion of a stick in the air: it
seems to rotate around a single point. Three-dimension al bodies have a property called the center of mass, o r center of gravity. This
center of mass’s main characteristic is that it appears t o carry the whole mass of the body.
Center of Gravity: Although the center of mass is in the midpoint of the st ick, all of the particles are moving as well.
The center of mass does not actually carry all the mass, despite appearances. Given a hollow sphere, the c enter is the center of
mass, even though it does not actually have anything i n it. As seen in, it looks as if the external forces of gravity appear to be
working only on the center of mass, but each particle is being pushed or pulled by gravity. The center of mass is much easier to use
when discussing bodies, because no one has to analyze each ind ividual particle.
Mathematical Expression: The mathematical relation of center of gravity is read as: ‘the position of the center of mass and
weighted average of the position of the particles. ‘
Specifically: ‘the total mass x the position of the c enter of mass= ∑ the mass of the individual particle x the position of the particle.
‘ The center of mass is a geometric point in three-d imensional volume. When using the definition above, i t yields the following
equation for center of mass:
where is the reference axis x, y, or z; m is individual mass; is the individual position; and M is the total mass.
When taking the center of mass of an oddly shaped obj ect, it is helpful to break it down into smaller sectio ns whose mass and
properties are easier to evaluate, and then add the pr oducts of the individual masses and positions and divide by the total mass.learning objectives
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

8.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15504
Center of Mass: This child’s toy uses the principles of ‘center of mass’ to stay balanced on a finger.
Key Points
The center of mass ‘s main characteristic is that it app ears to carry the whole mass of the body.
The total mass x the position of the center of mass= ∑ m ass of the individual particle x the position of the part icle.
The center of mass is a geometric point in three-dimens ional volume. By using the definition above, the followin g equation for
center of mass can be derived:
Key Terms
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Center of gravity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_gravity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Connexions. Provided by: Connexions. Located at: http://cnx.org. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
8.7: The Center of Gravity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

8.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155058.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
Express the relationship between the torque and the angular a cceleration in a form of equation
Torque and angular acceleration are related by the following formula where is the objects moment of iner tia and αα is the angular
acceleration.
T orque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the CT orque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the C
Torque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the Church in the French Revolut ion: Why do things change their angular
velocity? Soon, you’ll know.
Just like Newton’s Second Law, which is force is equal t o the mass times the acceleration, torque obeys a si milar law. If you
replace torque with force and rotational inertia with mass and angular acceleration with linear accelerat ion, you get Newton’s
Second Law back out. In fact, this equation is Newton’s se cond law applied to a system of particles in rotation about a given axis. It
makes no assumptions about constant rotational velocity.
The net torque about an axis of rotation is equal t o the product of the rotational inertia about that axis and the angular acceleration,
as shown in Figure 1.learning objectives

8.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15505
Figure 1: Relationship between force (F), torque (τ), momentum (p), an d angular momentum (L) vectors in a rotating system
Similar to Newton’s Second Law, angular motion also obey s Newton’s First Law. If no outside forces act on an ob ject, an object in
motion remains in motion and an object at rest rema ins at rest. With rotating objects, we can say that un less an outside torque is
applied, a rotating object will stay rotating and an ob ject at rest will not begin rotating.
If a turntable were spinning counter clockwise (when v iewed from the top), and you applied your fingers to opposite sides the
turntable would begin to slow its spinning. From a trans lational viewpoint, at least, there would be no net fo rce applied to the
turntable. The force that points to one side would b e cancelled by the force that points to the other. T he forces of the two fingers
would cancel. Therefore, the turntable would be in tra nslational equilibrium. Despite that, the rotational velocity would be
decreased meaning that the acceleration would no lon ger be zero. From this we might conclude that just bec ause a rotating object is
in translational equilibrium, it is not necessarily in ro tational equilibrium.
Key Points
When a torque is applied to an object it begins to rota te with an acceleration inversely proportional to its mome nt of inertia.
This relation can be thought of as Newton’s Second Law for ro tation. The moment of inertia is the rotational mass and th e
torque is rotational force.
Angular motion obeys Newton’s First Law. If no outside forces act on an object, an object in motion remains in moti on and an
object at rest remains at rest.
Key Terms
angular acceleration: The rate of change of angular velocity, often represen ted by α.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
rotational inertia: The tendency of a rotating object to remain rotating unless a torque is applied to it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Richard Baldwin, Phy1320: Angular Momentum -- The Mathemati cs of Torque. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38460/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rotational-inertia.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
angular acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/angular_acceleration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/0/09/Torque_animation.g if.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Torque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the Church i n the French Revolution. Located at:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1yvWP4J44A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms:
Standard YouTube license
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Rotational Kinematics, Angular Momentum, and Energy
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.2: Angular Acceleration
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
9.4: Dynamics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
9.8: Problem Solving
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
This page titled 9: Rotational Kinematics, Angular Momentum, and Ener gy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Boundless.

9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144879.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
Assess the relationship between radians the the revolution of a CD
When objects rotate about some axis—for example, whe n the CD (compact disc) rotates about its center—each p oint in the object
follows a circular arc. Consider a line from the cente r of the CD to its edge. Each pit used to record soun d along this line moves
through the same angle in the same amount of time. T he rotation angle is the amount of rotation, and is analogous to linear
distance. We define the rotation angle to be the rat io of the arc length to the radius of curvature:
(illustrated in).
Rotation Angle: All points on a CD travel in circular arcs. The pits along a line from the center to the edge all move through the
same angle Δ in a time Δt.
In mathematics, the angle of rotation (or angular pos ition) is a measurement of the amount (i.e., the an gle) that a figure is rotated
about a fixed point (often the center of a circle, as s hown in).
Angle θ and Arc Length s: The radius of a circle is rotated through an angle Δ. T he arc length Δs is described on the
circumference.
The arc length Δs is the distance traveled along a ci rcular path. r is the radius of curvature of the circ ular path. We know that for
one complete revolution, the arc length is the circ umference of a circle of radius r. The circumference of a circle is 2πr. Thus, for
one complete revolution the rotation angle is:learning objectives

9.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14487This result is the basis for defining the units used to meas ure rotation angles to be radians (rad), defined so th at:
If, then the CD has made one complete revolution, and every point on the CD is back at its original positi on. Because
there are 360º in a circle or one revolution, the relatio nship between radians and degrees is thus, so that:
Angular Velocity, Omega
Angular velocity ω is the rate of change of an angle, math ematically defined as.
Examine how fast an object is rotating based on angular velocity
To examine how fast an object is rotating, we define angula r velocity ω as the rate of change of an angle. In symbols, thi s is
where an angular rotation Δ takes place in a time Δt. The greater the rotation angle in a given amount of time, the greater the
angular velocity. The units for angular velocity are rad ians per second (rad/s).
Angular velocity ω is analogous to linear velocity v. T o find the precise relationship between angular and linear velocity, we again
consider a pit on the rotating CD. This pit moves an arc l ength Δs in a time Δt, and so it has a linear velocity.
From we see that. Substituting this into the expression for v gives
We can write this relationship in two different ways: or.
The first relationship states that the linear veloci ty v is proportional to the distance from the center of rotation, thus it is largest for a
point on the rim (largest r), as you might expect. W e can also call this linear speed v of a point on t he rim the tangential speed. The
second relationship can be illustrated by consideri ng the tire of a moving car, as shown in the picture b elow. Note that the speed of
the point at the center of the tire is the same as the speed v of the car. The faster the car moves, th e faster the tire spins—large v
means a large ω, because v=rω. Similarly, a larger-radi us tire rotating at the same angular velocity (ω) wil l produce a greater linear
speed (v) for the car.
Angular Velocity: A car moving at a velocity v to the right has a tire ro tating with an angular velocity ω. The speed of the tread of
the tire relative to the axle is v, the same as if the ca r were jacked up. Thus the car moves forward at linear ve locity v=rω, where r is
the tire radius. A larger angular velocity for the tire means a greater velocity for the car.learning objectives

9.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14487Angular Acceleration, Alpha
Angular acceleration is the rate of change of angular vel ocity, expressed mathematically as.
Explain the relationship between angular acceleration a nd angular velocity
Angular acceleration is the rate of change of angula r velocity. In SI units, it is measured in radians per second squared (rad/s), and
is usually denoted by the Greek letter alpha ().
Consider the following situations in which angular vel ocity is not constant: when a skater pulls in her ar ms, when a child starts up a
merry-go-round from rest, or when a computer’s hard d isk slows to a halt when switched off. In all these cases, there is an angular
acceleration in which ωω changes. The faster the change occurs, the greater the angular acceleration. Angular acceleration is
defined as the rate of change of angular velocity. In eq uation form, angular acceleration is expressed as follo ws:
where is the change in angular velocity and is the change in time. The units of angular acceleration are (rad/s)/s, or rad/s. If
ωω increases, then αα is positive. If ωω decreases, then αα is ne gative.
It is useful to know how linear and angular accelerat ion are related. In circular motion, there is accele ration that is tangent to the
circle at the point of interest (as seen in the diagram below). This acceleration is called tangential acceleration, a.
Tangential acceleration: In circular motion, acceleration can occur as the mag nitude of the velocity changes: a is tangent to the
motion. This acceleration is called tangential accelera tion.
Tangential acceleration refers to changes in the ma gnitude of velocity but not its direction. In circul ar motion, centripetal
acceleration, a, refers to changes in the direction of the velocity but not its magnitude. An object unde rgoing circular motion
experiences centripetal acceleration (as seen in the diagram below.) Thus, a and a are perpendicular and independent of one
another. Tangential acceleration a is directly relate d to the angular acceleration and is linked to an i ncrease or decrease in the
velocity (but not its direction).learning objectives
t
c
t c
t

9.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14487
Centripetal Acceleration: Centripetal acceleration occurs as the direction of ve locity changes; it is perpendicular to the circular
motion. Centripetal and tangential acceleration are thus perpendicular to each other.
Key Points
The arc length Δs is the distance traveled along a circ ular path. r is the radius of curvature of the circular path.
The rotation angle is the amount of rotation and is ana logous to linear distance. We define the rotation angle to be the ratio
of the arc length to the radius of curvature:.
For one complete revolution the rotation angle is 2π.
The greater the rotation angle in a given amount of tim e, the greater the angular velocity.
Angular velocity ω is analogous to linear velocity v.
We can write the relationship between linear velocity and an gular velocity in two different ways: or.
The faster the change in angular velocity occurs, the gre ater the angular acceleration.
In circular motion, linear acceleration is tangent to the c ircle at the point of interest, and is called tangentia l acceleration.
In circular motion, centripetal acceleration refers to changes in the direction of the velocity but not its magnitud e. An object
undergoing circular motion experiences centripetal ac celeration.
Key Terms
Angular position: The angle in radians (degrees, revolutions) through whic h a point or line has been rotated in a specified
sense about a specified axis.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
angular acceleration: The rate of change of angular velocity, often represen ted by α.
tangential acceleration: The acceleration in a direction tangent to the circle a t the point of interest in circular motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Angle of rotation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angle_of_rotation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Angular position. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular%20position. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

9.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14487OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42177/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Angular acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_acceleration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/tangential-acceleration.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
angular acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/angular_acceleration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42083/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42177/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42177/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

9.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155169.10: Conservation of Energy
Conclude the interchangeability of force and radius with t orque and angle of rotation in determining force
In this atom we will discuss work and energy associated with rotational motion. shows a worker using an electric grindstone
propelled by a motor. Sparks are flying, and noise a nd vibration are created as layers of steel are par ed from the pole. The stone
continues to turn even after the motor is turned of f, but it is eventually brought to a stop by frictio n. Clearly, the motor had to work
to get the stone spinning. This work went into heat, light, sound, vibration, and considerable rotational kinetic en ergy.
Grindstone: The motor works in spinning the grindstone, giving it rotational kinetic energy. That energy is then converted to heat,
light, sound, and vibration. (Credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass C ommunication Specialist Seaman Zachary David Bell.)
Work must be done to rotate objects such as grindstone s or merry-go-rounds. The simplest rotational situat ion is one in which the
net force is exerted perpendicular to the radius of a disc and remains perpendicular as the disc starts to rotate. The force is parallel
to the displacement, and so the net work (W) done is the product of the force (F) and the radius (r) of t he disc (this is otherwise
known as torque(τ)) times the angle (θ) of rotation:
Work and energy in rotational motion are completely analogous to work and energy in translational motion and completely
transferrable. Just as in translational motion (where k inetic energy equals 1/2mv where m is mass and v is ve locity), energy is
conserved in rotational motion. Kinetic energy (K.E.) in rotational motion is related to moment of rotati onal inertia (I) and angular
velocity (ω):
The final rotational kinetic energy equals the work don e by the torque:
This confirms that the work done went into rotational kinetic energy. To return to the grindstone example, work was done to give
the grindstone rotational energy, and work is done by friction so that it loses kinetic energy. However, the energy is never
destroyed; it merely changes form from rotation of the grin dstone to heat when friction is applied.
Key Points
Rotating objects have rotational kinetic energy.
Rotational kinetic energy can change form if work is done on the object.
Energy is never destroyed, if rotational energy is gained or lost, something must have done work on it to change the fo rm of the
energy.learning objectives

9.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15516Key Terms
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
rotational inertia: The tendency of a rotating object to remain rotating unless a torque is applied to it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Ener gy Revisited. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42180/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rotational-inertia.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Ener gy Revisited. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42180/latest/Figure_11_04_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
9.10: Conservation of Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144889.2: Angular Acceleration
Relate angle of rotation, angular velocity, and angular acceleration to their equivalents in linear kinematic s
Simply by using our intuition, we can begin to see the interrelatedness of rotational quantities like θ (angle of rotation), ω(angular
velocity) and α (angular acceleration). For example, if a motorcycl e wheel has a large angular acceleration for a fairly long time, it
ends up spinning rapidly and rotating through many r evolutions. The wheel’s rotational motion is analogo us to the fact that the
motorcycle’s large translational acceleration produces a large final velocity, and the distance traveled will a lso be large.
Kinematic Equations
Kinematics is the description of motion. We have alre ady studied kinematic equations governing linear mot ion under constant
acceleration:
Similarly, the kinematics of rotational motion descr ibes the relationships among rotation angle, angular velocity, angular
acceleration, and time. Let us start by finding an e quation relating ω, α, and t. To determine this equation, we use the corresponding
equation for linear motion:
As in linear kinematics where we assumed a is constant, here we assume that angular acceleration α is a constant, and can use the
relation: Where r – radius of curve.Similarly, we have the following relationships between linear and angular valu es:
By using the relationships and, we derive all the ot her kinematic equations for rotational motion under
constant acceleration:
The equations given above can be used to solve any rotational or translational kinematics problem in whi ch a and α are constant.
shows the relationship between some of the quantities discu ssed in this atom.
Linear and Angular: This figure shows uniform circular motion and some of it s defined quantities.learning objectives

9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14488Key Points
The kinematic equations for rotational and/or linear mo tion given here can be used to solve any rotational or tr anslational
kinematics problem in which a and α are constant.
By using the relationships between velocity and angula r velocity, distance and angle of rotation, and acceler ation and angular
acceleration, rotational kinematic equations can be de rived from their linear motion counterparts.
To derive rotational equations from the linear counterp arts, we used the relationships and.
Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of mechanics concerned with objects in mot ion, but not with the forces involved.
angular: Relating to an angle or angles; having an angle or angl es; forming an angle or corner; sharp-cornered; pointe d; as in,
an angular figure.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Kinematics of Rotational Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42178/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
angular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/angular. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42177/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 9.2: Angular Acceleration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144899.3: Rotational Kinematics
Distinguish the two different motions in which rolling without slipping is broken down
Rolling without slipping generally occurs when an obje ct rolls without skidding. To relate this to a real wo rld phenomenon, we can
consider the example of a wheel rolling on a flat, hori zontal surface.
Connecting Linear and Rotational Motion! | Doc PhyConnecting Linear and Rotational Motion! | Doc Phy
Connecting Linear and Rotational Motion! Rolling without Slipping!: How fast does the axle of a bike wheel move? How fast
does the BOTTOM of a wheel move?
Rolling without slipping can be better understood by breaking it down into two different motions: 1) Motio n of the center of mass,
with linear velocity v (translational motion); and 2) rotational motion aro und its center, with angular velocity w.
Rolling Motion: Rolling motion is a combination of rotational and tra nslational motion.learning objectives

9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14489When an object is rolling on a plane without slipping, the point of contact of the object with the plane does not move. If we
imagine a wheel moving forward by rolling on a plane at speed v, it must also be rotating about its axis at an angular speed ωω
since it is rolling.
The object’s angular velocity ωω is directly proporti onal to its velocity, because as we know, the faster we are driving in a car, the
faster the wheels have to turn. So, to determine the ex act relationship between linear velocity and angular velocity, we can imagine
the scenario in which the wheel travels a distance of x while r otating through an angle θ.
Rolling Without Slipping: A body rolling a distance of x on a plane without slipping.
In mathematical terms, the length of the arc is equa l to the angle of the segment multiplied by the obj ect’s radius, R. Therefore, we
can say that the length of the arc of the wheel that has rotated an angle θ, is equal to Rθ. Furthermore, si nce the wheel is in constant
contact with the ground, the length of the arc correlatin g to the angle is also equal to x. Therefore,
Since xx and θθ depend on time, we can take the derivative of both sides to obtain:
where is equal to the linear velocity, and is equal to the angular velocity ωω. We can then simplify this equation to:
Key Points
Rolling without slipping can be better understood by break ing it down into translational motion and rotational mo tion.
When an object is rolling on a plane without slipping, t he point of contact of the object with the plane does not mo ve.
A rolling object’s velocity v is directly related to its a ngular velocity, and is mathematically expressed as, where is
the object’s radius and is its linear velocity.
Key Terms
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing the motion of an object in circular motion; its magnitude is equal to the angu lar
speed (ωω) of the particle, and the direction is perpendi cular to the plane of its circular motion.
linear velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time of the object’s center of m ass.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics%23Rolling_without_slipping.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Rolling Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14311/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14489Sunil Kumar Singh, Rolling Motion. November 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14311/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Rolling Motion. November 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14311/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Connecting Linear and Rotational Motion! Rolling without Sl ipping!. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=AuBuK1jVyGw. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 9.3: Rotational Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144909.4: Dynamics
Explain the relationship between the force, mass, radius, a nd angular acceleration
If you have ever spun a bike wheel or pushed a merry- go-round, you have experienced the force needed to c hange angular velocity.
Our intuition is reliable in predicting many of the factors that are involved. For example, we know that a door opens slowly if we
push too close to its hinges. Furthermore, we know that the more massive the door, the more slowly it opens. T he first example
implies that the farther the force is applied from t he pivot, the greater the angular acceleration; ano ther implication is that angular
acceleration is inversely proportional to mass. These r elationships should seem very similar to the familiar relationships among
force, mass, and acceleration embodied in Newton’s sec ond law of motion. There are, in fact, precise rotation al analogs to both
force and mass.
Rotational inertia, as illustrated in, is the resis tance of objects to changes in their rotation. In oth er words, a rotating object will stay
rotating and a non-rotating object will stay non-rota ting unless acted on by a torque. This should remind you of Newton’s First
Law.
Rotational Inertia: Force is required to spin the bike wheel. The greater the fo rce, the greater the angular acceleration produced.
The more massive the wheel, the smaller the angular accelera tion. If you push on a spoke closer to the axle, the angula r
acceleration will be smaller.
To develop the precise relationship among force, mas s, radius, and angular acceleration, consider what hap pens if we exert a force
F on a point mass m that is at a distance r from a p ivot point. Because the force is perpendicular to r, an acceleration is
obtained in the direction of F. We can rearrange th is equation such that F=ma and then look for ways to r elate this expression to
expressions for rotational quantities. We note that a=rα, a nd we substitute this expression into F=ma, yielding:
Recall that torque is the turning effectiveness of a force. In this case, because F is perpendicular to r, tor que is simply. So, if
we multiply both sides of the equation above by r, we get torqu e on the left-hand side. That is,
, or
This equation is the rotational analog of Newton’s seco nd law (), where torque is analogous to force, angular acceleration is
analogous to translational acceleration, and mr is a nalogous to mass (or inertia). The quantity mr is ca lled the rotational inertia or
moment of inertia of a point mass m a distance r from the cen ter of rotation.
Different shapes of objects have different rotational in ertia which depend on the distribution of their mass.learning objectives
2 2

9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14490Key Points
The farther the force is applied from the pivot, the greate r the angular acceleration.
Angular acceleration is inversely proportional to mass.
The equation is the rotational analog of Newton’s seco nd law (), where torque is analogous to force, angular
acceleration is analogous to translational accelerat ion, and is analogous to mass (or inertia).
Key Terms
rotational inertia: The tendency of a rotating object to remain rotating unless a torque is applied to it.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42179/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42179/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rotational-inertia.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 9, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42179/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 9.4: Dynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144919.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
Express the rotational kinetic energy as a function of th e angular velocity and the moment of inertia, and rela te it to the total
kinetic energy
Rotational kinetic energy is the kinetic energy due to the rotation of an object and is part of its tot al kinetic energy. Looking at
rotational energy separately around an object’s axis of r otation yields the following dependence on the object’s moment of inertia:
Kinetic Energy of Rotation | Doc Phy sicsKinetic Energy of Rotation | Doc Phy sics
Kinetic Energy of Rotation: Things that roll without slipping have some fraction of t heir energy as translational kinetic and the
remainder as rotational kinetic. The ratio depends on the moment of inertia of the object that’s rolling.
where is the angular velocity and is the moment of i nertia around the axis of rotation.
The mechanical work applied during rotation is the torqu e () times the rotation angle.
The instantaneous power of an angularly accelerating bod y is the torque times the angular velocity:.
Note the close relationship between the result for rotatio nal energy and the energy held by linear (or translationa l) motion:learning objectives

9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14491In the rotating system, the moment of inertia takes the r ole of the mass and the angular velocity takes the role of th e linear velocity.
As an example, let us calculate the rotational kinetic energy of the Earth (animated in Figure 1). As the Earth has a period of about
23.93 hours, it has an angular velocity of 7.29×10 rad/s. The Earth has a moment of inertia, I = 8.04×10 kg·m2. Therefore, it
has a rotational kinetic energy of 2.138×10 J.
The Rotating Earth: The earth’s rotation is a prominent example of rotatio nal kinetic energy.
This can be partially tapped using tidal power. Additio nal friction of the two global tidal waves creates ener gy in a physical manner,
infinitesimally slowing down Earth’s angular velocity. Due to conservation of angular momentum this process t ransfers angular
momentum to the Moon’s orbital motion, increasing its d istance from Earth and its orbital period.
Moment of Inertia
The moment of inertia is a property of a mass that measu res its resistance to rotational acceleration about one or more axes.
Identify a property of a mass described by the moment of in ertia
The Moment of Inertia
The moment of inertia is a property of the distribut ion of mass in space that measures mass’s resistance t o rotational acceleration
about one or more axes. Newton’s first law, which descri bes the inertia of a body in linear motion, can be extended to the inertia of
a body rotating about an axis using the moment of in ertia. That is, an object that is rotating at consta nt angular velocity will remain
rotating unless it is acted upon by an external torq ue. In this way, the moment of inertia plays the same role in rotational dynamics
as mass does in linear dynamics: it describes the re lationship between angular momentum and angular veloc ity as well as torque
and angular acceleration.−5 37
learning objectives

9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14491
AP Phy sics C - Moment of InertiaAP Phy sics C - Moment of Inertia
Moment of Inertia: A brief introduction to moment of inertia (rotation al inertia) for calculus-based physics students.
The moment of inertia I of an object can be defined as the sum of for all the point masses of which it is composed, where m is
the mass and r is the distance of the mass from the center of mass. It can be expressed mathematically as:. Here, is
analogous to in translational motion.
As an example, consider a hoop of radius r. Assuming that the hoop material is uniform, the hoop’s moment of i nertia can be found
by summing up all the mass of the hoop and multiplyi ng by the distance of that mass from the center of m ass. Since the hoop is a
circle and the mass is uniform around the circle, the mom ent of inertia is. All of the mass m is at a distance r fr om the center.
Moment of inertia also depends on the axis about which you rotate an object. Objects will usually rotate about their center of mass,
but can be made to rotate about any axis. The momen t of inertia in the case of rotation about a differe nt axis other than the center of
mass is given by the parallel axis theorem. The theo rem states that the moment of inertia for an object rotated about a different axis
parallel to the axis passing through the center of m ass is where r is now the distance between the two axes and IcmIcmis
the moment of inertia when rotated about the center of m ass which you learned how to calculate in the previous par agraph.
A general relationship among the torque, moment of inertia, and angular acceleration is: or. Net τ is the total
torque from all forces relative to a chosen axis. Su ch torques are either positive or negative and add li ke ordinary numbers. The
relationship in is the rotational analog to Newton’s se cond law and is very applicable. This equation is actu ally valid for any
torque, applied to any object, and relative to any axis.
As can be expected, the larger the torque, the larger t he angular acceleration. For example, the harder a c hild pushes on a merry-goround, the slower it accelerates for the same torque. The basic relationship between the moment of inertia and the angular
acceleration is that the larger the moment of inerti a, the smaller the angular acceleration. The moment of inertia depends not only

9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14491on the mass of an object, but also on its distributio n of mass relative to the axis around which it rotate s. For example, it wil be
much easier to accelerate a merry-go-round full of chi ldren if they stand close to its axis than if they all stand at t he outer edge.
Moment of Inertia on a Merry-Go-Round: A father pushes a playground merry-go-round at its ed ge and perpendicular to its
radius to achieve maximum torque.
Key Points
Rotational kinetic energy can be expressed as: where is the angular velocity and is the moment of inertia
around the axis of rotation.
The mechanical work applied during rotation is the torqu e times the rotation angle:.
The instantaneous power of an angularly accelerating bod y is the torque times the angular velocity:.
There is a close relationship between the result for rota tional energy and the energy held by linear (or translati onal) motion.
Newton’s first law, which describes the inertia of a body in l inear motion, can be extended to the inertia of a body rota ting about
an axis using the moment of inertia.
An object that is rotating at constant angular velocity will remain rotating unless it is acted upon by an external torque.
The larger the torque, the larger the angular accelerati on.
Key Items
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
inertia: The property of a body that resists any change to its uniform motion; equivalent to its mass.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Richard Baldwin, Phy1300: Angular Momentum -- Rotational Ki netic Energy and Inertia. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38440/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Rotational energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotational_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/30/Globespin.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic Energy of Rotation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KGuyId5W6jY. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14491Moment of inertia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Moment_of_inertia. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42179/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/30/Globespin.gif. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinetic Energy of Rotation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KGuyId5W6jY. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 9, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42179/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Moment of Inertia. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eoBYvPF5KL0. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

9.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/144929.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
Evaluate the implications of net torque on conservation of energy
Let us consider some examples of momentum: the Earth continues to spin at the same rate it has for bill ions of years; a high-diver
who is “rotating” when jumping off the board does not need to make any physical effort to continue rotati ng, and indeed would be
unable to stop rotating before hitting the water. Th ese examples have the hallmarks of a conservation law. Following are further
observations to consider:
1. A closed system is involved. Nothing is making an effort to twist the Earth or the high- diver. They are isolated from rotation
changing influences (hence the term “closed system”).
2. Something remains unchanged. There appears to be a numerical quantity for measuring r otational motion such that the total
amount of that quantity remains constant in a closed sys tem.
3. Something can be transferred back and forth without chang ing the total amount. A diver rotates faster with arms and legs pulled
toward the chest from a fully stretched posture.
Angular Momentum
The conserved quantity we are investigating is called angular momentum. The symbol for angular momentum i s the letter L. Just as
linear momentum is conserved when there is no net ext ernal forces, angular momentum is constant or conserv ed when the net
torque is zero. We can see this by considering Newton’s 2nd law for rotational motion:
, where is the torque. For the situation in which the ne t torque is zero,.
If the change in angular momentum ΔL is zero, then the an gular momentum is constant; therefore,
(when net τ=0).
This is an expression for the law of conservation of angular momentum.
Example and Implications
An example of conservation of angular momentum is see n in an ice skater executing a spin, as shown in. The ne t torque on her is
very close to zero, because 1) there is relatively l ittle friction between her skates and the ice, and 2) the friction is exerted very
close to the pivot point.
Conservation of Angular Momentum: An ice skater is spinning on the tip of her skate wi th her arms extended. Her angular
momentum is conserved because the net torque on her is negligibly small. In the next image, her rate of spi n increases greatly when
she pulls in her arms, decreasing her moment of inerti a. The work she does to pull in her arms results in an increase in rotational
kinetic energy.
(Both and are small, and so is negligibly small.) Consequently, she can spin for quite some time. She c an also
increase her rate of spin by pulling in her arms an d legs. When she does this, the rotational inertia decr eases and the rotation rate
increases in order to keep the angular momentum cons tant. (: rotational inertia,: angular velocity)learning objectives

9.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14492Conservation of angular momentum is one of the key conservation laws in physics, along with the conservat ion laws for energy
and (linear) momentum. These laws are applicable even in microscopic domains where quantum mechanics gover ns; they exist due
to inherent symmetries present in nature.
Conservation of Angular Momentum Theory and WConservation of Angular Momentum Theory and W
Conservation of Angular Momentum Theory: What it do?
Rotational Collisions
In a closed system, angular momentum is conserved in a sim ilar fashion as linear momentum.
Evaluate the difference in equation variables in rotational versus angular momentum
During a collision of objects in a closed system, mome ntum is always conserved. This fact is readily seen in linear motion. When
an object of mass m and velocity v collides with anot her object of mass m and velocity v, the net momentu m after the collision,
mv + mv, is the same as the momentum before the collision, mv + mv.
What if an rotational component of motion is introduced? Is momentum still conserved?
learning objectives
2 2
1f 2f 1i 2i

9.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14492
Bowling ball and pi: When a bowling ball collides with a pin, linear and ang ular momentum is conserved
Yes. For objects with a rotational component, there ex ists angular momentum. Angular momentum is defined, mat hematically, as
, or. This equation is an analog to the definition of linear momentum as. Units for linear momentum are
kg⋅m/s while units for angular momentum are kg ⋅m /s. As we would expect, an object that has a large mom ent of inertia I, such as
Earth, has a very large angular momentum. An object th at has a large angular velocity ω, such as a centrifug e, also has a rather
large angular momentum.
So rotating objects that collide in a closed system c onserve not only linear momentum p in all directions, but also angular
momentum L in all directions.
For example, take the case of an archer who decides t o shoot an arrow of mass m at a stationary cylinder of mass m and radius r,
lying on its side. If the archer releases the arrow wi th a velocity v and the arrow hits the cylinder at i ts radial edge, what’s the final
momentum?
Arrow hitting cyclinde: The arrow hits the edge of the cylinder causing it to roll.
Initially, the cylinder is stationary, so it has no m omentum linearly or radially. Once the arrow is relea sed, it has a linear momentum
and an angular component relative to the cylinders rotating axis,. After the collision, the arrow sticks to the
rolling cylinder and the system has a net angular m omentum equal to the original angular momentum of t he arrow before the
collision.
Key Points
When an object is spinning in a closed system and no e xternal torques are applied to it, it will have no change in an gular
momentum.
The conservation of angular momentum explains the angul ar acceleration of an ice skater as she brings her arms and legs close
to the vertical axis of rotation.
If the net torque is zero, then angular momentum is consta nt or conserved.
Angular momentum is defined, mathematically, as, or. Wh ich is the moment of inertia times the angular
velocity, or the radius of the object crossed with the l inear momentum.
In a closed system, angular momentum is conserved in all di rections after a collision.
Since momentum is conserved, part of the momentum in a colli sion may become angular momentum as an object starts to s pin
after a collision.2
1 2
1i

9.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/14492Key Items
quantum mechanics: The branch of physics that studies matter and energy at the level of atoms and other elementary particles;
it substitutes probabilistic mechanisms for classical Newtonian ones.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
angular momentum: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the momentum of the
particle, and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its circular motion.
momentum: (of a body in motion) the product of its mass and veloci ty.
rotation: The act of turning around a centre or an axis.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42182/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/simplee.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-momentum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
quantum mechanics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quantum_mechanics. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 9, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42182/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Angular Momentum Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9IFb3g2e2M. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42182/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/meh.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
rotation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rotation. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 9, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42182/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Conservation of Angular Momentum Theory. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9IFb3g2e2M. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/514cc462b483dab00d000947/a rrow.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ball. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ball. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
This page titled 9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

9.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155139.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
Identify the direction of a vector using the Right Hand Ru le
Angular momentum and angular velocity have both magn itude and direction and, therefore, are vector quant ities. The direction of
these quantities is inherently difficult to track—a p oint on a rotating wheel is constantly rotating and changing direction. The axis
of rotation of a rotating wheel is the only place tha t has a fixed direction. The direction of angular m omentum and velocity can be
determined along this axis.
Imagine the axis of rotation as a pole through the ce nter of a wheel. The pole protrudes on both sides of t he wheel and, depending
on which side you’re looking at, the wheel is turning either clockwise or counterclockwise. This dependency on perspective makes
determining the angle of rotation slightly more diff icult. As with all physical quantities, there is a standar d for measurement that
makes these types of quantities consistent. For angu lar quantities, the direction of the vector is dete rmined using the Right Hand
Rule, illustrated in.
The Right Hand Rule: Figure (a) shows a disk is rotating counterclockwise when vie wed from above. Figure (b) shows the righthand rule. The direction of angular velocity ω size and a ngular momentum L are defined to be the direction in which the thumb of
your right hand points when you curl your fingers in the di rection of the disk’s rotation as shown.
The right hand rule can be used to find the directio n of both the angular momentum and the angular velo city. From a spinning disc,
for example, let’s again imagine a pole through the c enter of the disc, at the axis of rotation. Using the right hand rule, your right
hand would be grasping the pole so that your four fin gers (index, middle, ring, and pinky) are following th e direction of rotation.
That is, an imaginary arrow from your wrist to your f ingertips points in the same direction as the disc is rotating. In addition, your
thumb is pointing straight out in the axis, perpendicu lar to your other fingers (or parallel to the ‘pole ’ at the axis of rotation). Using
this right hand rule, the direction of angular veloci ty ω and angular momentum L are defined as the direc tion in which the thumb of
your right hand points when you curl your fingers in the direction of the disc’s rotation.
Gyroscopes
A gyroscope is a spinning wheel or disk in which the axl e is free to assume any orientation.
Compare the concept of a rotating wheel with a gyroscope
A gyroscope is a device for measuring or maintainin g orientation based on the principles of angular mom entum. Mechanically, a
gyroscope is a spinning wheel or disk in which the axle is free to assume any orientation. Although this ori entation does not remain
fixed, it changes in response to an external torque much less and in a different direction than it would without the large angular
momentum associated with the disk’s high rate of spin and moment of inertia. The device’s orientation rem ains nearly fixed,
regardless of the mounting platform’s motion, because m ounting the device in a gimbal minimizes external torq ue.
How It Works: Examples
Torque: Torque changes angular momentum as expressed by th e equation,learning objectives
learning objectives

9.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15513This equation means that the direction of ΔL is the s ame as the direction of the torque that creates it, as illustrated in. This direction
can be determined using the right hand rule, which sa ys that the fingers on your hand curl towards the dire ction of rotation or force
exerted, and your thumb points towards the direction of ang ular momentum, torque, and angular velocity.
Direction of Torque and Angular Momentum: In figure (a), the torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by r and F and is the
direction your right thumb would point to if you curled you r fingers in the direction of F. Figure (b) shows that th e direction of the
torque is the same as that of the angular momentum it produ ces.
Rotating wheel: Consider a bicycle wheel with handles a ttached to it, as in. With the wheel rotating as shown, its angular
momentum is to the woman’s left. Suppose the person holdi ng the wheel tries to rotate it as in the figure. Her natural expectation is
that the wheel will rotate in the direction she pushes it, however, what happens is quite different. The for ces exerted create a torque
that is horizontal toward the person, and this torqu e creates a change in angular momentum L in the same direction, perpendicular
to the original angular momentum L, thus changing th e direction of L but not the magnitude of L. ΔL and L add, giving a new
angular momentum with direction that is inclined mor e toward the person than before. The axis of the wheel has thus moved
perpendicular to the forces exerted on it, instead of in t he expected direction.
Gyroscopic Effect: In figure (a), a person holding the spinning bike wheel lif ts it with her right hand and pushes down with her lef t
hand in an attempt to rotate the wheel. This action creates a torque directly toward her. This torque causes a change i n angular
momentum ΔL in exactly the same direction. Figure (b) shows a vector diagram depicting how ΔL and L add, producing a n ew
angular momentum pointing more toward the person. The whee l moves toward the person, perpendicular to the forces she ex erts on
it.

9.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15513Gyroscope: This same logic explains the behavior of gy roscopes (see). There are two forces acting on a spinn ing gyroscope. The
torque produced is perpendicular to the angular mome ntum, thus the direction of the angular momentum is changed, but not its
magnitude. The gyroscope precesses around a vertica l axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpen dicular to L. If the
gyroscope is not spinning, it acquires angular mome ntum in the direction of the torque (L=ΔL), and it r otates around a horizontal
axis, falling over just as we would expect.
Gyroscopes: As seen in figure (a), the forces on a spinning gyr oscope are its weight and the supporting force from the stand. These
forces create a horizontal torque on the gyroscope, which create a change in angular momentum ΔL that is also horizontal. In figure
(b), ΔL and L add to produce a new angular momentum wi th the same magnitude, but different direction, so t hat the gyroscope
precesses in the direction shown instead of falling over.
Applications
Gyroscopes serve as rotational sensors. For this reaso n, applications of gyroscopes include inertial navigat ion systems where
magnetic compasses would not work (as in the Hubble te lescope) or would not be precise enough (as in ICBMs). Ano ther
application is the stabilization of flying vehicles, such as radio-controlled helicopters or unmanned aerial v ehicles.
Key Points
Angular velocity and angular momentum are vector quantitie s and have both magnitude and direction.
The direction of angular velocity and angular momentum are perpendicular to the plane of rotation.
Using the right hand rule, the direction of both angular velocity and angular momentum is defined as the direction in which the
thumb of your right hand points when you curl your finge rs in the direction of rotation.
Torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by r and F an d is the direction your right thumb would point if you curl ed the
fingers of your right hand in the direction of F.
The direction of the torque is thus the same as that of th e angular momentum it produces.
The gyroscope precesses around a vertical axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to L. If the g yroscope is
not spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of the torque, and it rotates about a horizontal axis, falling over just
as we would expect.
Key Items
angular momentum: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the momentum of the
particle, and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its circular motion.
right hand rule: Direction of angular velocity ω and angular momentum L in which the thumb of your right hand points when
you curl your fingers in the direction of rotation.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
gimbal: A device for suspending something, such as a ship’s co mpass, so that it will remain level when its support is tip ped.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

9.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15513CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-momentum.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/right-hand-rule.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Gyroscope. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyroscope. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gimbal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gimbal. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/right-hand-rule.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 17, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42184/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155149.8: Problem Solving
Develop and apply a strong problem-solving strategy for r otational kinematics
Problem-Solving Strategy For Rotational Kinematics
When solving problems on rotational kinematics:
Examine the situation to determine that rotational ki nematics (rotational motion) is involved. Rotation must be involved, but
without the need to consider forces or masses that affect the motion.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A sketch of the situation is useful.
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the prob lem as stated (identify the knowns).
Solve the appropriate equation or equations for the quan tity to be determined (the unknown). It can be useful to th ink in terms
of a translational analog because by now you are familia r with such motion.
Substitute the known values along with their units into the ap propriate equation, and obtain numerical solutions compl ete with
units. Be sure to use units of radians for angles.
Check your answer to see if it is reasonable: Does your ans wer make sense?
Suppose a large freight train accelerates from rest, gi ving its 0.350 m radius wheels an angular acceleratio n of 0.250 rad/s.
After the wheels have made 200 revolutions (assume no s lippage): (a) How far has the train moved down the trac k? (b) What
are the final angular velocity of the wheels and the l inear velocity of the train?
In part (a), we are asked to find x, and in (b) we are asked to find ω and v. We are given the number of r evolutions θ, the radius
of the wheels r, and the angular acceleration α.
The distance x is very easily found from the relationshi p between distance and rotation angle:.
Solving this equation for x yields.
Before using this equation, we must convert the number of revolutions into radians, because we are dealing with a relationship
between linear and rotational quantities:
Substitute the known values into to find the distance the train moved down the track:
We cannot use any equation that incorporates t to fi nd ω, because the equation would have at least two unkn own values. The
equation will work, because we know the values for all variables except ω. Taking the square root of this
equation and entering the known values gives
One may find the linear velocity of the train, v, through its relationship to ω:
Joy phy sics probs 07- Rotational motionJoy phy sics probs 07- Rotational motionlearning objectives
Example:

9.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15514Rotational motion: Part of a series of videos on physics problem-solving. The problems are taken from “The Joy of Physics. ”
This one deals with angular motion. The viewer is urged to pau se the video at the problem statement and work the proble m before
watching the rest of the video.
Equation list: Rotational and translational kinematic equations.
Key Points
Examine the situation to determine that rotational ki nematics (rotational motion) is involved, and identify ex actly what needs to
be determined.
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the prob lem as stated and solve the appropriate equations.
Substitute the known values along with their units into the ap propriate equation, and obtain numerical solutions compl ete with
units.
Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of mechanics concerned with objects in mot ion, but not with the forces involved.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Kinematics of Rotational Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42178/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

9.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15514Rotational motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZ8U_3qZQqs. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Kinematics of Rotational Motion. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42178/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
9.8: Problem Solving is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/155159.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
Derive uniform circular motion from linear equations
Defining Circular Motion
The description of circular motion is described bet ter in terms of angular quantity than its linear co unter part. The reasons are easy
to understand. For example, consider the case of unifo rm circular motion. Here, the velocity of particle is changing – though the
motion is “uniform”. The two concepts do not go togeth er. The general connotation of the term “uniform” i ndicates “constant”, but
the velocity is actually changing all the time.
A Rotating Body: Each particle constituting the body executes a uniform c ircular motion about the fixed axis. For the descriptio n
of the motion, angular quantities are the better choice.
When we describe the uniform circular motion in term s of angular velocity, there is no contradiction. The velocity (i.e. angular
velocity) is indeed constant. This is the first advantage o f describing uniform circular motion in terms of angul ar velocity.
Second advantage is that angular velocity conveys the physical sense of the rotation of the particle as aga inst linear velocity, which
indicates translational motion. Alternatively, angular description emphasizes the distinction between two typ es of motion
(translational and rotational).
Relationship Between Linear and Angular Speed
For simplicity, let’s consider a uniform circular moti on. For the length of the arc subtending angle ” at t he origin and “r” is the
radius of the circle containing the position of the part icle, we have.
Differentiating with respect to time, we have
Because for a uniform circular motion, we get. Similar ly, we also get where stands for linear acceleration,
while refers to angular acceleration (In a more gen eral case, the relationship between angular and linear quantities are given as
Rotational Kinematic Equations
With the relationship of the linear and angular spe ed/acceleration, we can derive the following four rota tional kinematic equations
for constant aa and αα:learning objectives

9.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/15515Mass, Momentum, Energy, and Newton’s Second Law
As we use mass, linear momentum, translational kinetic energy, and Newton’s 2nd law to describe linear motion, we can describe a
general rotational motion using corresponding scalar/ve ctor/tensor quantities:
Mass/ Rotational inertia:
Linenar/angular momentum:
Force/ Torque:
Kinetic energy:
For example, just as we use the equation of motion F=maF= ma to describe a linear motion, we can use its count erpart
to describe an angular motion. The descriptions are equivalent, and the choice can be made purely for th e
convenience of use.
Key Points
As we use mass, linear momentum, translational kinetic energy, and Newton’s 2nd law to describe linear motion, we can
describe a general rotational motion using correspondin g scalar/vector/tensor quantities.
Angular and linear velocity have the following relationshi p:.
As we use the equation of motion to describe a linear motion, we can use its counterpart, to describe
angular motion. The descriptions are equivalent, and the choice can be made purely for the convenience of use.
Key Items
uniform circular motion: Movement around a circular path with constant speed.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
rotational inertia: The tendency of a rotating object to remain rotating unless a torque is applied to it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Circular Motion and Rotational Kinematics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m14014/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/uniform-circularmotion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rotational-inertia.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Circular Motion and Rotational Kinematics. February 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14014/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115Index
A
aberration
24.3: Lenses
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
absolute space
27.1: Introduction
absolute zero
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
14.4: Entropy
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
acceleration
1.2: Units
2.3: Acceleration
2.5: Free-Falling Objects
3.2: Vectors
4.3: Newton’s Laws
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
achromatic
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
achromatic doublet
24.3: Lenses
action potential
19.6: Electricity in the World
adhesion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
adiabatic
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
adiabatic index
13.2: Specific Heat
aether
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
afocal system
24.3: Lenses
alpha particle
29.2: The Early Atom
30.2: Radioactivity
alternating current
20.5: RC Circuits
Alveoli
10.2: Density and Pressure
AM Radio Waves
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Ampere
19.2: Electric Current
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
Ampere's law
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
amplifier
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
amplitude
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.7: Waves on Strings
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
Aneroid Barometer
10.2: Density and Pressure
angular
9.2: Angular Accelerationangular acceleration
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
angular frequency
15.3: Periodic Motion
angular momentum
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
angular motion
8.1: Introduction
angular position
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
angular velocity
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
8.1: Introduction
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
annihilation
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
antimatter
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
antinode
16.1: Introduction
16.5: Further Topics
aperture
25.1: The Human Eye
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
application
1.1: The Basics of Physics
approximation
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Archimedes' Principle
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
Artificial satellite
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
asteroid
14.4: Entropy
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
astronomical unit
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
atom
12.1: Introduction
atomic number
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
atomic orbital
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
atomic spectra
30.1: The Nucleus
atrium
11.4: Other Applications
Avogadro’s number
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
29.2: The Early Atomaxis
3.2: Vectors
axon
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
B
ballistics
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
basal metabolic rate
6.6: Power
base
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
battery
19.2: Electric Current
20.1: Overview
Bell's theorem
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
Bernoulli’s equation
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
beta decay
30.2: Radioactivity
bilateral symmetry
3.3: Projectile Motion
binary data
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
black body
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
black body radiation
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
blackbody
13.5: Global Warming
Boltzmann constant
12.5: Kinetic Theory
boundary condition
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
Boyle's Law
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
brachytherapy
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
breakdown
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
brine
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
Brownian motion
12.1: Introduction
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
buoyancy
10.2: Density and Pressure
buoyant force
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle
C
calorie
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
calorimeter
13.2: Specific Heat

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115calorimetry
13.1: Introduction
capacitance
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
capacitor
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.5: RC Circuits
Carnot cycle
14.4: Entropy
cathode
29.2: The Early Atom
CCD
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
cell membrane
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
center of mass
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
7.5: Center of Mass
8.3: Stability
8.7: The Center of Gravity
centrifugal force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
centripetal
29.2: The Early Atom
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
centripetal acceleration
15.3: Periodic Motion
CFC
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
characteristic time constant
22.2: AC Circuits
chemical reaction
12.1: Introduction
chromatic aberration
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
circuit
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
circular motion
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
cladding
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
classical electrodynamics
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
classical mechanics
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
classical physics
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
closed system
7.1: Introduction
cochlea
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
coherence
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
coherent
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
26.1: Superposition and Interference
cohesion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equationcombination circuit
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
combustion
13.2: Specific Heat
complex numbers
19.5: Alternating Currents
component
3.2: Vectors
compression
15.5: Waves
compressive stress
8.5: Applications of Statics
computed tomography
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
concave lens
24.3: Lenses
concave mirror
24.4: Mirrors
concentration
12.9: Diffusion
conductive medium
19.1: Overview
conductor
17.1: Overview
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
conservation
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
7.1: Introduction
conservation of energy
7.3: Collisions
conservation of momentum principle
7.3: Collisions
conservative force
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
constant velocity
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
constructive interference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.5: Further Topics
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
continuity
10.5: Fluids in Motion
contraction
11.4: Other Applications
contrast
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
control rod
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
conversion
1.2: Units
convex
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
convex lens
24.3: Lenses
convex mirror
24.4: Mirrorscoordinate
3.2: Vectors
Coordinate axes
3.2: Vectors
corona discharge
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
coulomb
17.1: Overview
18.1: Overview
Coulomb force
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Coulomb’s Law
10.6: Deformation of Solids
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
Coulomb's law
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
crest
15.5: Waves
critical temperature
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
critically damped
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
cryptography
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
crystallography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
29.2: The Early Atom
Curie temperature
21.2: Magnets
current
19.2: Electric Current
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
Cyclotron
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
cyclotron frequency
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
D
damping
16.5: Further Topics
de Broglie wavelength
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
decay
30.2: Radioactivity
decibels (units)
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
deformation
15.2: Hooke’s Law
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
degeneracy
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
degree of freedom
12.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
demagnetization
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115destructive interference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.5: Further Topics
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
diagram
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
dialysis
11.1: Overview
diamagnetism
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
diastole
11.2: Flow in Tubes
dielectric
17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
differential
12.8: Thermal Stresses
differential equation
20.5: RC Circuits
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
diffraction
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.2: Diffraction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
diffusion
11.4: Other Applications
12.9: Diffusion
19.6: Electricity in the World
dimension
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
10.6: Deformation of Solids
7.3: Collisions
diode
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
diopter
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
dipole
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
dipole moment
17.1: Overview
18.1: Overview
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
direct current
20.1: Overview
20.5: RC Circuits
direction of propagation
15.5: Waves
discharge
17.1: Overview
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
disorder
14.4: Entropy
dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
displacement
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectorsdissipative force
15.3: Periodic Motion
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
distortion
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
diurnal
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
Doppler effect
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
Doppler shift
29.2: The Early Atom
dosimeter
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
dot product
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
drift velocity
19.2: Electric Current
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
dynamic contrast ratio
25.1: The Human Eye
dynamics
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
dynamo
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
E
eardrum
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
Eccentricity
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
elastic
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
elastic collision
7.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
Elastic potential energy
15.3: Periodic Motion
elasticity
15.2: Hooke’s Law
16.1: Introduction
electric charge
17.1: Overview
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
19.1: Overview
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
electric current
19.2: Electric Current
electric displacement field
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
electric field
17.1: Overview
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law
18.1: Overview
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
electric potential
18.1: Overviewelectrical circuit
20.1: Overview
electrical resistance
19.1: Overview
electrocardiogram
19.6: Electricity in the World
electromagnet
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
Electromagnetic force
29.2: The Early Atom
electromagnetic radiation
26.3: Further Topics
30.2: Radioactivity
6.8: Further Topics
electromagnetic waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
electromotive force
20.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
electromotive force (emf)
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
electron affinity
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
electron gun
18.5: Applications
electron shell
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
electron volt
18.1: Overview
electrostatic force
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
element
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
elementary charge
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
elementary particle
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
emissivity
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
energy
15.5: Waves
6.1: Introduction
enthalpy
10.1: Introduction
13.2: Specific Heat
entropy
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
epistemological
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
epithelium
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
equation
4.5: Problem-Solving

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115equilibrium
10.2: Density and Pressure
12.6: Phase Changes
12.9: Diffusion
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
equipotential
18.1: Overview
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
Escape velocity
5.8: Energy Conservation
Euclidean
10.6: Deformation of Solids
evaporation
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
exponent
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
external beam therapy
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
F
Faraday constant
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
Faraday shield
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Faraday's law of induction
20.1: Overview
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
ferromagnet
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
ferromagnetic
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
fibrillation
19.6: Electricity in the World
fictitious force
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
field of view
25.1: The Human Eye
first law of thermodynamics
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
6.8: Further Topics
fission
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
6.8: Further Topics
fluid
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
fluidity
10.1: Introduction
flux
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
flux density
18.3: Point Charge
flux intensity
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
FM
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrumfocal point
24.3: Lenses
force
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
4.1: Introduction
4.2: Force and Mass
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
7.3: Collisions
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
fossil fuels
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
Fourier analysis
15.1: Introduction
frame of reference
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
free electron laser
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
free fall
2.5: Free-Falling Objects
frequency
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.5: Waves
16.1: Introduction
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
friction
4.3: Newton’s Laws
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
7.3: Collisions
frigorific mixture
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
fundamental thermodynamic relation
13.2: Specific Heat
fusion
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
6.8: Further Topics
G
Galilean transformation
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
galvanometer
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
gamma (γ) rays
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
29.2: The Early Atom
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
Gamma decay
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
gamma ray
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
gas constant
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
Gauge Pressure
10.2: Density and Pressure
general relativity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
geometric optics
24.1: Overviewgeothermal
14.4: Entropy
gimbal
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
Gluon
30.1: The Nucleus
gradient
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
grating
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
gravitational acceleration
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
gravitational force
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
gravity
17.1: Overview
3.3: Projectile Motion
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
greenhouse effect
13.5: Global Warming
greenhouse gas
13.5: Global Warming
ground state
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
group velocity
15.5: Waves
gyroradius
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
H
harmonic oscillator
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
heat
14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
heat capacity
13.2: Specific Heat
heat engine
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
heat of reaction
13.2: Specific Heat
heat pump
14.4: Entropy
heat transfer
13.1: Introduction
helical
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
helical motion
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
hertz
16.1: Introduction
Hohmann transfer orbit
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
Hooke's Law
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
humidity
12.6: Phase Changes
Huygen's principle
16.5: Further Topics

5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115hydraulic press
10.2: Density and Pressure
hydrogen bond
12.3: Thermal Expansion
I
ideal energy
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
ideal fluid
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
ideal gas
10.2: Density and Pressure
12.1: Introduction
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
12.5: Kinetic Theory
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
image distance
24.3: Lenses
impedance
20.5: RC Circuits
22.2: AC Circuits
impulse
7.1: Introduction
incandescence
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
incident ray
26.3: Further Topics
incline
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
incompressible
10.2: Density and Pressure
10.5: Fluids in Motion
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
index of refraction
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
induction
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
inductor
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.2: AC Circuits
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
inelastic
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Conservation of Momentum
inelastic scattering
29.2: The Early Atom
inertia
1.2: Units
4.3: Newton’s Laws
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
inertial frame
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
Instantaneous
2.2: Speed and Velocity
insulator
17.1: Overview
interfere
16.4: Interactions with Sound Wavesinterference
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
26.2: Diffraction
26.3: Further Topics
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
interferometer
26.1: Superposition and Interference
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
intermolecular
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
12.6: Phase Changes
internal energy
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
13.1: Introduction
14.1: Introduction
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
International Systems of Units
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
inverse
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
inviscid
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
ionization energy
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
ionizing radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
iridescence
26.2: Diffraction
isentropic
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
isolated system
13.1: Introduction
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
isotope
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
isotropic
12.3: Thermal Expansion
J
joint
8.5: Applications of Statics
K
Kelvin
16.1: Introduction
Kelvin scale
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
kilocalorie
13.1: Introduction
Kinematic
2.3: Acceleration
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions
9.2: Angular Acceleration
9.8: Problem Solving
kinematics
2.1: Basics of Kinematicskinetic energy
10.2: Density and Pressure
15.2: Hooke’s Law
18.1: Overview
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.8: Energy Conservation
6.8: Further Topics
7.3: Collisions
kinetic theory of gases
12.1: Introduction
12.5: Kinetic Theory
L
laminar
11.4: Other Applications
laminar flow
11.1: Overview
land
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
laser
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Latent Heat of Fusion
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
latent heat of vaporization
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
law
1.1: The Basics of Physics
law of conservation of energy
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
LCD
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
length
1.2: Units
length contraction
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
lens
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.1: Superposition and Interference
Lenz's law
22.2: AC Circuits
leverage
8.5: Applications of Statics
line element
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
linear momentum
7.1: Introduction
linear thermal expansion coefficient
12.3: Thermal Expansion
linear velocity
9.3: Rotational Kinematics
longitudinal
15.5: Waves
Lorentz factor
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
Lorentz force
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
Lorentz transformations
27.1: Introduction
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity

6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115Lorenz Invariance
27.1: Introduction
luminance
25.1: The Human Eye
luminiferous aether
27.1: Introduction
M
Mach number
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
machines
8.5: Applications of Statics
magnetic domains
21.2: Magnets
magnetic field
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited
magnetic field lines
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
magnetic flux
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
magnetic mirror
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
magnetron
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
magnification
24.3: Lenses
magnitude
3.2: Vectors
mass
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
4.2: Force and Mass
mass distribution
15.3: Periodic Motion
Mass Spectrometer
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
matter
1.1: The Basics of Physics
matter waves
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
Maxwell’s equations
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
27.1: Introduction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
mean motion
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
mechanical advantage
8.5: Applications of Statics
mechanical equivalent of heat
13.1: Introduction
media
16.1: Introduction
medium
15.5: Wavesmetabolism
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
meteorology
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature
metric
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
microscopy
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
microstate
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics
Minkowski space
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
model
1.1: The Basics of Physics
mole
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
moment of inertia
12.5: Kinetic Theory
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
momentum
4.3: Newton’s Laws
7.1: Introduction
7.3: Collisions
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
monochromatic
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.2: Diffraction
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
motion
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Motional Emf
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
MRI
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
muscles
8.5: Applications of Statics
mutual inductance
22.2: AC Circuits
myocardium
19.6: Electricity in the World
N
nanostructure
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
natural convection
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
natural frequency
16.5: Further Topics
natural satellite
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
nematic
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
nerve impulse
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
net force
4.3: Newton’s Laws
neuron
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
neurotransmitter
16.4: Interactions with Sound WavesNewton’s third law of motion
7.4: Rocket Propulsion
Newton's Law of Gravitation
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
newtonian mechanics
12.5: Kinetic Theory
NMR
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
noble gas
12.5: Kinetic Theory
node
16.1: Introduction
16.5: Further Topics
Nonconservative Forces
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
normal
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
normal force
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
nuclear reactor
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
nucleons
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
nucleosynthesis
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
nucleus
17.1: Overview
29.2: The Early Atom
30.1: The Nucleus
nuclide
30.1: The Nucleus
null measurements
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
O
Objective measurement
16.1: Introduction
ohm
19.2: Electric Current
Ohm’s law
22.2: AC Circuits
ohmic
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
optical window
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
order of magnitude
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
origin
3.2: Vectors
orthogonal
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
26.1: Superposition and Interference
oscillate
15.2: Hooke’s Law
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.7: Waves on Strings
26.3: Further Topics
oscillator
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations

7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115osmosis
11.1: Overview
over damping
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
oxidation
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
ozone
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
P
parallel
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel equivalent resistance
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
paramagnetism
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
particle accelerator
18.1: Overview
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
pendentive
8.5: Applications of Statics
Pendulums
6.8: Further Topics
perihelion
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
period
15.3: Periodic Motion
16.1: Introduction
periodic table
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
permanent magnet
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields
permeability
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
permittivity
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics
perpendicular
4.4: Other Examples of Forces
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
phase
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
phase velocity
15.5: Waves
phasor
22.2: AC Circuits
phasors
19.5: Alternating Currents
phon
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level
phosphor
18.5: Applications
photoconductivity
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
photoelectric effect
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
29.2: The Early Atom
photoelectron
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantitiesphoton
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
29.2: The Early Atom
Physical pendulum
15.3: Periodic Motion
pit
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
Planck constant
29.1: Overview
Planck’s constant
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
plane
10.6: Deformation of Solids
plane waves
15.5: Waves
26.1: Superposition and Interference
planet
5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation
plasma
10.1: Introduction
12.6: Phase Changes
plumb line
7.5: Center of Mass
point mass
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
point particle
7.5: Center of Mass
Poiseuille's law
10.2: Density and Pressure
polarity
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Polarizability
26.3: Further Topics
polarization
26.3: Further Topics
polarizer
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
position
2.3: Acceleration
positive feedback
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
Positron
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
potential
12.3: Thermal Expansion
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
potential difference
18.1: Overview
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
potential energy
18.1: Overview
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy
5.8: Energy Conservation
6.8: Further Topics
potentiometer
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
power
15.5: Waves
6.6: Powerprefix
1.2: Units
pressure
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
probability density function
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
propulsion
5.8: Energy Conservation
pupil
25.1: The Human Eye
Purkinje fibers
19.6: Electricity in the World
Q
quantization
29.2: The Early Atom
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics
quantum mechanics
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
Quarks
30.1: The Nucleus
R
radar
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radial
18.1: Overview
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion
Radians
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
radiation
1.2: Units
radiative transfer
13.5: Global Warming
radio waves
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
radioactive decay
30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
radioactive tracer
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
radiograph
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radiography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
radioisotope
30.2: Radioactivity
radiometric dating
30.2: Radioactivity
radionuclide
30.1: The Nucleus
30.2: Radioactivity
radon
30.2: Radioactivity
rarefaction
15.5: Waves
raster
18.5: Applications
ray tracing
24.3: Lenses

8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115Rayleigh criterion
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
reactance
22.2: AC Circuits
reflection
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
26.3: Further Topics
refraction
24.1: Overview
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.3: Further Topics
refractive index
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
relative
3.4: Multiple Velocities
relativistic quantum theory
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
relativity of simultaneity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
renewable forms of energy
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use
reorientate
3.3: Projectile Motion
resisitivity
17.1: Overview
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
resistance
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistor
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
20.5: RC Circuits
resolution
26.2: Diffraction
resonance
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
22.2: AC Circuits
rest mass
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
restoring force
15.3: Periodic Motion
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
resultant
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
reversible
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics
14.4: Entropy
Reynolds number
11.2: Flow in Tubes
right hand rule
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
rigid
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
rigid body
7.5: Center of Mass
rms
12.5: Kinetic Theory
20.5: RC Circuits
22.2: AC Circuits
rms current
19.5: Alternating Currentsrms voltage
19.5: Alternating Currents
root mean square
19.5: Alternating Currents
rotation
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
rotational inertia
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.10: Conservation of Energy
9.4: Dynamics
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
S
scalar
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectors
scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Schrodinger's Equation
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
scientific method
1.1: The Basics of Physics
scientific notation
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Scintillation
29.2: The Early Atom
scintillators
30.2: Radioactivity
second law of thermodynamics
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
selective absorber
13.5: Global Warming
semiclassical
29.2: The Early Atom
semiclassical approach
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
semiconductor
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
30.2: Radioactivity
series
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
series equivalent resistance
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
shear stress
10.1: Introduction
11.2: Flow in Tubes
shock hazard
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the World
Shunt resistance
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
shutter speed
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
SI units
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
sidereal year
5.6: Kepler’s Laws
sievert
30.2: Radioactivity
silver halide
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanicssimple circuit
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
simple harmonic motion
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
simple harmonic oscillator
15.3: Periodic Motion
simple pendulum
15.3: Periodic Motion
sinoatrial node
19.6: Electricity in the World
sinusoidal
15.3: Periodic Motion
sinusoidal steady state
19.5: Alternating Currents
Snell’s law of refraction
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
solenoid
21.2: Magnets
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
sonic boom
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
special relativity
10.6: Deformation of Solids
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
27.1: Introduction
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
specific heat
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
13.2: Specific Heat
spectral color
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
spectral radiance
29.1: Overview
spectrum
29.2: The Early Atom
speed of light
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.3: Relativistic Quantities
speed of propagation
15.5: Waves
spherical aberration
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
Spin
21.6: Applications of Magnetism
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
stable equilibrium
8.3: Stability
Standard atmosphere
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
standing wave
15.7: Waves on Strings
29.2: The Early Atom
static
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
static contrast ratio
25.1: The Human Eye

9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115static electricity
17.1: Overview
static equilibrium
10.2: Density and Pressure
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines
18.3: Point Charge
8.3: Stability
stimulated emission
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics
Stoke's theorem
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
Strain
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
streamlined
11.4: Other Applications
stress
12.8: Thermal Stresses
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
String theory
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities
stroboscopic
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Subjective measurement
16.1: Introduction
sublimation
10.1: Introduction
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat
Superconductivity
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
superimpose
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics
superposition
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
surface vertices
24.3: Lenses
symmetrical
3.3: Projectile Motion
symmetry
4.3: Newton’s Laws
systole
11.2: Flow in Tubes
T
tangent
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
tangential acceleration
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics
telecommunication
23.3: Applications of EM Waves
temperature coefficient of resistivity
19.3: Resistance and Resistors
tensile stress
8.5: Applications of Statics
Terminal velocity
17.1: Overview
terminal voltage
20.2: Resistors in Series and Paralleltesla
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge
tetrahertz radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Theory
1.1: The Basics of Physics
thermal agitation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermal conductivity
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer
thermal energy
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
thermal equilibrium
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
13.1: Introduction
14.1: Introduction
thermal hazard
19.5: Alternating Currents
19.6: Electricity in the World
thermal radiation
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermodynamic temperature
14.1: Introduction
thermodynamics
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
12.6: Phase Changes
14.1: Introduction
thermography
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thick lenses
24.3: Lenses
thin lens
24.3: Lenses
thin lens equation
24.3: Lenses
Thomson scattering
29.2: The Early Atom
Thoracic Cavity
10.2: Density and Pressure
thrust
4.3: Newton’s Laws
time dilation
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity
tomography
25.2: Other Optical Instruments
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
torque
10.2: Density and Pressure
18.1: Overview
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem
7.5: Center of Mass
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
8.4: Solving Statics Problems
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
9.4: Dynamics
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
torques
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Lawstorr
10.2: Density and Pressure
tracer
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
trajectory
3.3: Projectile Motion
Transformer
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
translation
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
transmutation
30.2: Radioactivity
transverse
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors
transverse wave
15.5: Waves
15.7: Waves on Strings
16.5: Further Topics
trigonometry
1.4: Solving Physics Problems
triple point
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales
trough
15.5: Waves
tunneling
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws
Turbine
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
turbulence
11.4: Other Applications
turbulent
11.4: Other Applications
turbulent flow
11.1: Overview
U
ultrasound
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
underdamped
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Uniform Circular Motion
15.3: Periodic Motion
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities
uniform motion
4.3: Newton’s Laws
Unit vector
17.3: Coulomb’s Law
3.2: Vectors
V
valance shell
29.5: Multielectron Atoms
vapor
12.6: Phase Changes
vaporization
13.6: Phase Equilbrium
vascular
11.1: Overview

10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23115vector
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
18.1: Overview
2.1: Basics of Kinematics
3.2: Vectors
4.2: Force and Mass
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities
8.1: Introduction
vector area
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law
vector field
10.6: Deformation of Solids
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited
velocity
2.2: Speed and Velocity
2.3: Acceleration
3.2: Vectors
4.2: Force and Mass
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force
ventricle
11.4: Other Applications
vessel
11.2: Flow in Tubes
Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water
12.4: Ideal Gas Law
virtual image
24.4: Mirrorsviscosity
10.1: Introduction
11.2: Flow in Tubes
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
11.4: Other Applications
visible light
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
voltage
17.1: Overview
19.2: Electric Current
W
warfare
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics
watt
6.6: Power
wave
15.5: Waves
wave equation
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
wave speed
15.5: Waves
waveform
15.1: Introduction
wavefront
16.5: Further Topicswavelength
15.5: Waves
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties
26.1: Superposition and Interference
26.3: Further Topics
weight
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
wettability
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
Wheatstone bridge
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters
work
15.5: Waves
18.1: Overview
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
9.10: Conservation of Energy
X
xerography
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics
Z
zeroth law of thermodynamics
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/29439Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65424Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Physics (Boundless)
Webpages: 207
All licenses found:
Undeclared: 99% (205 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 1% (2 pages)
By Page
Physics (Boundless) - Undeclared
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: The Basics of Physics - Undeclared
1.1: The Basics of Physics - Undeclared
1.2: Units - Undeclared
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude Undeclared
1.4: Solving Physics Problems - Undeclared
2: Kinematics - Undeclared
2.1: Basics of Kinematics - Undeclared
2.2: Speed and Velocity - Undeclared
2.3: Acceleration - Undeclared
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics Undeclared
2.5: Free-Falling Objects - Undeclared
3: Two-Dimensional Kinematics - Undeclared
3.1: Motion in Two Dimensions - Undeclared
3.2: Vectors - Undeclared
3.3: Projectile Motion - Undeclared
3.4: Multiple Velocities - Undeclared
4: The Laws of Motion - Undeclared
4.1: Introduction - Undeclared
4.2: Force and Mass - Undeclared
4.3: Newton’s Laws - Undeclared
4.4: Other Examples of Forces - Undeclared
4.5: Problem-Solving - Undeclared
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces - Undeclared
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws Undeclared
5: Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation Undeclared5.1: Introduction to UCM and Gravitation Undeclared
5.2: Non-Uniform Circular Motion - Undeclared
5.3: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force - Undeclared
5.4: Types of Forces in Nature - Undeclared
5.5: Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation Undeclared
5.6: Kepler’s Laws - Undeclared
5.7: Gravitational Potential Energy - Undeclared
5.8: Energy Conservation - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.9: Angular vs. Linear Quantities - Undeclared
6: Work and Energy - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.1: Introduction - Undeclared
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force - Undeclared
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force - Undeclared
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem - Undeclared
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy Undeclared
6.6: Power - Undeclared
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use - Undeclared
6.8: Further Topics - Undeclared
7: Linear Momentum and Collisions - Undeclared
7.1: Introduction - Undeclared
7.2: Conservation of Momentum - Undeclared
7.3: Collisions - Undeclared
7.4: Rocket Propulsion - Undeclared
7.5: Center of Mass - Undeclared
8: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque Undeclared
8.1: Introduction - Undeclared
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium - Undeclared
8.3: Stability - Undeclared
8.4: Solving Statics Problems - Undeclared
8.5: Applications of Statics - Undeclared
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture Undeclared

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/654248.7: The Center of Gravity - Undeclared
8.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration - Undeclared
9: Rotational Kinematics, Angular Momentum, and
Energy - Undeclared
9.1: Quantities of Rotational Kinematics Undeclared
9.2: Angular Acceleration - Undeclared
9.3: Rotational Kinematics - Undeclared
9.4: Dynamics - Undeclared
9.5: Rotational Kinetic Energy - Undeclared
9.6: Conservation of Angular Momentum Undeclared
9.7: Vector Nature of Rotational Kinematics Undeclared
9.8: Problem Solving - Undeclared
9.9: Linear and Rotational Quantities - Undeclared
9.10: Conservation of Energy - Undeclared
10: Fluids - Undeclared
10.1: Introduction - Undeclared
10.2: Density and Pressure - Undeclared
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle - Undeclared
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion - Undeclared
10.5: Fluids in Motion - Undeclared
10.6: Deformation of Solids - Undeclared
11: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications - Undeclared
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
11.1: Overview - Undeclared
11.2: Flow in Tubes - Undeclared
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation - Undeclared
11.4: Other Applications - Undeclared
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
12: Temperature and Kinetic Theory - Undeclared
12.1: Introduction - Undeclared
12.2: Temperature and Temperature Scales Undeclared
12.3: Thermal Expansion - Undeclared
12.4: Ideal Gas Law - Undeclared
12.5: Kinetic Theory - Undeclared
12.6: Phase Changes - Undeclared
12.7: The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
12.8: Thermal Stresses - Undeclared
12.9: Diffusion - Undeclared
13: Heat and Heat Transfer - Undeclared
13.1: Introduction - Undeclared13.2: Specific Heat - Undeclared
13.3: Phase Change and Latent Heat - Undeclared
13.4: Methods of Heat Transfer - Undeclared
13.5: Global Warming - Undeclared
13.6: Phase Equilbrium - Undeclared
14: Thermodynamics - Undeclared
14.1: Introduction - Undeclared
14.2: The First Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
14.3: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
14.4: Entropy - Undeclared
14.5: The Third Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
15: Waves and Vibrations - Undeclared
15.1: Introduction - Undeclared
15.2: Hooke’s Law - Undeclared
15.3: Periodic Motion - Undeclared
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations - Undeclared
15.5: Waves - Undeclared
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction - Undeclared
15.7: Waves on Strings - Undeclared
16: Sound - Undeclared
16.1: Introduction - Undeclared
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level - Undeclared
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms - Undeclared
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves - Undeclared
16.5: Further Topics - Undeclared
17: Electric Charge and Field - Undeclared
17.1: Overview - Undeclared
17.2: Shelding and Charging Through Induction Undeclared
17.3: Coulomb’s Law - Undeclared
17.4: The Electric Field Revisited - Undeclared
17.5: Electric Flux and Gauss’s Law - Undeclared
17.6: Applications of Electrostatics - Undeclared
18: Electric Potential and Electric Field - Undeclared
18.1: Overview - Undeclared
18.2: Equipotential Surfaces and Lines - Undeclared
18.3: Point Charge - Undeclared
18.4: Capacitors and Dielectrics - Undeclared
18.5: Applications - Undeclared
19: Electric Current and Resistance - Undeclared
19.1: Overview - Undeclared
19.2: Electric Current - Undeclared
19.3: Resistance and Resistors - Undeclared
19.4: Electric Power and Energy - Undeclared
19.5: Alternating Currents - Undeclared

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/6542419.6: Electricity in the World - Undeclared
20: Circuits and Direct Currents - Undeclared
20.1: Overview - Undeclared
20.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - Undeclared
20.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules - Undeclared
20.4: V oltmeters and Ammeters - Undeclared
20.5: RC Circuits - Undeclared
21: Magnetism - Undeclared
21.1: Magnetism and Magnetic Fields - Undeclared
21.2: Magnets - Undeclared
21.3: Magnetic Force on a Moving Electric Charge Undeclared
21.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field - Undeclared
21.5: Magnetic Fields, Magnetic Forces, and
Conductors - Undeclared
21.6: Applications of Magnetism - Undeclared
22: Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies Undeclared
22.1: Magnetic Flux, Induction, and Faraday’s Law Undeclared
22.2: AC Circuits - Undeclared
22.3: Applications of Induction and EM Waves Undeclared
22.4: Magnetic Fields and Maxwell Revisited Undeclared
23: Electromagnetic Waves - Undeclared
23.1: The Electromagnetic Spectrum - Undeclared
23.2: Electromagnetic Waves and their Properties Undeclared
23.3: Applications of EM Waves - Undeclared
24: Geometric Optics - Undeclared
24.1: Overview - Undeclared
24.2: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion Undeclared
24.3: Lenses - Undeclared
24.4: Mirrors - Undeclared25: Vision and Optical Instruments - Undeclared
25.1: The Human Eye - Undeclared
25.2: Other Optical Instruments - Undeclared
26: Wave Optics - Undeclared
26.1: Superposition and Interference - Undeclared
26.2: Diffraction - Undeclared
26.3: Further Topics - Undeclared
26.4: Applications of Wave Optics - Undeclared
27: Special Relativity - Undeclared
27.1: Introduction - Undeclared
27.2: Consequences of Special Relativity Undeclared
27.3: Relativistic Quantities - Undeclared
27.4: Implications of Special Relativity - Undeclared
28: Introduction to Quantum Physics - Undeclared
28.1: History and Quantum Mechanical Quantities Undeclared
28.2: Applications of Quantum Mechanics Undeclared
29: Atomic Physics - Undeclared
29.1: Overview - Undeclared
29.2: The Early Atom - Undeclared
29.3: Atomic Physics and Quantum Mechanics Undeclared
29.4: Applications of Atomic Physics - Undeclared
29.5: Multielectron Atoms - Undeclared
30: Nuclear Physics and Radioactivity - Undeclared
30.1: The Nucleus - Undeclared
30.2: Radioactivity - Undeclared
30.3: Quantum Tunneling and Conservation Laws Undeclared
30.4: Applications of Nuclear Physics - Undeclared
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared