PHYSICS
Boundless
Boundless

Boundless
Physics
Boundless

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34268TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
5.1: The Basics of Physics
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
5.1.2: Units
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
5.2: Kinematics
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
5.2.2: Speed and Velocity
5.2.3: Acceleration
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
5.2.5: Free-Falling Objects
5.3: The Laws of Motion
5.3.1: Introduction
5.3.2: Force and Mass
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
5.3.5: Problem-Solving
5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.4: Work and Energy
5.4.1: Introduction
5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
5.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
5.4.6: Power
5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use
5.4.8: Further Topics
5.5: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque
5.5.1: Introduction
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
5.5.3: Stability
5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
5.5.7: The Center of Gravity
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/342685.6: Fluids
5.6.1: Introduction
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle
5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
5.6.5: Fluids in Motion
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
5.7: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications
5.7.1: Overview
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
5.7.4: Other Applications
5.8: Waves and Vibrations
5.8.1: Introduction
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
5.8.5: Waves
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
5.8.7: Waves on Strings
5.9: Sound
5.9.1: Introduction
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
5.9.5: Further Topics
Index
Glossary
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65455Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.1: The Basics of Physics
This page titled 5.1: The Basics of Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
5.1.2: Units
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
5.1.4: Solving Physics ProblemsTopic hierarchy

5.1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339225.1.1: The Basics of Physics
Introduction: Physics and Matter
Physics is a study of how the universe behaves.
Apply physics to describe the function of daily life
Physics is a natural science that involves the study of matter and its motion through space and time, alon g with related concepts
such as energy and force. More broadly, it is the study of n ature in an attempt to understand how the universe behave s.
What is Phy sics?What is Phy sics?
What is Physics?: Mr. Andersen explains the importance of physics as a scien ce. History and virtual examples are used to give the
discipline context.
Physics uses the scientific method to help uncover the b asic principles governing light and matter, and to d iscover the implications
of those laws. It assumes that there are rules by which the universe functions, and that those laws can be at least partiallylearning objectives

5.1.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33922understood by humans. It is also commonly believed that those laws could be used to predict everything ab out the universe’s future
if complete information was available about the present st ate of all light and matter.
Matter is generally considered to be anything that ha s mass and volume. Many concepts integral to the stud y of classical physics
involve theories and laws that explain matter and its motion. The law of conservation of mass, for example, states that mass cannot
be created or destroyed. Further experiments and calc ulations in physics, therefore, take this law into accou nt when formulating
hypotheses to try to explain natural phenomena.
Physics aims to describe the function of everything ar ound us, from the movement of tiny charged particle s to the motion of
people, cars, and spaceships. In fact, almost everyth ing around you can be described quite accurately by the laws of physics.
Consider a smart phone; physics describes how electri city interacts with the various circuits inside the device. This knowledge
helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building the smart phone. Next, co nsider a GPS system;
physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, an d the time it takes to travel
that distance. When you use a GPS device in a vehicle, it utilizes these physics equations to determine th e travel time from one
location to another. The study of physics is capable of making significant contributions through advances in new technologies that
arise from theoretical breakthroughs.
Global Positioning System: GPS calculates the speed of an object, the distance over whi ch it travels, and the time it takes to travel
that distance using equations based on the laws of physic s.
Physics and Other Fields
Physics is the foundation of many disciplines and contr ibutes directly to chemistry, astronomy, engineering, an d most scientific
fields.
Explain why the study of physics is integral to the study o f other sciences
Physics and Other Disciplines
Physics is the foundation of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry deal s with the interactions of
atoms and molecules, so it is rooted in atomic and molecular physics. Most branches of engineering are app lied physics. In
architecture, physics is at the heart of structural st ability and is involved in acoustics, heating, lighti ng, and the cooling of buildings.
Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as the radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, a nd heat transfer in the Earth.
Some disciplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hyb rids of physics and other disciplines.learning objectives

5.1.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33922
Physics in Chemistry: The study of matter and electricity in physics is funda mental towards the understanding of concepts in
chemistry, such as the covalent bond.
Physics has many applications in the biological scienc es. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the pro perties of cell walls and
cell membranes. On the macroscopic level, it can expl ain the heat, work, and power associated with the human body. Physics is
involved in medical diagnostics, such as X-rays, magne tic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasonic blood flo w measurements.
Medical therapy sometimes directly involves physics: cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation, for in stance. Physics can also
explain sensory phenomena, such as how musical instrum ents make sound, how the eye detects color, and how laser s can transmit
information.
The boundary between physics and the other sciences i s not always clear. For instance, chemists study atoms and molecules, which
are what matter is built from, and there are some scie ntists who would be equally willing to call themselves phy sical chemists or
chemical physicists. It might seem that the distinctio n between physics and biology would be clearer, since physics seems to deal
with inanimate objects. In fact, almost all physicists would agree that the basic laws of physics that apply to molecules in a test tube
work equally well for the combination of molecules th at constitutes a bacterium. What differentiates phys ics from biology is that
many of the scientific theories that describe living things ultimately result from the fundamental laws o f physics, but cannot be
rigorously derived from physical principles.
It is not necessary to formally study all application s of physics. What is most useful is the knowledge of t he basic laws of physics
and skill in the analytical methods for applying th em. The study of physics can also improve your prob lem-solving skills.
Furthermore, physics has retained the most basic aspe cts of science, so it is used by all of the sciences. T he study of physics makes
other sciences easier to understand.
Models, Theories, and Laws
The terms model, theory, and law have exact meanings in relation to their usage in the stu dy of physics.
Define the terms model, theory, and law
Definition of Terms: Model, Theory, Law
In colloquial usage, the terms model, theory, and law are often used interchangeably or have different in terpretations than they do
in the sciences. In relation to the study of physics, howeve r, each term has its own specific meaning.
The laws of nature are concise descriptions of the universe around us. T hey are not explanations, but human statements of the
underlying rules that all natural processes follow. They are intrinsic to the universe; humans did not create them and we cannot
change them. We can only discover and understand them. The cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observat ion; science must
describe the universe as it is, not as we may imagine i t to be. Laws can never be known with absolute certaint y, because it is
impossible to perform experiments to establish and co nfirm a law in every possible scenario without excepti on. Physicists operate
under the assumption that all scientific laws and theo ries are valid until a counterexample is observed. I f a good-quality, verifiable
experiment contradicts a well-established law, then the law must be modified or overthrown completely.learning objectives

5.1.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33922Models
A model is a representation of something that is often too d ifficult (or impossible) to display directly. While a model’s design is
justified using experimental information, it is only accurate under limited situations. An example is the commonly used “planetary
model” of the atom, in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets o rbit the Sun. We cannot
observe electron orbits directly, but the mental ima ge helps explain the observations we can make, such a s the emission of light
from hot gases. Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For example, models can help physicists a nalyze a scenario and
perform a calculation, or they can be used to represent a s ituation in the form of a computer simulation.
Planetary Model of an Atom: The planetary model of the atom in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous
to the way planets orbit the Sun
Theories
A theory is an explanation for patterns in nature that is s upported by scientific evidence and verified multip le times by various
groups of researchers. Some theories include models to help visualize phenomena, whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of
gravity, for example, does not require a model or men tal image, because we can observe the objects directl y with our own senses.
The kinetic theory of gases, on the other hand, makes u se of a model in which a gas is viewed as being compos ed of atoms and
molecules. Atoms and molecules are too small to be ob served directly with our senses—thus, we picture them m entally to
understand what our instruments tell us about the beha vior of gases.
Laws
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by scientific e vidence and repeated
experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and theories are similar in that
they are both scientific statements that result fro m a tested hypothesis and are supported by scientif ic evidence. However, the
designation law is reserved for a concise and very g eneral statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that
energy is conserved during any process, or Newton’s sec ond law of motion, which relates force, mass, and accelera tion by the
simple equation. A theory, in contrast, is a less co ncise statement of observed phenomena. For example, the Theory of
Evolution and the Theory of Relativity cannot be ex pressed concisely enough to be considered a law. The biggest difference
between a law and a theory is that a law is much more c omplex and dynamic, and a theory is more explanatory. A law describes a
single observable point of fact, whereas a theory expl ains an entire group of related phenomena. And, where as a law is a postulate
that forms the foundation of the scientific method, a th eory is the end result of that process.
Key Points
Physics is a natural science that involves the study of matt er and its motion through space and time, along with related c oncepts
such as energy and force.
Matter is generally considered to be anything that has mas s and volume.
Scientific laws and theories express the general truths of nature and the body of knowledge they encompass. Thes e laws of
nature are rules that all natural processes appear to foll ow.

5.1.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33922Many scientific disciplines, such as biophysics, are hybri ds of physics and other sciences.
The study of physics encompasses all forms of matter and i ts motion in space and time.
The application of physics is fundamental towards signific ant contributions in new technologies that arise from t heoretical
breakthroughs.
Concepts in physics cannot be proven, they can only be s upported or disproven through observation and experiment ation.
A model is an evidence-based representation of somethi ng that is either too difficult or impossible to display d irectly.
A theory is an explanation for patterns in nature that i s supported by scientific evidence and verified multipl e times by various
groups of researchers.
A law uses concise language, often expressed as a mathema tical equation, to describe a generalized pattern in natu re that is
supported by scientific evidence and repeated experim ents.
Key Terms
matter: The basic structural component of the universe. Matte r usually has mass and volume.
scientific method: A method of discovering knowledge about the natural wo rld based in making falsifiable predictions
(hypotheses), testing them empirically, and developing pe er-reviewed theories that best explain the known data.
application: the act of putting something into operation
Model: A representation of something difficult or impossible to display directly
Law: A concise description, usually in the form of a math ematical equation, used to describe a pattern in nature
theory: An explanation for patterns in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by v arious
groups of researchers
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
scientific method. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scientific_method. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Physics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
matter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/matter. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/application. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-

5.1.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33922ShareAlike
Covalent bond. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Covalent_bond. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42092/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/model. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
theory. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/theory. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is Physics?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=az5dZOVsoww. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5078e0f6e4b04e6a3fb83a94 /gps.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Covalent bond. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Covalent_bond. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Atom_diagram.png.
License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.1.1: The Basics of Physics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
1.1: The Basics of Physics by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339235.1.2: Units
Length
Length is a physical measurement of distance that is fund amentally measured in the SI unit of a meter.
Distinguish SI and customary units of length
Length can be defined as a measurement of the physica l quantity of distance. Many qualitative observation s fundamental to physics
are commonly described using the measurement of leng th. The distance between objects, the rate at which ob jects are traveling,
and how much force an object exerts are all dependen t on length as a variable. In order to describe lengt h in a standardized and
quantitative manner, an accepted unit of measurement mus t be utilized.
Many different units of length are used around the wo rld. In the United States, the U.S. customary units operat ionally describe
length in terms of the basic unit of an inch. Varying lengths are thus described in relation to the inch, such as a foot equaling 12
inches, a yard equaling three feet, and a mile equaling 1,7 60 yards.
Though regional use of different measurement units is not generally problematic, it can raise issues of co mpatibility and
understanding when working abroad or collaboratively with international partners. As such, a standard unit of measurement that is
internationally accepted is needed. The basic unit of length as identified by the International System of Un its (SI) is the meter. The
meter is expressed more specifically in terms of speed of l ight.
One meter is defined as the distance that light travel s in a vacuum in of a second. All lengths are measur ed in terms
related to the meter, where its multiples are devised around the convenience of the number 10. For example, a centimeter is equal to
of a meter (or meters), and a kilometer is equal to 1,00 0 meters (or meters).
Meter Defined by Speed of Light: The meter is defined to be the distance that light trave ls in of a second in a vacuum.
Distance traveled is speed multiplied by time.
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemlearning objectives

5.1.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923Metric System – Length: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conv ersions.
Mass
Mass is the quantity of matter that an object contains, as m easured by its resistance to acceleration.
Explain the difference between mass and weight
Mass
Mass, specifically inertial mass, is a quantitative meas ure of an object’s resistance to acceleration. It i s an intrinsic property of an
object and does not change because of the environment. Th e SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg).
The kilogram is defined as being equal to the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram (IPK), which is alm ost exactly equal to
the mass of one liter of water. It is also the only SI un it that is directly defined by an artifact, rather th an a fundamental physical
property that can be reproduced in different labora tories. Four of the seven base units in the SI system are defined relative to the
kilogram, so the stability of this measurement is crucial for accurate and consistent measurements.
In 2005, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) recommended that the kilogram be red efined in terms of a
fundamental constant of nature, due to evidence that the International Prototype Kilogram will vary in mas s over time. At its 2011
meeting, the General Conference on Weights and Measu res (CGPM) agreed that the kilogram should be redefine d in terms of the
Planck constant. The conference deferred a final decision until its next meeting in 2014.
Prototype Mass Drifts: A graph of the relative change in mass of selected kilo gram prototypes.
learning objectives

5.1.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923Mass and Weight
In everyday usage, the mass of an object in kilogram s is often referred to as its weight. This value, thoug h given in kilograms, is
actually the non-SI unit of measure known as the kilog ram- force. In scientific terms, ‘weight’ refers to t he gravitational force
acting on a given body. This measurement changes depen ding on the gravitational pull of the opposing body. For example, a
person’s weight on the Earth is different than a per son’s weight on the moon because of the differences in the gravitational pull of
each body. In contrast, the mass of an object is an in trinsic property and remains the same regardless of gravitational fields.
Accordingly, astronauts in microgravity must exert 10 t imes more force to accelerate a 10-kg object at the same rate as a 1-kg
object, even though the differences in weight are impercep tible.
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stem
Metric System – Mass: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conve rsions.
Time
Time is the fundamental physical quantity of duration an d is measured by the SI Unit known as the second.

5.1.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923Relate time with other physical quantities
Time is one of the seven fundamental physical quanti ties in the International System (SI) of Units. Time is used to define other
quantities, such as velocity or acceleration, and a s such, it is important that it be standardized and quantified precisely. An
operational definition of time is highly useful in the cond uct of both advanced experiments and everyday affairs of l ife.
Historically, temporal measurement was a prime motiva tion in navigation and astronomy. Periodic events and motion have long
served as standards for units of time. For example, the movement of the sun across the sky, the phases of t he moon, the swing of a
pendulum, and the beat of a heart have all been used as a standard for time keeping. These events and stan dards, however, are
highly dynamic in nature and cannot reliably be uti lized for accurate quantitative measures. Between 10 00 and 1960 the second
was defined as of a mean solar day. This definition changed between 1960 and 1967 and was defined in term s of the period of
the Earth’s orbit around the Sun in 1900. Today, the SI Unit o f the second is defined in terms of radiation emitted by cesium atoms.
The second is now operationally defined as “the durati on of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation correspo nding to the transition
between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state o f the cesium 133 atom.” It follows that the hyperfine splitting in the ground
state of the cesium 133 atom is exactly 9,192,631,770 hertz. In other words, cesium atoms can be made to vi brate in a very steady
way, and these vibrations can be readily observed and counted. The second is the time required for 9,192,63 1,770 of these
vibrations to occur.learning objectives

5.1.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923
NIST-F1 Cesium Clock: NIST-F1 is referred to as a fountain clock because it uses a fountain-like movement of atoms to obtain its
improved reckoning of time.

5.1.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923
High School Phy sics - Metric Sy stemHigh School Phy sics - Metric Sy stem
Metric System – Time: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conve rsions.
Prefixes and Other Systems of Units
SI prefixes precede a basic unit of measure to indicate a multiple or fraction of the unit.
Apply prefixes to units and distinguish between SI and custom ary units
Prefixes
A metric prefix, or SI prefix, is a unit prefix that precedes a basic unit of measure to indicate a multi ple or fraction of the unit. Each
prefix has a unique symbol that is prepended to the unit symbol. The prefix kilo-, for example, may be added to gram to indicate
multiplication by one thousand; one kilogram is equa l to one thousand grams (1 kg = 1000 g). The prefix ce nti-, likewise, may be
added to meter to indicate division by one hundred; one centimeter is equal to one hundredth of a meter (1 cm = 0.01 m). Prefixes
in varying multiples of 10 are a feature of all for ms of the metric system, with many dating back to the s ystem’s introduction in the
learning objectives

5.1.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339231790s. Today, the prefixes are standardized for use in the International System of Units (SI) by the Interna tional Bureau of Weights
and Measures.There are twenty prefixes officially specif ied by SI.
SI Unit Prefixes: The twenty prefixes officially specified by the Intern ational System of Units
It is important to note that the kilogram is the on ly SI unit with a prefix as part of its name and symbo l. Because multiple prefixes
may not be used, in the case of the kilogram the pref ix names are used with the unit name “gram” and the prefix symbols are used
with the unit symbol “g. ” With this exception, any SI prefix may be used with any SI unit, including the degree Celsius and its
symbol °C.
Other Systems of Units
The SI Unit system, or the metric system, is used by the majority of countries in the world, and is the stand ard system agreed upon
by scientists and mathematicians. Colloquially, howeve r, other systems of units are used in many countries. The United States, for
example, teaches and uses the United States customary units. This system of units was developed from the English, or Imperial,
unit standards of the United Kingdom.The United States cus tomary units define measurements using different sta ndards than those
used in SI Units. The system for measuring length using the United States customary system is based on the inch, foot, yard, and
mile. Likewise, units of area are measured in terms of square feet, and units of capacity and volume are m easured in terms of cubic
inches, cubic feet, or cubic yards. Units of mass are commonly defined in terms of ounces and pounds, rat her than the SI unit of
kilograms.Other commonly used units from the United Stat es customary system include the fluid volume units of the teaspoon,
tablespoon, fluid ounce, US cup, pint, quart, and gallon, as well as the degrees Fahrenheit used to measure temperature.
Some units that are widely used are not a part of the International System of Units and are considered Non-SI Units. These units,
though not officially part of SI Units, are generally accepted for use in conjunction with SI units. These ca n include the minute,
hour, and day used in temporal measurements, the lite r for volumetric measurements, and the degree, minut e, and second used to
measure angles.

5.1.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923
Da n F u lle rton (AP lu sP h y sics)
High School P hysics - Metric System
High School P hysics - Metric System
Watch on
Metric System – Prefixes: A brief introduction to the metric system and unit conv ersions.
Converting Units
Converting between units can be done through the use of con version factors or specific conversion formulas.
Apply factor-label method for converting units
Translating Systems of Measurement
It is often necessary to convert from one type of un it to another. Conversion of units is the conversion of different units of
measurement for the same quantity, typically using c onversion factors. For example, if you are reading a Eu ropean cookbook, some
quantities may be expressed in units of liters; if yo u’re cooking in the US in a standard kitchen with stand ard tools, you will need to
convert those measurements to cups. Or, perhaps you ar e reading walking directions from one location to an other and you are
interested in how many miles you will be walking. In thi s case, you will need to convert units of feet to mile s. This is a bit like
translating a substitution code, using a formula that help s you understand what one measure means in terms of another system.
learning objectives

5.1.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923
Unit Conversion in the Metric Sy stem - CLEAR & SIUnit Conversion in the Metric Sy stem - CLEAR & SI
Unit Conversion in the Metric System: EASY Unit Conversion in the Metric System – This simple e xtra help video tutorial
explains the metric system and how to make simple metric co nversions.
Conversion Methods
There are several ways to approach doing conversions. One commonly used method is known as the Factor-label method for
converting units, or the “railroad method. ”
The factor-label method is the sequential application of conversion factors expressed as fractions and arr anged so that any
dimensional unit appearing in both the numerator an d denominator of any of the fractions can be cancelle d out until only the
desired set of dimensional units is obtained. For exam ple, 10 miles per hour can be converted to meters per second by using a
sequence of conversion factors.
Each conversion factor is equivalent to the value of one. For example, starting with 1 mile = 1609 meters and dividing both sides of
the equation by 1 mile yields, which when simplified yields. Physically crossing out the units that
cancel each other out will also help visualize what’s left o ver.
Converting 1 year into seconds using the Factor-Label Method: Physically crossing out units that cancel out helps visuali ze the
“leftover” unit(s).
So, when the units mile and hour are cancelled out and the arithmetic is done, 10 miles per hour converts to 4.47 me ters per second.

5.1.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923A limitation of the factor-label method is that it can only convert between units that have a constant ratio that can be multiplied, or
a multiplication factor. This method cannot be used between units that have a displacement, or differenc e factor. An example is the
conversion between degrees Celsius and kelvins, or bet ween Celsius and Fahrenheit. For these, it is best to use the specific
conversion formulas.
For example, if you are planning a trip abroad in Spai n and the weather forecast predicts the weather to be mostly cloudy and 16°C,
you may want to convert the temperature into °F, a un it that you are more comfortable interpreting. In o rder to do this, you would
need to know the conversion formula from Celsius to Fahren heit. This formula is:.
So you would then know that 16°C is equivalent to 60.8°F and be able to pack the right type of clothing to be comfortab le.
Key Points
The SI unit for length is the meter.
One meter is defined as the distance that light travels in a v acuum in of a second.
Derivatives of measurement units related to the meter are devised around the convenience of the number 10.
The kilogram is the only SI unit directly defined by the a rtifact itself.
Mass is a property that does not depend on gravitational fields, unlike weight.
One kilogram is defined as the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram (IPK), a platinum-iridium alloy cylinder.
One kilogram is almost exactly equal to the mass of one lit er of water.
Time is a physical quantity of duration.
The SI Unit for time is the second.
The second is operationally defined in terms of radiati on emitted by cesium atoms.
The twenty standardized prefixes for use in the Internatio nal System of Units are derived from multiples of 10.
The kilogram is the only SI unit with a prefix as part of its name and symbol; as such, SI unit prefixes are prepended to the unit
gram.
The United States customary units define measurements ba sed on the English, or Imperial, unit standards.
Conversion of units is the conversion between different unit s of measurement for the same quantity, typically throug h
multiplicative conversion factors.
The factor-label method is the sequential application of conversion factors expressed as fractions in which uni ts appearing in
both the numerator and denominator can be cancelled ou t, leaving only the desired set of units.
For conversions that have a difference factor, specific co nversion formulas should be used.
Key Terms
Length: How far apart objects are physically.
acceleration: the rate at which the velocity of a body changes with time
inertia: the tendency of an object to resist any change in its motion
Radiation: the emission of energy as electromagnetic waves or as mov ing or oscillating subatomic particles.
prefix: That which is prefixed; especially one or more letters or syllables added to the beginning of a word to modify it s
meaning; as, pre- in prefix, con- in conjure.
conversion: a change between different units of measurement for the same quantity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.1.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923Unit of length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_of_length. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kilogram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilogram. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Second. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Second. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/radiation. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
United States customary units. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_customary_units. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
SI Unit Prefixes. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/SI_Unit_Prefixes. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
prefix. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prefix. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.1.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33923OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Metric prefix. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Metric System - Prefixes. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Units conversion by factor-label. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Units_conversion_by_factorlabel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/conversion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Metric System - Length. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 10, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42091/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Prototype mass drifts. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prototype_mass_drifts.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Metric System - Mass. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Clock. Provided by: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/r...ses/n99-22.cfm. Located at:
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n99-22.cfm. License: CC BY: Attribution
Metric System - Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Metric prefix. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_prefix. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Metric System - Prefixes. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5xyF-mwitU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Unit Conversion in the Metric System. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEDVddQvimI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.1.2: Units is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
1.2: Units by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.1.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339245.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is a way of writing numbers that are too big or too small in a convenient and standard form.
Convert properly between standard and scientific notat ion and identify appropriate situations to use it
Scientific Notation: A Matter of Convenience
Scientific notation is a way of writing numbers that ar e too big or too small in a convenient and standard form. Scientific notation
has a number of useful properties and is commonly used in calculators and by scientists, mathematicians a nd engineers. In
scientific notation all numbers are written in the f orm of (multiplied by ten raised to the power of), where the exponent)
is an integer, and the coefficient (is any real number.
Scientific Notation: There are three parts to writing a number in scientif ic notation: the coefficient, the base, and the exponent.
Most of the interesting phenomena in our universe are not on the human scale. It would take about 1,000,000, 000,000,000,000,000
bacteria to equal the mass of a human body. Thomas Y oung’s discovery that light was a wave preceded the use of scientific
notation, and he was obliged to write that the time re quired for one vibration of the wave was “ of a millio nth of a millionth of a
second”; an inconvenient way of expressing the point. Scientific notation is a less awkward and wordy way to write very large and
very small numbers such as these.
A Simple System
Scientific notation means writing a number in terms of a product of something from 1 to 10 and something e lse that is a power of
ten.
For instance,
, and so forth…
Each number is ten times bigger than the previous on e. Since is ten times smaller than, it makes sense to use the notation
to stand for one, the number that is in turn ten t imes smaller than. Continuing on, we can write to st and for 0.1, the
number ten times smaller than. Negative exponents are us ed for small numbers:
Scientific notation displayed calculators can take o ther shortened forms that mean the same thing. For exam ple, (written
notation) is the same as (notation on some calculators) and (notation on some other calculators).learning objectives

5.1.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33924Round-off Error
A round-off error is the difference between the calcula ted approximation of a number and its exact mathematical value.
Explain the impact round-off errors may have on calcula tions, and how to reduce this impact
Round-off Error
A round-off error, also called a rounding error, is the difference between the calculated approximation of a number and its exact
mathematical value. Numerical analysis specifically tri es to estimate this error when using approximation e quations, algorithms, or
both, especially when using finitely many digits to rep resent real numbers. When a sequence of calculations subject to rounding
errors is made, errors may accumulate, sometimes dominatin g the calculation.
Calculations rarely lead to whole numbers. As such, value s are expressed in the form of a decimal with infinit e digits. The more
digits that are used, the more accurate the calcula tions will be upon completion. Using a slew of digits i n multiple calculations,
however, is often unfeasible if calculating by hand a nd can lead to much more human error when keeping tr ack of so many digits.
To make calculations much easier, the results are often ’r ounded off’ to the nearest few decimal places.
For example, the equation for finding the area of a circle is. The number (pi) has infinitely many dig its, but can be
truncated to a rounded representation of as 3.1415926 5359. However, for the convenience of performing calcu lations by hand, this
number is typically rounded even further, to the nea rest two decimal places, giving just 3.14. Though this t echnically decreases the
accuracy of the calculations, the value derived is typica lly ‘close enough’ for most estimation purposes.
However, when doing a series of calculations, numbers ar e rounded off at each subsequent step. This leads to an accumulation of
errors, and if profound enough, can misrepresent calculat ed values and lead to miscalculations and mistakes.
The following is an example of round-off error:
Rounding these numbers off to one decimal place or to the nearest whole number would change the answer to 5.7 and 6,
respectively. The more rounding off that is done, the more errors are introduced.
Order of Magnitude Calculations
An order of magnitude is the class of scale of any amo unt in which each class contains values of a fixed rat io to the class preceding
it.
Choose when it is appropriate to perform an order-of-magn itude calculation
Orders of Magnitude
An order of magnitude is the class of scale of any amo unt in which each class contains values of a fixed rat io to the class preceding
it. In its most common usage, the amount scaled is 10, and the scale is the exponent applied to this amou nt (therefore, to be an
order of magnitude greater is to be 10 times, or 10 t o the power of 1, greater). Such differences in order of magnitude can be
measured on the logarithmic scale in “decades,” or fac tors of ten. It is common among scientists and technolo gists to say that a
parameter whose value is not accurately known or is k nown only within a range is “on the order of” some valu e. The order of
magnitude of a physical quantity is its magnitude in powers of ten when the physical quantity is expressed in powers of ten with
one digit to the left of the decimal.
Orders of magnitude are generally used to make very approximate comparisons and reflect very large diffe rences. If two numbers
differ by one order of magnitude, one is about ten t imes larger than the other. If they differ by two ord ers of magnitude, they differ
by a factor of about 100. Two numbers of the same ord er of magnitude have roughly the same scale — the la rger value is less than
ten times the smaller value.learning objectives
learning objectives

5.1.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33924It is important in the field of science that estimat es be at least in the right ballpark. In many situatio ns, it is often sufficient for an
estimate to be within an order of magnitude of the v alue in question. Although making order-of-magnitude estimates seems simple
and natural to experienced scientists, it may be completely u nfamiliar to the less experienced.
Some of the mental steps of estimating in orders of m agnitude are illustrated in answering the following e xample question:
Roughly what percentage of the price of a tomato comes fro m the cost of transporting it in a truck?
Guessing the Number of Jelly Beans: Can you guess how many jelly beans are in the jar? If you try t o guess directly, you
will almost certainly underestimate. The right way to do it is to estimate the linear dimensions and then estimate t he volume
indirectly.
Incorrect solution: Let’s say the trucker needs to ma ke a prot on the trip. Taking into account her beni ts, the cost of gas, and
maintenance and payments on the truck, let’s say the total cost is more like 2000. You might guess about 5 000 tomatoes would
t in the back of the truck, so the extra cost per t omato is 40 cents. That means the cost of transporti ng one tomato is
comparable to the cost of the tomato itself.
The problem here is that the human brain is not ver y good at estimating area or volume — it turns out t he estimate of 5000
tomatoes fitting in the truck is way off. (This is why p eople have a hard time in volume-estimation contests, such as the one
shown below.) When estimating area or volume, you are much better off estimating linear dimensions and co mputing the
volume from there.
So, here’s a better solution: As before, let’s say the co st of the trip is $2000. The dimensions of the bin a re probably 4m by 2m
by 1m, for a volume of. Since our goal is just an ord er-of-magnitude estimate, let’s round that volume off to the nearest
power of ten:. The shape of a tomato doesn’t follow linear dimensions, but since this is just an estimat e, let’s pretend
that a tomato is an 0.1m by 0.1m by 0.1m cube, with a volume of. We can nd the total number of tomatoes by
dividing the volume of the bin by the volume of one tomato: tomatoes. The transportation cost per tomat o is
per tomato. That means that transportation really d oesn’t contribute very much to the cost of a tomato.
Approximating the shape of a tomato as a cube is an e xample of another general strategy for making order -of-magnitude
estimates.
Key Points
Scientific notation means writing a number in terms of a prod uct of something from 1 to 10 and something else that is a power
of 10.
In scientific notation all numbers are written in the form of (a times ten raised to the power of b).
Each consecutive exponent number is ten times bigger tha n the previous one; negative exponents are used for sma ll numbers.
When a sequence of calculations subject to rounding er ror is made, these errors can accumulate and lead to the
misrepresentation of calculated values.Example:

5.1.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33924Increasing the number of digits allowed in a representation reduces the magnitude of possible round-off errors, but ma y not
always be feasible, especially when doing manual calculatio ns.
The degree to which numbers are rounded off is relative t o the purpose of calculations and the actual value.
Orders of magnitude are generally used to make very appr oximate comparisons and reflect very large differences.
In the field of science, it is often sufficient for an esti mate to be within an order of magnitude of the value in que stion.
When estimating area or volume, you are much better off est imating linear dimensions and computing volume from those l inear
dimensions.
Key Terms
exponent: The power to which a number, symbol or expression is to be raised. For example, the 3 in.
Scientific notation: A method of writing, or of displaying real numbers as a decimal number between 1 and 10 followed by an
integer power of 10
approximation: An imprecise solution or result that is adequate for a defined purpose.
Order of Magnitude: The class of scale or magnitude of any amount, where ea ch class contains values of a fixed ratio (most
often 10) to the class preceding it. For example, something t hat is 2 orders of magnitude larger is 100 times larger; so mething
that is 3 orders of magnitude larger is 1000 times larger; and something that is 6 orders of magnitude larger is one million times
larger, because and
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Scientific notation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_notation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Significant figures. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Significant_figures. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lma.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42120/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Scientific notation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific%20notation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
exponent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/exponent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Round-off error. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Round-off_error. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
approximation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/approximation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Order of magnitude. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_magnitude. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Order of Magnitude. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Order%20of%20Magnitude. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: www.thechembook.com/chemistry...tific_notation. Located at:
www.thechembook.com/chemistry/index.php/Scientific_notation. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.1.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33924This page titled 5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Boundless.
1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.1.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339255.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
Dimensional Analysis
Any physical quantity can be expressed as a product of a co mbination of the basic physical dimensions.
Calculate the conversion from one kind of dimension t o another
Dimensions
The dimension of a physical quantity indicates how it rel ates to one of the seven basic quantities. These fundamenta l quantities are:
[M] Mass
[L] Length
[T] Time
[A] Current
[K] Temperature
[mol] Amount of a Substance
[cd] Luminous Intensity
As you can see, the symbol is enclosed in a pair of squ are brackets. This is often used to represent the dim ension of individual basic
quantity. An example of the use of basic dimensions is speed, which has a dimension of 1 in length and -1 in time;.
Any physical quantity can be expressed as a product of a co mbination of the basic physical dimensions.
Dimensional Analysis
Dimensional analysis is the practice of checking relat ions between physical quantities by identifying their dimensions. The
dimension of any physical quantity is the combinati on of the basic physical dimensions that compose it. Dimensional analysis is
based on the fact that physical law must be independ ent of the units used to measure the physical variab les. It can be used to check
the plausibility of derived equations, computations an d hypotheses.
Derived Dimensions
The dimensions of derived quantities may include few or all dimensions in individual basic quantities. In o rder to understand the
technique to write dimensions of a derived quantity, we consider the case of force. Force is defined as:
The dimension of acceleration, represented as [a], i s itself a derived quantity being the ratio of veloc ity and time. In turn, velocity is
also a derived quantity, being ratio of length and time.
Dimensional Conversion
In practice, one might need to convert from one kin d of dimension to another. For common conversions, you mi ght already know
how to convert off the top of your head. But for less comm on ones, it is helpful to know how to find the conversion fac tor:
where n represents the amount per u dimensions. You can then use ratios to figure out the conversion:learning objectives

5.1.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33925Trigonometry
Trigonometry is central to the use of free body diagrams, which help visually represent difficult physics problem s.
Explain why trigonometry is useful in determining horizon tal and vertical components of forces
Trigonometry and Solving Physics Problems
In physics, most problems are solved much more easily when a free body diagram is used. Free body diagrams use geometry and
vectors to visually represent the problem. Trigonome try is also used in determining the horizontal and v ertical components of
forces and objects. Free body diagrams are very helpful in visually identifying which components are unknown and where the
moments are applied. They can help analyze a problem, wheth er it is static or dynamic.
When people draw free body diagrams, often not everyth ing is perfectly parallel and perpendicular. Sometim es people need to
analyze the horizontal and vertical components of f orces and object orientation. When the force or obje ct is not acting parallel to
the x or y axis, people can employ basic trigonometry to use the simplest components of the action to analyze it. B asically,
everything should be considered in terms of x and y, which sometimes takes some manipulation.
Free Body Diagram: The rod is hinged from a wall and is held with the help of a string.
A rod ‘AB’ is hinged at ‘A’ from a wall and is held st ill with the help of a string, as shown in. This exerc ise involves drawing the
free body diagram. To make the problem easier, the f orce F will be expressed in terms of its horizontal and ver tical components.
Removing all other elements from the image helps produc e the finished free body diagram.
Free Body Diagram: The free body diagram as a finished product
Given the finished free body diagram, people can use t heir knowledge of trigonometry and the laws of sine and cosine to
mathematically and numerical represent the horizontal a nd vertical components:
General Problem-Solving Tricks
Free body diagrams use geometry and vectors to visually r epresent the problem.learning objectives

5.1.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33925Construct a free-body diagram for a physical scenario
In physics, most problems are solved much more easily wh en a free body diagram is used. This uses geometry and vectors to
visually represent to problem, and trigonometry is al so used in determining horizontal and vertical compo nents of forces and
objects.
Purpose: Free body diagrams are very helpful in visuall y identifying which components are unknown, where the moments are
applied, and help analyze a problem, whether static or dyn amic.
How to Make A Free Body Diagram
To draw a free body diagram, do not worry about drawing it to scale, this will just be what you use to help yo urself identify the
problems. First you want to model the body, in one of three wa ys:
As a particle. This model may be used when any turning effe cts are zero or have zero interest even though the b ody itself may
be extended. The body may be represented by a small symbol ic blob and the diagram reduces to a set of concurre nt arrows. A
force on a particle is a bound vector.
rigid extended. Stresses and strains are of no interest but turning e ffects are. A force arrow should lie along the line of force, but
where along the line is irrelevant. A force on an extende d rigid body is a sliding vector.
non-rigid extended. The point of application of a force becomes crucial and has to be indicated on the diagram. A force on a
non-rigid body is a bound vector. Some engineers use the tail of the arrow to indicate the point of application. Others use the
tip.
Do’s and Don’ts
What to include: Since a free body diagram represent s the body itself and the external forces on it. So you will want to include the
following things in the diagram:
The body: This is usually sketched in a schematic way depe nding on the body – particle/extended, rigid/non-rigid – and on what
questions are to be answered. Thus if rotation of the body and torque is in consideration, an indication of size and s hape of the
body is needed.
The external forces: These are indicated by labelled a rrows. In a fully solved problem, a force arrow is capable of indicating the
direction, the magnitude the point of application. The se forces can be friction, gravity, normal force, drag, tensio n, etc…
Do not include:
Do not show bodies other than the body of interest.
Do not show forces exerted by the body.
Internal forces acting on various parts of the body by othe r parts of the body.
Any velocity or acceleration is left out.learning objectives

5.1.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33925
J e sse M a son
How T o Solve Any P hysics P roblem
How T o Solve Any P hysics P roblem
Watch on
How To Solve Any Physics Problem: Learn five simple steps in five minutes! In this epi sode we cover the most effective
problem-solving method I’ve encountered and call upon some fuzzy friends to help us remember the steps.
Free Body Diagram: Use this figure to work through the example problem.

5.1.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33925Key Points
Dimensional analysis is the practice of checking relations am ount physical quantities by identifying their dimension s.
It is common to be faced with a problem that uses differen t dimensions to express the same basic quantity. The fol lowing
equation can be used to find the conversion factor bet ween the two derived dimensions:.
Dimensional analysis can also be used as a simple check to computations, theories and hypotheses.
It is important to identify the problem and the unknowns and draw them in a free body diagram.
The laws of cosine and sine can be used to determine the vertical and horizontal components of the different ele ments of the
diagram.
Free body diagrams use geometry and vectors to visually r epresent physics problems.
A free body diagram lets you visually isolate the probl em you are trying to solve, and simplify it into simple geo metry and
trigonometry.
When drawing these diagrams, it is helpful to only draw the body it self, and the forces acting on it.
Drawing other objects and internal forces can condense th e diagram and cause it to be less helpful.
Key Terms
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
trigonometry: The branch of mathematics that deals with the relationshi ps between the sides and the angles of triangles and the
calculations based on them, particularly the trigonometr ic functions.
static: Fixed in place; having no motion.
dynamic: Changing; active; in motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Dimensional analysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimensional_analysis. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Dimensional Analysis. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15037/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
trigonometry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trigonometry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_body_diagram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dynamic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dynamic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Free Body Diagram (Application). February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14720/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.1.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33925Free Body Diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Free_Body_Diagram.png. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
How To Solve Any Physics Problem. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YocWuzi4JhY. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
1.4: Solving Physics Problems by Boundless has no license indicated.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.2: Kinematics
This page titled 5.2: Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
5.2.2: Speed and Velocity
5.2.3: Acceleration
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
5.2.5: Free-Falling ObjectsTopic hierarchy

5.2.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339275.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
Defining Kinematics
Kinematics is the study of the motion of points, objects, and groups of objects without considering the causes of its mo tion.
Define kinematics
Kinematics is the branch of classical mechanics that d escribes the motion of points, objects and systems of groups of objects,
without reference to the causes of motion (i.e., forces). The study of kinematics is often referred to as the “g eometry of motion.”
Objects are in motion all around us. Everything from a tennis match to a space-probe flyby of the plane t Neptune involves motion.
When you are resting, your heart moves blood throug h your veins. Even in inanimate objects there is cont inuous motion in the
vibrations of atoms and molecules. Interesting questi ons about motion can arise: how long will it take for a space probe to travel to
Mars? Where will a football land if thrown at a certai n angle? An understanding of motion, however, is also key to understanding
other concepts in physics. An understanding of acceleratio n, for example, is crucial to the study of force.
To describe motion, kinematics studies the trajectori es of points, lines and other geometric objects, as well as their differential
properties (such as velocity and acceleration). Kinem atics is used in astrophysics to describe the motion of celestial bodies and
systems; and in mechanical engineering, robotics and biomechanics to describe the motion of systems compo sed of joined parts
(such as an engine, a robotic arm, or the skeleton of the hu man body).
A formal study of physics begins with kinematics. The wor d “kinematics” comes from a Greek word “kinesis” meani ng motion,
and is related to other English words such as “cinema” (movies) and “kinesiology” (the study of human motion). Kinematic
analysis is the process of measuring the kinematic quantities used to describe motion. The study of kine matics can be abstracted
into purely mathematical expressions, which can be use d to calculate various aspects of motion such as velo city, acceleration,
displacement, time, and trajectory.
Kinematics of a particle trajectory: Kinematic equations can be used to calculate the traje ctory of particles or objects. The
physical quantities relevant to the motion of a particle include: mass m, position r, velocity v, acceleration a.
Reference Frames and Displacement
In order to describe an object’s motion, you need to specif y its position relative to a convenient reference frame.
Evaluate displacement within a frame of reference.
In order to describe the motion of an object, you m ust first describe its position — where it is at any particular time. More
precisely, you need to specify its position relative t o a convenient reference frame. Earth is often used as a reference frame, and we
often describe the position of objects related to its position to or from Earth. Mathematically, the positi on of an object is generally
represented by the variable x.
Frames of Reference
There are two choices you have to make in order to d efine a position variable x. You have to decide where to put x = 0 and which
direction will be positive. This is referred to as ch oosing a coordinate system, or choosing a frame of re ference. As long as you arelearning objectives
learning objectives

5.2.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33927consistent, any frame is equally valid. But you don’ t want to change coordinate systems in the middle of a calculation. Imagine
sitting in a train in a station when suddenly you no tice that the station is moving backward. Most people wo uld say that they just
failed to notice that the train was moving — it only seemed like the station was moving. But this shows that ther e is a third
arbitrary choice that goes into choosing a coordina te system: valid frames of reference can differ from each other by moving
relative to one another. It might seem strange to use a coordinate system moving relative to the earth — but, for instance, the frame
of reference moving along with a train might be far more convenient for describing things happening insi de the train. Frames of
reference are particularly important when describing an object’s displacement.
FRAMES OF REFERENCE by Professor Hume and Professor Donald Ivey of the University of Toronto
In this classic film, Professors Hume and Ivey cleverly illustrate reference frames and distinguish between fixe d and moving
frames of reference.
Frames of Reference (1960)Frames of Reference (1960)
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film: Frames of Reference is a 1960 educational film by Physical Sciences Study
Committee. The film was made to be shown in high school physics courses. In the film University of Toronto p hysics professors
Patterson Hume and Donald Ivey explain the distinction between inertial and nonintertial frames of referen ce, while demonstrating
these concepts through humorous camera tricks. For exam ple, the film opens with Dr. Hume, who appears to be upsid e down,
accusing Dr. Ivey of being upside down. Only when the pair flip a coin does it become obvious that Dr. Ivey — and the camera —
are indeed inverted. The film’s humor serves both to hold students’ interest and to demonstrate the concept s being discussed. This
PSSC film utilizes a fascinating set consisting of a r otating table and furniture occupying surprisingly u npredictable spots within
the viewing area. The fine cinematography by Abraham M orochnik, and funny narration by University of Toront o professors

5.2.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33927Donald Ivey and Patterson Hume is a wonderful example of the fun a creative team of filmmakers can have with a subject that
other, less imaginative types might find pedestrian. Producer: Richard Leacock Production Company: Educat ional Development
Corp. Sponsor: Eric Prestamon
Displacement
Displacement is the change in position of an object re lative to its reference frame. For example, if a car m oves from a house to a
grocery store, its displacement is the relative dista nce of the grocery store to the reference frame, or t he house. The word
“displacement” implies that an object has moved or ha s been displaced. Displacement is the change in position of an object and can
be represented mathematically as follows:
where is displacement, is the final position, and is the initial position.
shows the importance of using a frame of reference when de scribing the displacement of a passenger on an airplane.
Displacement in Terms of Frame of Reference: A passenger moves from his seat to the back of the plan e. His location relative to
the airplane is given by x. The -4.0m displacement of the passenger relative to the plane is represented by an ar row toward the rear
of the plane. Notice that the arrow representing his displ acement is twice as long as the arrow representing the disp lacement of the
professor (he moves twice as far).
Introduction to Scalars and Vectors
A vector is any quantity that has both magnitude and di rection, whereas a scalar has only magnitude.
Distinguish the difference between scalars and vectors
What is the difference between distance and displace ment? Whereas displacement is defined by both direct ion and magnitude,
distance is defined by magnitude alone. Displacement i s an example of a vector quantity. Distance is an exa mple of a scalar
quantity. A vector is any quantity with both magnitude and direction. Other examples of vectors include a ve locity of 90 km/h east
and a force of 500 newtons straight down.learning objectives

5.2.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33927
Scalars and V ectorsScalars and V ectors
Scalars and Vectors: Mr. Andersen explains the differences between scalar and vectors quantities. He also uses a demonstration to
show the importance of vectors and vector addition.
In mathematics, physics, and engineering, a vector is a geometric object that has a magnitude (or length) a nd direction and can be
added to other vectors according to vector algebra. T he direction of a vector in one-dimensional motion i s given simply by a plus
(+) or minus (−) sign. A vector is frequently represe nted by a line segment with a definite direction, or graphically as an arrow,
connecting an initial point A with a terminal point B, as shown in.
Vector representation: A vector is frequently represented by a line segment wi th a definite direction, or graphically as an arrow,
connecting an initial point A with a terminal point B.
Some physical quantities, like distance, either have no direction or no specified direction. In physics, a sc alar is a simple physical
quantity that is not changed by coordinate system ro tations or translations. It is any quantity that ca n be expressed by a single
number and has a magnitude, but no direction. For exam ple, a 20ºC temperature, the 250 kilocalories (250 Ca lories) of energy in a
candy bar, a 90 km/h speed limit, a person’s 1.8 m h eight, and a distance of 2.0 m are all scalars, or qu antities with no specified

5.2.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33927direction. Note, however, that a scalar can be negative, such as a −20ºC temperature. In this case, the minus sign indicates a point
on a scale rather than a direction. Scalars are never repre sented by arrows. (A comparison of scalars vs. vectors is shown i n.)
Scalars vs. Vectors: A brief list of quantities that are either scalars or vec tors.
Key Points
To describe motion, kinematics studies the trajectories of points, lines and other geometric objects.
The study of kinematics can be abstracted into purely ma thematical expressions.
Kinematic equations can be used to calculate various aspec ts of motion such as velocity, acceleration, displaceme nt, and time.
Choosing a frame of reference requires deciding where the ob ject’s initial position is and which direction will be consi dered
positive.
Valid frames of reference can differ from each other by moving relative to one another.
Frames of reference are particularly important when describ ing an object’s displacement.
Displacement is the change in position of an object relat ive to its reference frame.
A vector is any quantity that has magnitude and direct ion.
A scalar is any quantity that has magnitude but no dir ection.
Displacement and velocity are vectors, whereas distance and speed are scalars.
Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of mechanics concerned with objects in mot ion, but not with the forces involved.
displacement: A vector quantity that denotes distance with a direct ional component.
frame of reference: A coordinate system or set of axes within which to measure the position, orientation, and other properties
of objects in it.
scalar: A quantity that has magnitude but not direction; compa re vector.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42122/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.2.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33927Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
displacement. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/displacement. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frame of reference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frame_of_reference. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRDOqiqBUQY. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Scalar (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42124/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vector (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
scalar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/scalar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Kinematics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinematics. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42033/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Frames of Reference (1960) Educational Film. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRDOqiqBUQY. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Vector (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_(physics). License: CC BY: Attribution
Scalars and Vectors. Provided by: National Air and Space Association. Located at: http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/k12/airplane/vectors.html. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Scalars and Vectors. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUrMI0DIh40. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
2.1: Basics of Kinematics by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.2.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339285.2.2: Speed and Velocity
Average Velocity: A Graphical Interpretation
Average velocity is defined as the change in position (o r displacement) over the time of travel.
Contrast speed and velocity in physics
In everyday usage, the terms “speed” and “velocity” are used interchangeably. In physics, however, they a re distinct quantities.
Speed is a scalar quantity and has only magnitude. Vel ocity, on the other hand, is a vector quantity and so has both magnitude and
direction. This distinction becomes more apparent when we calculate average speed and velocity.
Average speed is calculated as the distance traveled over the total time of travel. In contrast, average velocity is defined as the
change in position (or displacement) over the total time of travel.
Average Velocity: The kinematic formula for calculating average veloc ity is the change in position over the time of travel.
The SI unit for velocity is meters per second, or m/s, b ut many other units (such as km/h, mph, and cm/s) are commonly used.
Suppose, for example, an airplane passenger took five seconds to move -4 m (the negative sign indicates th at displacement is
toward the back of the plane). His average velocity would be:
The minus sign indicates that the average velocity is als o toward the rear of the plane.
The average velocity of an object does not tell us anything about what happens to it between the starting point and ending point,
however. For example, we cannot tell from average veloc ity whether the airplane passenger stops momentarily or backs up before
he gets to the back of the plane. To get more details, we must con sider smaller segments of the trip over smaller time i ntervals.
To illustrate the difference between average speed a nd average velocity, consider the following additiona l example. Imagine you
are walking in a small rectangle. You walk three meter s north, four meters east, three meters south, and an other four meters west.
The entire walk takes you 30 seconds. If you are calc ulating average speed, you would calculate the entir e distance (3 + 4 + 3 + 4 =
14 meters) over the total time, 30 seconds. From this, you would get an average speed of 14/30 = 0.47 m/s. When calculating
average velocity, however, you are looking at the disp lacement over time. Because you walked in a full rect angle and ended up
exactly where you started, your displacement is 0 mete rs. Therefore, your average velocity, or displacemen t over time, would be 0
m/s.
learning objectives

5.2.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33928Average Speed vs. Average Velocity: If you started walking from one corner and went all the way around the rectangle in 30
seconds, your average speed would be 0.47 m/s, but your ave rage velocity would be 0 m/s.
Instananeous Velocity: A Graphical Interpretation
Instantaneous velocity is the velocity of an object at a single point in time and space as calculated by the sl ope of the tangent line.
Differentiate instantaneous velocity from other ways of d etermining velocity
Typically, motion is not with constant velocity nor spe ed. While driving in a car, for example, we continuous ly speed up and slow
down. A graphical representation of our motion in te rms of distance vs. time, therefore, would be more va riable or “curvy” rather
than a straight line, indicating motion with a constan t velocity as shown below. (We limit our discussion to one dimensional
motion. It should be straightforward to generalize to thre e dimensional cases.)
Motion with Changing Velocity: Motion is often observed with changing velocity. This would result in a curvy line when graphed
with distance over time.
To calculate the speed of an object from a graph re presenting constant velocity, all that is needed is to find the slope of the line; this
would indicate the change in distance over the change in t ime. However, changing velocity it is not as straightforwar d.
Since our velocity is constantly changing, we can esti mate velocity in different ways. One way is to look at our instantaneous
velocity, represented by one point on our curvy lin e of motion graphed with distance vs. time. In order t o determine our velocity at
any given moment, we must determine the slope at tha t point. To do this, we find a line that represents our velocity in that moment,
shown graphically in. That line would be the line tan gent to the curve at that point. If we extend this li ne, we can easily calculate
the displacement of distance over time and determin e our velocity at that given point. The velocity of an object at any given
moment is the slope of the tangent line through the relev ant point on its x vs. t graph.
learning objectives

5.2.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33928Determining instantaneous velocity: The velocity at any given moment is dened as the slope of the tangent line through the
relevant point on the graph
Instantaneous V elocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Instantaneous V elocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes,
Instantaneous Velocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Graphs vs. Time: This is how kinematics begins.
In calculus, finding the slope of curve at x=x is eq uivalent to finding the first derivative:
One interpretation of this definition is that the ve locity shows how many meters the object would travel in one second if it
continues moving at the same speed for at least one secon d.
Key Points
Average velocity can be calculated by determining the t otal displacement divided by the total time of travel.
The average velocity of an object does not tell us anyth ing about what happens to it between the starting point a nd ending point.
Average velocity is different from average speed in that it considers the direction of travel and the overall ch ange in position.
When velocity is constantly changing, we can estimate our velocity by looking at instantaneous velocity.
Instantaneous velocity is calculated by determining the slope of the line tangent to the curve at the point of in terest.
Instantaneous velocity is similar to determining how man y meters the object would travel in one second at a specifi c moment.
Key Terms
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.

5.2.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33928instantaneous: (As in velocity)—occurring, arising, or functioning without any delay; happening within an imperceptibly brief
period of time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 20, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: None. Located at: None. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
instantaneous. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instantaneous. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 20, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42096/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: None. Located at: None. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
Instantaneous Velocity, Acceleration, Jerk, Slopes, Graphs vs. Time. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=STcgrV2L4tw. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.2.2: Speed and Velocity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
2.2: Speed and Velocity by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.2.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339295.2.3: Acceleration
Graphical Interpretation
The graphical representation of acceleration over ti me can be derived through the graph of an object’s positi on over time.
Distinguish the difference between how to plot a velocity graph and how to plot an acceleration graph
In physics, acceleration is the rate at which the velo city of a body changes with time. It is a vector quan tity with both magnitude
and direction. Acceleration is accompanied by a force, as described by Newton’s Second Law; the force, as a ve ctor, is the product
of the mass of the object being accelerated and the acceleration (vector), or. The SI unit of accelerati on is the meter per
second squared:
Acceleration is a vector that points in the same dire ction as the change in velocity, though it may not al ways be in the direction of
motion. For example, when an object slows down, or deceler ating, its acceleration is in the opposite direction of i ts motion.
The motion of an object can be depicted graphically by plotting the position of an object over time. T his distance-time graph can be
used to create another graph that shows changes in v elocity over time. Because acceleration is velocity in divided by time in s,
we can further derive a graph of acceleration from a gra ph of an object’s speed or position.
is a graph of an object’s position over time. This gr aph is similar to the motion of a car. In the begin ning, the object’s position
changes slowly as it gains speed. In the middle, the spe ed is constant and the position changes at a constant rate. As it slows down
toward the end, the position changes more slowly. From this gra ph, we can derive a velocity vs time graph.
Position vs Time Graph: Notice that the object’s position changes slowly at the beg inning of the journey, then more and more
quickly as it picks up speed. Its position then changes mor e slowly as it slows down at the end of the journey. In the mid dle of the
journey, while the velocity remains constant, the positio n changes at a constant rate.
This shows the velocity of the object over time. The ob ject’s velocity increases in the beginning as it acc elerates at the beginning,
then remains constant in the middle before it slows d own toward the end. Notice that this graph is a represe ntation of the slope of
the previous position vs time graph. From this graph, we can further derive an acceleration vs time graph.learning objectives

5.2.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929
Velocity vs Time: The object’s velocity increases as it accelerates at t he beginning of the journey. It remains the same in the middl e
of the journey (where there is no acceleration). It decrea ses as the object decelerates at the end of the journey.
To do this, we would also plot the slope of the velocit y vs time graph. In this graph, the acceleration is constant in the three
different stages of motion. As we noted earlier, the o bject is increasing speed and changing positions slo wly in the beginning. The
acceleration graph shows that the object was increasing at a positive constant acceleration during this tim e. In the middle, when the
object was changing position at a constant velocity, the acceleration was 0. This is because the object is no longer changing its
velocity and is moving at a constant rate. Towards the en d of the motion, the object slows down. This is depict ed as a negative
value on the acceleration graph. Note that in this ex ample, the motion of the object is still forward (posi tive), but since it is
decelerating, the acceleration is negative.
Acceleration vs Time Graph: The object has positive acceleration as it speeds u p at the beginning of the journey. It has no
acceleration as it travels at constant velocity in the mi ddle of the journey. Its acceleration is negative as it slo ws down at the end of
the journey.

5.2.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929
High School Phy sics: Graphing MotionHigh School Phy sics: Graphing Motion
Graphing Motion: A brief introduction to particle diagrams and motion graphs.
Motion with Constant Acceleration
Constant acceleration occurs when an object’s velocity cha nges by an equal amount in every equal time period.
Describe how constant acceleration affects the motion of an object
learning objectives

5.2.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929
One-Dimensional Motion: When you drop an object, it falls vertically toward the ce nter of the earth due to the constant
acceleration of gravity.
An object experiencing constant acceleration has a ve locity that increases or decreases by an equal amount for any constant period
of time. Acceleration can be derived easily from basi c kinematic principles. It is defined as the first time derivative of velocity (so
the second derivative of position with respect to time):
Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriousl y limit the situations we can study and does not deg rade the accuracy of our
treatment, because in a great number of situations, a cceleration is constant. When it is not, we can either consider it in s eparate
parts of constant acceleration or use an average accelera tion over a period of time.
The motion of falling objects is a simple, one-dimensi onal type of projectile motion in which there is no horizontal movement. For
example, if you held a rock out and dropped it, the rock would fall only vertically downward toward the ear th. If you were to throw
the rock instead of just dropping it, it would follow a mo re projectile-like pattern, similar to the one a kicked b all follows.
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projected into the air and is subject only to the acceleration of gravity. The
object thrown is called a projectile, and the object’s path is called its trajectory. In two-dimensional pro jectile motion, there is both
a vertical and a horizontal component.
Due to the algebraic properties of constant accelerat ion, there are kinematic equations that relate displa cement, initial velocity, final
velocity, acceleration, and time. A summary of these equa tions is given below.

5.2.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929
Constant Acceleration Explained w ith V ectors and AConstant Acceleration Explained w ith V ectors and A
Constant Acceleration Explained with Vectors and Algebra: This video answers the question “what is acceleration? ".
Key Points
Acceleration is the rate at which the velocity of a body ch anges with time.
Acceleration is a vector that points in the same directi on as the change in velocity, though it may not always be in the direction
of motion.
Because acceleration is velocity in m/s divided by time in s, we can derive a graph of acceleration from a graph of an ob ject’s
speed or position.
Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously limi t the situations we can study and does not degrade the accu racy of
our treatment.
Due to the algebraic properties of constant acceleration, t here are kinematic equations that can be used to calcula te
displacement, velocity, acceleration, and time.
Calculations with constant acceleration can be done in re lation to one-dimensional motion as well as two-dimensiona l motion.

5.2.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929Key Terms
acceleration: The amount by which a speed or velocity increases (and so a scalar quantity or a vector quantity).
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.
position: A place or location.
kinematic: of or relating to motion or kinematics
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
position. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/position. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Graphing Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYXf7Q9j9qA. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinematic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 25, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42100/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Graphing Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYXf7Q9j9qA. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Constant Acceleration Explained with Vectors and Algeb ra. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-4pV1HibhlU.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 19, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42102/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.2.3: Acceleration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
2.3: Acceleration by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.2.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33929

5.2.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339305.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Applications
There are four kinematic equations that describe the moti on of objects without consideration of its causes.
Choose which kinematics equation to use in problems in wh ich the initial starting position is equal to zero
Kinematics is the branch of classical mechanics that describes the motion of points, bodies (objects), and systems of bodies (groups
of objects) without consideration of the causes of mo tion. There are four kinematic equations when the in itial starting position is
the origin, and the acceleration is constant:
1.
2. or alternatively
3.
4.
Notice that the four kinematic equations involve five kinematic variables: and. Each of these equations contains only
four of the five variables and has a different one mi ssing. This tells us that we need the values of three variables to obtain the value
of the fourth and we need to choose the equation tha t contains the three known variables and one unknown v ariable for each
specific situation.
Here the basic problem solving steps to use these equation s:
Step one – Identify exactly what needs to be determined in th e problem (identify the unknowns).
Step two – Find an equation or set of equations that can hel p you solve the problem.
Step three – Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerica l solutions complete
with units.
Step four – Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does i t make sense?
Problem-solving skills are obviously essential to succ ess in a quantitative course in physics. More importan tly, the ability to apply
broad physical principles, usually represented by equa tions, to specific situations is a very powerful form o f knowledge. It is much
more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analytic al skills and problem-solving abilities can be appli ed to new situations,
whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contai n every possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are u seful both for
solving problems in a physics class and for applying phy sics in everyday and professional life.
Motion Diagrams
A motion diagram is a pictorial description of an o bject’s motion and represents the position of an obj ect at equally spaced time
intervals.
Construct a motion diagram
A motion diagram is a pictorial description of the m otion of an object. It displays the object’s location at various equally spaced
times on the same diagram; shows an object’s initial position and velocity; and presents several spots in the center of the diagram.
These spots reveal whether or not the object has acce lerated or decelerated. For simplicity, the object i s represented by a simple
shape, such as a filled circle, which contains inform ation about an object’s position at particular time instances. For this reason, a
motion diagram is more information than a path diagram. I t may also display the forces acting on the object at eac h time instance.
is a motion diagram of a simple trajectory. Imagine the object as a hockey puck sliding on ice. Notice th at the puck covers the same
distance per unit interval along the trajectory. We can conclude that the puck is moving at a constant velocity and, therefore, there is
no acceleration or deceleration during the motion.learning objectives
learning objectives

5.2.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33930
Puck Sliding on Ice: Motion diagram of a puck sliding on ice. The puck is moving at a constant velocity.
One major use of motion diagrams is the presentation o f film through a series of frames taken by a camera; this is sometimes called
stroboscopic technique (as seen in). Viewing an object on a motion diagram allows one to determine whether a n object is speeding
up or slowing down, or if it is at constant rest. As the f rames are taken, we can assume that an object is at a constant rest if it
occupies the same position over time. We can assume that an object is speeding up if there is a visible increase in the space between
objects as time passes, and that it is slowing down if t here is a visible decrease in the space between objec ts as time passes. The
objects on the frame come very close together.
Bouncing Ball: A bouncing ball captured with a stroboscopic flash at 25 images per second.
Key Points
The four kinematic equations involve five kinematic vari ables: and.
Each equation contains only four of the five variables and has a different one missing.
It is important to choose the equation that contains the t hree known variables and one unknown variable for each specific
situation.
Motion diagrams represent the motion of an object by di splaying its location at various equally spaced times on the same
diagram.
Motion diagrams show an object’s initial position and vel ocity and presents several spots in the center of the dia gram. These
spots reveal the object’s state of motion.
Motion diagrams contain information about an object’s po sition at particular time instances and is therefore mo re informative
than a path diagram.

5.2.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33930Key Terms
kinematics: The branch of physics concerned with objects in motion.
stroboscopic: Relating to an instrument used to make a cyclically movi ng object appear to be slow-moving, or stationary.
diagram: A graph or chart.
motion: A change of position with respect to time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42125/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinematics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinematics. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Motion diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_diagram. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/motion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
diagram. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diagram. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
stroboscopic. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/stroboscopic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51129b2ee4b0c14bf464ce1b/1.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/3/3c/Bouncing_ball_strobe _edit.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.2.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339315.2.5: Free-Falling Objects
Solve basic problems concerning free fall and distingui sh it from other kinds of motion
The motion of falling objects is the simplest and mos t common example of motion with changing velocity. I f a coin and a piece of
paper are simultaneously dropped side by side, the pa per takes much longer to hit the ground. However, if y ou crumple the paper
into a compact ball and drop the items again, it will look like both the coin and the paper hit the floor simultaneously. This is
because the amount of force acting on an object is a function of not only its mass, but also area. Free fal l is the motion of a body
where its weight is the only force acting on an object.
Free Fall: This clip shows an object in free fall.
Galileo also observed this phenomena and realized that it disagreed with the Aristotle principle that heavi er items fall more quickly.
Galileo then hypothesized that there is an upward for ce exerted by air in addition to the downward force of gravity. If air resistance
and friction are negligible, then in a given locatio n (because gravity changes with location), all object s fall toward the center of
Earth with the same constant acceleration, independent of their mass, that constant acceleration is gravity. Air resistan ce opposes
the motion of an object through the air, while frict ion opposes motion between objects and the medium thr ough which they are
traveling. The acceleration of free-falling objects is referred to as the acceleration due to gravity gg. As we said earlier, gravity
varies depending on location and altitude on Earth (or any other planet), but the average acceleration due to gravity on Earth is 9.8
. This value is also often expressed as a negative a cceleration in mathematical calculations due to the downward direction of
gravity.
The best way to see the basic features of motion inv olving gravity is to start by considering straight u p and down motion with no
air resistance or friction. This means that if the obje ct is dropped, we know the initial velocity is zero. On ce the object is in motion,
the object is in free-fall. Under these circumstances, th e motion is one-dimensional and has constant acceler ation, gg. The
kinematic equations for objects experiencing free fall are:
where and.
Free Fall MotionFree Fall Motionlearning objectives

5.2.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33931Video: Free Fall Motion - Describes how to calculate the time for an object to fall if given the height and the height th at an
object fell if given the time to fall.
Some examples of objects that are in free fall include:
A spacecraft in continuous orbit. The free fall would en d once the propulsion devices turned on.
An stone dropped down an empty well.
An object, in projectile motion, on its descent.
Key Points
The acceleration of free-falling objects is called the acceleration due to gravity, since objects are pulled to wards the center of
the earth.
The acceleration due to gravity is constant on the surfac e of the Earth and has the value of 9.80.
Glossary
Acceleration
The amount by which a speed or velocity changes within a cer tain period of time (and so a scalar quantity or a vector qu antity).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS:
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike Provided by: Light and
Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/lmb.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution Free fall. Provided by: Wikipedia.
Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_fall. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike acceleration. Provided by:
Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike Free-fall.
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Free-fall.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Free Fall Motion - YouTube. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C6-AxMc9mig. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.2.5: Free-Falling Objects is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
2.5: Free-Falling Objects by Boundless has no license indicated.
Example:

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.3: The Laws of Motion
This page titled 5.3: The Laws of Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.5.3.1: Introduction
5.3.2: Force and Mass
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
5.3.5: Problem-Solving
5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s LawsTopic hierarchy

5.3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339335.3.1: Introduction
Newton and His Laws
There are three laws of motion that describe the relations hip between forces, mass, and acceleration.
Apply three Newton’s laws of motion to relate forces, mass, and acceleration
Newton’s laws of motion describe the relationship between the forces acting on a body and its motion due to those forces. For
example, if your car breaks down and you need to push it, you must exert a force with your hands on the ca r in order for it to move.
The laws of motion will tell you how quickly the car will move from your pushing. There are three laws of motion:
First law: If an object experiences no net force, then its velocity is constant: the object is either at res t (if its velocity is zero), or it
moves in a straight line with constant speed (if its ve locity is nonzero). For example, if you don’t push the car (no force), then it
doesn’t move.
Second law: The acceleration aa of a body is parallel and directly proportional to the net force acting on the body, is in the
direction of the net force, and is inversely proportiona l to the mass mm of the body:
For example, if you push the car with a greater force i t will accelerate more. But, if the car is more massiv e (mm is larger) then it
won’t accelerate as much from the same size force as a ligh ter car.
Third law: When a first body exerts a force on a se cond body, the second body simultaneously exerts a fo rce on the
first body. This means that and are equal in magnit ude and opposite in direction. For example, when you pu sh a car, if it is
exerting the same force on you that you are exerting on it, you might wonder why you don’t move backwards? The answer is there
are also forces from the ground on your feet pushin g you forward. So, in fact, the car is pushing a force back on you that is of the
same magnitude that you are using to push it forward.
In the figure below there are some practical examples ill ustrating the concept of force:
Strain: by using a machine known as pulley you can easily r aise or lower a massive body
Gravitational Force: a massive body is attracted downward b y the gravitational force practiced by the Earth
Magnetic Force: two magnets repel each other when the same p oles get closer
Examples of Force: Some situations in which forces are at play.
Key Points
Acceleration of an object is proportional to the force on i t.
Force causes an object to move.
Objects with more mass require more force to move.learning objectives

5.3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33933Key Terms
force: Any influence that causes an object to undergo a certai n change, either concerning its movement, direction o r geometrical
construction.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Newton's laws of motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_laws_of_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.3.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339345.3.2: Force and Mass
Force
Force is any influence that causes an object to change, eithe r concerning its movement, direction, or geometrical co nstruction.
Develop the relationship between mass and acceleration in determining force
Overview of Forces
In physics, a force is any influence that causes an o bject to undergo a certain change, either concernin g its movement, direction, or
geometrical construction. It is measured with the SI un it of Newtons. A force is that which can cause an object with mass to change
its velocity, i.e., to accelerate, or which can cause a flexible object to deform. Force can also be describe d by intuitive concepts
such as a push or pull. A force has both magnitude and d irection, making it a vector quantity.
Ste p by Ste p Scie n ce
What is a force?
What is a force?
Watch on
What is a force?: Describes what forces are and what they do.learning objectives

5.3.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33934Qualities of Force
The original form of Newton’s second law states that the net force acting upon an object is equal to the ra te at which its momentum
changes. This law is further given to mean that the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the
object, is in the direction of the net force, and is inverse ly proportional to the mass of the object.
As we mentioned, force is a vector quantity. A vector is a one dimensional array with elements of both magnitu de and direction. In
a force vector, the mass,, is the magnitude component and the acceleration,, is the directional componen t. The equation for
force is written:
Related concepts to force include thrust, which incre ases the velocity of an object; drag, which decrease s the velocity of an object;
and torque which produces changes in rotational speed of an object. Forces which do not act uniformly on al l parts of a body will
also cause mechanical stresses, a technical term for influences which cause deformation of matter. While mechanical stress can
remain embedded in a solid object, gradually deform ing it, mechanical stress in a fluid determines chan ges in its pressure and
volume.
Dynamics
Dynamics is the study of the forces that cause objec ts and systems to move. To understand this, we need a wo rking definition of
force. Our intuitive definition of force — that is, a push or a pull —is a good place to start. We know that a push or pull has both
magnitude and direction (therefore, it is a vector qua ntity) and can vary considerably in each regard.
shows a few examples of the “push-pull” nature of for ce. The top left example is that of a pulley system. T he force that someone
would have to pull down on the cable would have to equ al and exceed the force made by the mass the object and the effects of
gravity on those object in order for the system to move up. The top right example shows that any object r esting on a surface will
still exert force on that surface. The bottom example i s that of two magnets being attracted to each other due to m agnetic force.
Examples of Force: Some situations in which forces are at play.
Mass
Mass is a physical property of matter that depends on size a nd shape of matter, and is expressed as kilograms by the SI s ystem.
Justify the significance of understanding mass in physics
What is Mass?
All elements have physical properties whose values can help describe an elements physical state. Changes to t hese properties can
describe elemental transformations. Physical propert ies do not change the chemical nature of matter. The physical property we are
covering in this atom is called mass.learning objectives

5.3.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33934Mass is defined as a quantitative measure of an objec t’s resistance to acceleration. The terms mass and weigh t are often
interchanged, however it is incorrect to do so. Weight is a different property of matter that, while related to mass, is not mass, but
rather the amount of gravitational force acting on a giv en body of matter. Mass is an intrinsic property that never ch anges.
Units of Mass
In order to measure something, a standard value mus t be established to use in relation to the object o f measurement. This relation is
called a unit. The International System of Units (SI) me asures mass in kilograms, or kg. There are other units o f mass, including the
following (only the first two are accepted by the SI syste m):
t – Tonne; 1t = 1000kg
u – atomic mass unit; 1u ~= 1.66×10 kg
sl – slug
lb – pound
Concepts Using Mass
Weight – see
Newtons Second Law – mass has a central role in determining the behavior of bodies. Newtons Second Law relates force f,
exerted in a body of mass m, to the body’s acceleration a:
Momentum – mass relates a body’s momentum, p, to its linear velocity, v:
Kinetic Energy – mass relates kinetic energy, K to veloc ity, v:
Key Points
Force is stated as a vector quantity, meaning it has elemen ts of both magnitude and direction. Mass and acceleration
respectively.
In layman’s terms, force is a push or pull that can be de fined in terms of various standards.
Dynamics is the study of the force that causes objects and s ystems to move or deform.
External forces are any outside forces that act on a bo dy, and internal forces are any force acting within a body.
Mass is defined as a quantitative measure of an object’s re sistance to acceleration.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, if a body of f ixed mass m is subjected to a single force F, its accel eration a is
given by F/m.
Mass is central in many concepts of physics, including:weight, momentum, acceleration, and kinetic energy.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, if a body of f ixed mass m is subjected to a single force F, its accel eration a is
given by F/m.
Key Terms
force: A force is any influence that causes an object to unde rgo a certain change, either concerning its movement, direct ion or
geometrical construction.
velocity: A vector quantity that denotes the rate of change of position with respect to time, or a speed with a directional
component.
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
mass: The quantity of matter which a body contains, irrespecti ve of its bulk or volume. It is one of four fundamental pr operties
of matter. It is measured in kilograms in the SI system of m easurement.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution-27

5.3.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33934OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/velocity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is a force?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIZpG7h5b54. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Special Relativity/Relativistic dynamics. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Special_Relativity/Relativistic_dynamics%23 Mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Physical properties. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_properties. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
mass. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mass. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Force examples.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Force_examples.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
What is a force?. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIZpG7h5b54. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.3.2: Force and Mass is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.2: Force and Mass by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339355.3.3: Newton’s Laws
The First Law: Inertia
Newton’s first law of motion describes inertia. Accordin g to this law, a body at rest tends to stay at rest, a nd a body in motion tends
to stay in motion, unless acted on by a net external forc e.
Define the First Law of Motion
History
Sir Isaac Newton was an English scientist who was intereste d in the motion of objects under various conditions. In 1687, he
published a work called Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica, which described his three laws of motion. Newton used
these laws to explain and explore the motion of physic al objects and systems. These laws form the basis for mechanics. The laws
describe the relationship between forces acting on a b ody and the motions experienced due to these forces. The three laws are as
follows:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force, and is inversely proportional to the mass of th e object.
3. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
The First Law of Motion
You have most likely heard Newton’s first law of motion before. If you haven’t heard it in the form written above, you have
probably heard that “a body in motion stays in moti on, and a body at rest stays at rest.” This means that a n object that is in motion
will not change its velocity unless an unbalanced for ce acts upon it. This is called uniform motion. It is easier to explain this
concept through examples.
If you are ice skating, and you push yourself away f rom the side of the rink, according to Newton’s first law you will continue
all the way to the other side of the rink. But, this won ’t actually happen. Newton says that a body in motion will stay in motion
until an outside force acts upon it. In this and mos t other real world cases, this outside force is friction. The friction between
your ice skates and the ice is what causes you to slow down and eventually stop.
Let’s look at another situation. Refer to for this ex ample. Why do we wear seat belts? Obviously, they’re th ere to protect us
from injury in case of a car accident. If a car is t raveling at 60 mph, the driver is also traveling at 60 mph. When the car
suddenly stops, an external force is applied to the car that causes it to slow down. But there is no for ce acting on the driver, so
the driver continues to travel at 60 mph. The seat b elt is there to counteract this and act as that ext ernal force to slow the driver
down along with the car, preventing them from being harm ed.
Newton’s First Law: Newton’s first law in effect on the driver of a carlearning objectives
Example:

5.3.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935Inertia
Sometimes this first law of motion is referred to as th e law of inertia. Inertia is the property of a body t o remain at rest or to remain
in motion with constant velocity. Some objects have mo re inertia than others because the inertia of an obje ct is equivalent to its
mass. This is why it is more difficult to change the directio n of a boulder than a baseball.
New ton ' s First Law (Inertia) | New ton ' s Three Law s New ton ' s First Law (Inertia) | New ton ' s Three Law s
Doc Physics – Newton: Newton’s first law is hugely counterintuitive. You may ha ve learned it in gradeschool, though. Let’s see it
for the mind-blowing conclusion it really is.
The Second Law: Force and Acceleration
The second law states that the net force on an object is e qual to the rate of change, or derivative, of its linear mom entum.
Define the Second Law of Motion
English scientist Sir Isaac Newton examined the motion o f physical objects and systems under various conditio ns. In 1687, he
published his three laws of motion in Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica. The laws form the basis for mechanics—they
describe the relationship between forces acting on a body, a nd the motion experienced due to these forces. These three laws state:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero, or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
learning objectives

5.3.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339353. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
The first law of motion defines only the natural stat e of the motion of the body (i.e., when the net force is zero). It does not allow us
to quantify the force and acceleration of a body. T he acceleration is the rate of change in velocity; it is caused only by an external
force acting on it. The second law of motion states t hat the net force on an object is equal to the rate of change of its linear
momentum.
Linear Momentum
Linear momentum of an object is a vector quantity th at has both magnitude and direction. It is the produ ct of mass and velocity of a
particle at a given time:
where, and. From this equation, we see that objects with more mass will have more
momentum.
The Second Law of Motion
Picture two balls of different mass, traveling in the same direction at the same velocity. If they both collide with a wall at the same
time, the heavier ball will exert a larger force on t he wall. This concept, illustrated below, explains Newton ’s second law, which
emphasizes the importance of force and motion, over velocity alone. It states: the net force on an objec t is equal to the rate of
change of its linear momentum. From calculus we know th at the rate of change is the same as a derivative. When we the linear
momentum of an object we get:
Force and Mass: This animation demonstrates the connection between fo rce and mass.
where, and. From this we can further simplify the equatio n:
where, a=accelerationa=acceleration. As we stated earlier, acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, or velo city divided by time.

5.3.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935
New ton ' s Second Law (1 of 2) | New ton ' s Three LawNew ton ' s Second Law (1 of 2) | New ton ' s Three Law
Newton’s Three Laws of Mechanics – Second Law – Part 1: Here we’ll see how many people can confuse your understand ing of
Newton’s 2nd law of motion through oversight, sloppy langua ge, or cruel intentions.
New ton ' s Second Law (2 of 2) | New ton ' s Three LawNew ton ' s Second Law (2 of 2) | New ton ' s Three Law

5.3.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935Newton’s Three Laws of Mechanics – Second Law – Part Two: Equilibrium is investigated and Newton’s 1st law is seen as a
special case of Newton’s 2nd law!
The Third Law: Symmetry in Forces
The third law of motion states that for every action, the re is an equal and opposite reaction.
Define the Third Law of Motion
Sir Isaac Newton was a scientist from England who was inte rested in the motion of objects under various condit ions. In 1687, he
published a work called Philosophiae Naturalis Principla Mathematica, which contained his three laws of motion. Newton used
these laws to explain and explore the motion of physic al objects and systems. These laws form the bases for me chanics. The laws
describe the relationship between forces acting on a b ody, and the motion is an experience due to these fo rces. Newton’s three laws
are:
1. If an object experiences no net force, its velocity wi ll remain constant. The object is either at rest and the ve locity is zero or it
moves in a straight line with a constant speed.
2. The acceleration of an object is parallel and direc tly proportional to the net force acting on the object, is in the direction of the
net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
3. When a first object exerts a force on a second object, the second object simultaneously exerts a force on the f irst object,
meaning that the force of the first object and the forc e of the second object are equal in magnitude and opposi te in direction.
Newton’s Third Law of Motion
Newton’s third law basically states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. If object A exerts a force on object
B, because of the law of symmetry, object B will exert a forc e on object A that is equal to the force acted on it:
In this example, F is the action and F is the reactio n. You have undoubtedly witnessed this law of motion. For example, take a
swimmer who uses her feet to push off the wall in order to gain speed. The more force she exerts on the wall, the harder she pushes
off. This is because the wall exerts the same force on her that she forces on it. She pushes the wall in the direction behind her,
therefore the wall will exert a force on her that is in the direction in front of her and propel her forward.
learning objectives
A B

5.3.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935
Newton’s Third Law of Motion: When a swimmer pushes off the wall, the swimmer is using t he third law of motion.
Take as another example, the concept of thrust. When a rocket launches into outer space, it expels gas ba ckward at a high velocity.
The rocket exerts a large backward force on the gas, a nd the gas exerts and equal and opposite reaction fo rce forward on the rocket,
causing it to launch. This force is called thrust. Thrus t is used in cars and planes as well.
New ton ' s Third Law is What' s Up. But how can stuff New ton ' s Third Law is What' s Up. But how can stuff
Newton’s Third Law: The most fundamental statement of basic physical rea lity is also the most often misunderstood. As your
mom if she’s clear on Newton’s Third. Then ask her why th ings can move if every force has a paired opposite force all the time,
forever.
Key Points
Newton’s three laws of physics are the basis for mechanics.
The first law states that a body at rest will stay at rest until a net external force acts upon it and that a body in motion will
remain in motion at a constant velocity until acted on by a net external force.

5.3.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935Net external force is the sum of all of the forcing acting on an object.
Just because there are forces acting on an object doesn’t necessarily mean that there is a net external force; for ces that are equal
in magnitude but acting in opposite directions can cancel o ne another out.
Friction is the force between an object in motion and the surface on which it moves. Friction is the external force that acts on
objects and causes them to slow down when no other external f orce acts upon them.
Inertia is the tendency of a body in motion to remain in m otion. Inertia is dependent on mass, which is why it is harder t o
change the direction of a heavy body in motion than it is to change the direction of a lighter object in motion.
Newton’s three laws of motion explain the relationship be tween forces acting on an object and the motion they ex perience due
to these forces. These laws act as the basis for mechanics.
The second law explains the relationship between force and motion, as opposed to velocity and motion. It uses the con cept of
linear momentum to do this.
Linear momentum, is the product of mass, and velocity.
The second law states that the net force is equal to the derivative, or rate of change of its linear momentum.
By simplifying this relationship and remembering tha t acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, we can s ee that the second
law of motion is where the relationship between force and a cceleration comes from.
If an object A exerts a force on object B, object B exer ts an equal and opposite force on object A.
Newton’s third law can be seen in many everyday circumst ances. When you walk, the force you use to push off the g round
backwards makes you move forward.
Thrust is an application of the third law of motion. A he licopter uses thrust to push the air under the propeller down, and
therefore lift off the ground.
Key Terms
inertia: The property of a body that resists any change to its uniform motion; equivalent to its mass.
friction: A force that resists the relative motion or tendency to such motion of two bodies in contact.
uniform motion: Motion at a constant velocity (with zero acceleration). Not e that an object in motion will not change its
velocity unless an unbalanced force acts upon it.
net force: The combination of all the forces that act on an object.
momentum: (of a body in motion) the product of its mass and veloci ty.
acceleration: The amount by which a speed or velocity increases (and so a scalar quantity or a vector quantity).
symmetry: Exact correspondence on either side of a dividing line, plane, center or axis.
thrust: The force generated by propulsion, as in a jet engine.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s First Law of Motion: Inertia. Sept ember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42130/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inertia. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
uniform motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/uniform%20motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.3.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33935Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
net force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/net_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Newton's Second Law of Motion. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14042/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
momentum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/momentum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acceleration. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part 1. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFybXASirwQ.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastischer stou00df3. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elastischer_sto%C3%9F3.gif.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part Two. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Z7qivqbSBI.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42074/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newtons first law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newtons_first_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
symmetry. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/symmetry. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
thrust. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/thrust. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Doc Physics - Newton. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cliJbHYpNic. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, Forces: Newton's First L aw. January 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m38960/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part 1. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFybXASirwQ.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastischer stou00df3. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elastischer_sto%C3%9F3.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Newton's Three Laws of Mechanics - Second Law - Part Two. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Z7qivqbSBI.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Newtonu2019s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces. January 25, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42074/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Newton's Third Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VR7NfNWuPLk. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.3.3: Newton’s Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.3: Newton’s Laws by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339365.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
Weight
Weight is taken as the force on an object due to gravity, and is different than the mass of an object.
Infer what factors other than gravity will contribute to t he apparent weight of an object
In physics, it is important to differentiate the weig ht of an object from its mass. The mass of an object is an intrinsic quantity,
independent of the location of the object. On the oth er hand, the weight of an object is an extrinsic quan tity. It is considered as the
force on an object due to gravity. Since gravitationa l acceleration changes depending on the location in the universe, weight does as
well.
Mathematically, the weight of an object (W) can be found by multiplying its mass (m) by the acceleration due to gravity (g):
. The strength of gravity varies very little over t he surface of the Earth. In fact, the greatest percent difference in the value
of the acceleration due to gravity on Earth is 0.5%.
For most calculations involving the weight of an object o n Earth, it is sufficient to assume that.
The weight of an object has the same SI unit as force—the Ne wton ().
In US customary units, the weight of an object can be ex pressed in pounds. Keep in mind that in US units the poun d is either a unit
of force or of mass. If one must find the weight (as opposed to the mass) of an object in US units, it can be calculated in terms of
pounds of force.
It is important to note that the apparent weight of a n object (i.e., the weight of an object determined by a scale) will vary if forces
other than gravity are acting upon the object. For e xample, if you weigh a given mass underwater you will find a different result
than if you weigh that mass in air. In this case, the we ight of the object varies due to the force of buoyan cy. While the mass is in the
water it displaces fluid, resulting in an upward forc e upon it. This upward force affects the net force th at the mass exerts on the
scale, and thus alters its “apparent” weight.
Spring Scale: A spring scale measures weight by finding the extent to which a spring is compressed.This is proportional to th e
force that a mass exerts on the scale due to its weight.learning objectives

5.3.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33936Normal Forces
The normal force comes about when an object contacts a surface; the resulting force is always perpendicular to the surface of
contact.
Evaluate Newton’s Second and Third Laws in determining the no rmal force on an object
Overview
The normal force,, comes about when an object contac ts a surface. According to Newton’s third law, when one ob ject exerts a
force on a second object, the second object always exe rts a force that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction on the first
object. This is the reason that the normal force exists.
A common situation in which a normal force exists is when a person stands on the ground. Because of Newton’ s third law, the
ground exerts a force on the person that is equal in magnitude to the person’s weight. In this simple case, the weight of the person
and the opposing normal force are the only two force s considered on the person. The person remains stil l because the forces due to
weight and the normal force create a net force of zero on the person.
Forces on Inclined Planes
A more complex example of a situation in which a norm al force exists is when a mass rests on an inclined plane. In this case, the
normal force is not in the exact opposite direction as the force due to the weight of the mass. This is b ecause the mass contacts the
surface at an angle. By taking this angle into account, the magnitude of the normal force () can be found from:
where:
is the mass under consideration,
is the acceleration due to gravity,
and is the angle between the inclined surface and the ho rizontal.
Inclined Plane: A mass rests on an inclined plane that is at an angle to the horizontal. The following forces act on the mass: the
weight of the mass (),the force due to friction (),and the norm al force ().
Another interesting example involving normal forces is when a person stands in an elevator. When the eleva tor goes up, the normal
force is actually greater than the force due to grav ity. In this situation there are only two forces acti ng on the person. The first is the
force of gravity on the person, which does not chang e. The second is the normal force. By summing the fo rces and setting them
equal to m ⋅am ⋅a (utilizing Newton’s second law), we find:
where:
is the normal force,
is the force due to gravity,
is the mass of the person,learning objectives

5.3.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33936and is the acceleration.
Since acceleration is positive, the normal force must ac tually be greater than the force due to gravity (the weight of the person).
Key Points
Weight is taken to be the force on an object due to gravi ty.
Weight and mass are not the same thing!
The weight of a given mass will be different when the accelera tion due to gravity is different.
Apparent weight can change because of the effect of buoya ncy.
The strength of gravity is almost the same everywhere on th e surface of the Earth.
The normal force,, comes about when an object contacts a sur face.
The normal force exists because for every force, there is al ways an equal and opposite force.
The normal force is always perpendicular to the plane tha t the object contacts or rests on.
Key Terms
Gravitational acceleration: Gravitational acceleration is the acceleration that a n object undergoes due solely to gravity
perpendicular: at or forming a right angle (to).
normal: A line or vector that is perpendicular to another lin e, surface, or plane.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Gravitational acceleration. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational%20acceleration.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY: Attribution
Normal force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Newton's laws of motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_laws_of_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
perpendicular. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/perpendicular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
normal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/normal. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Weight. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight. License: CC BY: Attribution
Normal force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_force. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.4: Other Examples of Forces by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339375.3.5: Problem-Solving
A General Approach
Basic problem-solving techniques can aid in the solut ion of problems involving motion (i.e., the laws of motion).
Assess the laws of motion through practiced problem solvi ng techniques
When dealing with the laws of motion, although knowledge of concepts and equations is important, understand ing basic problem
solving techniques can simplify the process of solvi ng problems that may appear difficult. Your approach to problem solving can
involve several key steps.
Free body diagram: An example of a drawing to help identify forces and direc tions.
First, gather all relevant information from the probl em. Identify all quantities that are given (the knowns), then do the same for all
quantities needed (the unknowns). Also, identify the physical principles involved (e.g., f orce, gravity, friction, etc.).
Next, a drawing may be helpful. Sometimes a drawing can even help determine the known and unknown quantities. It need not be a
work of art, but it should be clear enough to illustra te proper dimension, (meaning one, two, or three dime nsions). You can then use
this drawing to determine which direction is positive and wh ich is negative (making note of this on the drawing).
A next step is to use what is known to find the approp riate equation to find what is unknown. While it is ea siest to find an equation
that leaves only one unknown, sometimes this is not po ssible. In these situations, you can solve multiple equ ations to find the right
answer. Remember that equations represent physical prin ciples and relationships, so use the equations and drawin gs in tandem.
You may then substitute the knowns into the appropriate equations and find a numerical solution.
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable and makes se nse. Your judgment will improve and fine tune as you solve more problems
of this nature. This “judgement” step helps intuit t he problem in terms of its conceptual meaning. If yo u can judge whether the
answer is reasonable, you have a deeper understanding of physics than simply the mechanics of problem solving.
When solving problems, we tend to perform these steps in different order, as well as do several steps simultane ously. There is no
rigid procedure that will work every time. Creativity and insight grow with experience. In time, the basics of problem solving can
become relatively automatic.
Key Points
Gathering all relevant information and identifying known s and unknowns is an important first step.
Always make a drawing to help identify directions of forces a nd to establish, and axes.learning objectives

5.3.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33937Choose the correct equations, solve the problem, and check t hat the answer fits expectations numerically.
Key Terms
equation: An assertion that two expressions are equal, expressed by writing the two expressions separated by an equal sign;
from which one is to determine a particular quantity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42125/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
equation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Free body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_body_diagram. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.3.5: Problem-Solving is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.5: Problem-Solving by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339385.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces
Forces in Two Dimensions
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes depende nt upon how strong the push or pull is.
Explain why forces are classified as “vector quantities”
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes d ependent upon how strong the push or pull is. Because of these characteristics,
forces are classified as “vector quantities. ” This mean s that forces follow a different set of mathematical rules than physical
quantities that do not have direction (denoted scalar quantities).
For example, when determining what happens when two forc es act on the same object, it is necessary to know bo th the magnitude
and the direction of both forces to calculate the r esult. If both of these pieces of information are no t known for each force, the
situation is ambiguous. For example, if you know that t wo people are pulling on the same rope with known magni tudes of force but
you do not know which direction either person is pull ing, it is impossible to determine what the accelerat ion of the rope will be.
The two people could be pulling against each other a s in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction. In this
simple one-dimensional example, without knowing the d irection of the forces it is impossible to decide whe ther the net force is the
result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting o ne from the other. Associating forces with vectors avoi ds such problems.
When two forces act on a point particle, the resultin g force or the resultant (also called the net force) can be determined by
following the parallelogram rule of vector addition: the addition of two vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram gives an
equivalent resultant vector which is equal in magnit ude and direction to the transversal of the parallelo gram. The magnitude of the
resultant varies from the difference of the magnitu des of the two forces to their sum, depending on the angle between their lines of
action.
Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on a system. Ideally, t hese diagrams are drawn
with the angles and relative magnitudes of the force vectors preserved so that graphical vector addition can be done to determine
the net force.learning objectives

5.3.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33938
Forces as Vectors: Free-body diagrams of an object on a flat surface and an inc lined plane. Forces are resolved and added together
to determine their magnitudes and the net force.
Key Points
When determining what happens when two forces act on the same object, it is necessary to know both the magnitude and th e
direction of both forces to calculate the result.
When two forces act on a point particle, the resulting forc e or the resultant (also called the net force), can be d etermined by
following the parallelogram rule of vector addition.
Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on an object.
Key Terms
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
free-body diagram: A free body diagram, also called a force diagram, is a pictorial representation often used by physicists and
engineers to analyze the forces acting on a body of intere st.

5.3.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33938resultant: A vector that is the vector sum of multiple vectors
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Net force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_force. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14040/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42069/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
resultant. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resultant. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
free-body diagram. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/free-body%20diagram. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Freebodydiagram3 pn.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyc lopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Freebodydiagram3_pn.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
This page titled 5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
4.6: Vector Nature of Forces by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.3.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339395.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
Applications of Newton’s Laws
Net force affects the motion, postion and/or shape of o bjects (some important and commonly used forces are friction, drag and
deformation).
Explain the effect of forces on an object’s motion and shap e
We know that a net force affects the motion, position and shape of an object. It is useful at this point to look at some particularly
interesting and common forces that will provide furt her applications of Newton’s laws of motion. Specifically, we will discuss the
forces of friction, air or liquid drag, and deformation.
Friction
Friction is a force that resists movement between two sur faces sliding against each other. When surfaces in co ntact move relative to
each other, the friction between the two surfaces conv erts kinetic energy into heat. This property can have a dramatic effect, as seen
in the use of friction created by rubbing pieces of wood together to start a fire. Friction is not itself a fundamental force, but arises
from fundamental electromagnetic forces between the char ged particles constituting the two contacting surfaces.
Drag
Another interesting force in everyday life is the for ce of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either gas or liquid). You
feel this drag force when you move your hand through water, or through the wind. Like friction, the force o f drag is a force that
resists motion. As we will discuss in later units, the dr ag force is proportional to the velocity of the obje ct moving through it. We
see an illustrated example of drag force in.
Drag Force on a Barge: (a) A view from above of two tugboats pushing on a barge. (b) The free-body diagram for the ship
contains only forces acting in the plane of the water. I t omits the two vertical forces—the weight of the barge and the buoyant force
of the water supporting it cancel and are not shown. Since t he applied forces are perpendicular, the – and -axes are in the same
direction as and. The problem quickly becomes a one-di mensional problem along the direction of, since fricti on is in the
direction opposite to.
Deformation
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wal l, the car will not move but it will noticeably chang e shape. The change in
shape of an object due to the application of a forc e is a deformation. Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation.
For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the object returns to its original shape when the force is
removed (that is, the deformation is elastic for small deformations). Second, the size of the deformation is p roportional to the force.
Friction: Kinetic
If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one anot her, then the friction between them is called kinetic frict ion.learning objectives

5.3.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Explain the dynamics of energy for friction between two su rfaces
When surfaces in contact move relative to each other, the friction between the two surfaces converts kineti c energy into heat. This
property can have dramatic consequences, as illustra ted by the use of friction created by rubbing pieces of wood together to start a
fire. Kinetic energy is converted to heat whenever motion with friction occurs, for example when a viscous fluid is stirred.
Kinetic Friction Introduction | Doc Phy sicsKinetic Friction Introduction | Doc Phy sics
Kinetic Friction Introduction: Here, I’ll explain the microscopic justification of fric tion and what we can know about it. The
coefficient of friction, too!
Kinetic (or dynamic) friction occurs when two objects ar e moving relative to each other and rub together; a sled on the ground
would be a good example of kinetic friction.
learning objectives

5.3.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Friction: Frictional forces always oppose motion or attempted motio n between objects in contact. Friction arises in part be cause of
the roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. In order for the object to move, it must r ise to where the
peaks can skip along the bottom surface. Thus, a force is requ ired just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks wi ll be broken
off, also requiring a force to maintain motion. Much of th e friction is actually due to attractive forces betwee n molecules making up
the two objects, so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are no t friction-free. Such adhesive forces also depend on the subst ances the
surfaces are made of, explaining, for example, why rubber-so led shoes slip less than those with leather soles.
The force of friction is what slows an object sliding o ver a surface. This force is what makes the brakes on cars work or causes
resistance when you slide your hand across a surface. T he force of friction can be represented by an equat ion:. In this
equation is something called the coefficient of fric tion. This is a unitless number that represents the strength of the friction of the
object. A very “grippy” surface like rubber might hav e a high coefficient of friction, whereas a slippery s urface like ice has a much
lower coefficient. is called the normal force and i s the force of the surface pushing up on the object. In most cases on level
ground, the normal force will be the equal and opposi te of the object’s weight. In other words, it is the fo rce that the surface must
exert to keep the object from falling through.
The coefficient of kinetic friction is typically rep resented as and is usually less than the coefficien t of static friction for the same
materials.
Friction: Static
Static friction is a type of friction that occurs to res ist motion when two objects are at rest against each other.
Demonstrate the relationship of maximum force of static friction
Static Friction
Another type of frictional force is static friction, otherwise known as stiction. Like all friction, it acts to resist the motion of an
object moving over a surface. Unlike kinetic friction, howev er, static friction acts to resist the start of motion.
Static Friction and some friction challenges | Doc Ph Static Friction and some friction challenges | Doc Ph
……learning objectives

5.3.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Static Friction and some friction challenges: Here, I talk about sneaky ol’ static friction.
Static friction is friction between two objects that a re not moving relative to each other. This frictional force is what prevents a
parked car from sliding down a hill, for example. Bef ore an object at rest on a surface can move, it must overcome the force of
static friction.
Static friction originates from multiple sources. For any given material on another material of the same composition, friction will
be greater as the material surfaces become rougher (consider sandpaper) on the macroscopic level. Addit ionally, intermolecular
forces can greatly influence friction when two materia ls are put into contact. When surface area is below t he micrometer range, Van
der Waals’ forces, electrostatic interactions and hy drogen bonding can cause two materials to adhere to one another. A force is
required to overcome these interactions and cause the surfaces to move across one another.
Like kinetic friction, the force of static friction is given by a coefficient multiplied by the normal f orce. The normal force is the
force of the surface pushing up on the object, which i s usually equal to the object’s weight. The coefficie nt of static friction is
usually greater than the coefficient of kinetic frict ion and is usually represented by.
Putting these elements together gives the maximum force o f static friction as:
In general, the force of static friction can be represente d as:
As with all frictional forces, the force of friction c an never exceed the force applied. Thus the force o f static friction will vary
between 0 and depending on the strength of the appli ed force. Any force smaller than
attempting to slide one surface over the other is opposed by a frictional force of equal magnitude and
opposite direction. Any force larger than that overco mes the force of static friction and causes sliding to occur. The instant sliding
occurs, static friction is no longer applicable—the fri ction between the two surfaces is then called kinetic fric tion.
Static Friction: To move a block at rest on a surface, a force must be appl ied which is great enough to overcome the force of static
friction.
Problem-Solving With Friction and Inclines
Combining motion on inclines with friction uses such c oncepts as equilibrium and contact force on an incline.
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.3.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Calculate the force of friction on an incline
Contact Force on an Incline
The incline plane has two contact or interface surfac es. One is the incline surface, where the block is place d and the other is the
base of the incline, which is in contact with the surf ace underneath. The motion of the block, therefore, may depend on the motion
of the incline itself.
Block and incline system: Forces on the block
When on an incline, calculating the force of friction is different than when the object is on a level surfa ce. Recall that the force of
friction depends on both the coefficient of friction and the normal force. When on an incline with an an gle, the normal
force becomes
As always, the frictional force resists motion. If the b lock is being pushed up the incline the friction fo rce points down the incline.
If the block is being pulled down the incline, the friction force will hold the block up.
Equilibrium of Forces on an Incline
When not acted on by any other forces, only by grav ity and friction, the frictional force will resist the tendency of the block to slide
down the incline. If the frictional force is equal to the gravitational force the block will not slide do wn the incline. The block is said
to be in equilibrium since the sum of the forces on it is 0.
Gravitational force down an incline is given by.
Where is the angle the incline makes with the horizon tal. For the block to be in equilibrium, the maximum force of friction
must be greater than or equal to FG=mgsin (θ). If the maximum frictional force is greater than the
force of gravity, the sum of the forces is still 0. T he force of friction can never exceed the other for ces acting on it. The frictional
forces only act to counter motion.
Drag
The drag force is the resistive force felt by objects mov ing through fluids and is proportional to the square of th e object’s speed.
Relate the magnitude of drag force to the speed of an object
Another interesting force in everyday life is the fo rce of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either a gas or a liquid). You
feel the drag force when you move your hand through water. You might also feel it if you move your hand d uring a strong wind.
The faster you move your hand, the harder it is to m ove. You feel a smaller drag force when you tilt your hand so only the side goes
through the air—you have decreased the area of your ha nd that faces the direction of motion.
Like friction, the drag force always opposes the mot ion of an object. Unlike simple friction, the drag fo rce is proportional to some
function of the velocity of the object in that flui d. This functionality is complicated and depends upon the shape of the object, its
size, its velocity, and the fluid it is in. Aerodyna mic objects tend to have small surface areas and be designed to have low drag
coefficients.learning objectives
learning objectives

5.3.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939For most large objects such as bicyclists, cars, and baseba lls not moving too slowly, the magnitude of the drag force is found to
be proportional to the square of the speed of the o bject. We can write this relationship mathematically as. When taking into
account other factors, this relationship becomes, where is known as the drag coefficient, a unit-less number that
represents the aerodynamic properties of the object, is the cross-sectional area of the object which is fac ing the direction of
motion, and is the density of the fluid the object is mo ving through.
Aerodynamic Shape: From racing cars to bobsled racers, aerodynamic shaping is cr ucial to achieving top speeds. Bobsleds are
designed for speed. They are shaped like a bullet with tapere d fins. (credit: U.S. Army, via Wikimedia Commons)
Da n F u lle rton (AP lu sP h y sics)
P hysics: Retarding and Drag Forces
P hysics: Retarding and Drag Forces
Watch on

5.3.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Retarding and Drag Forces: A brief look at retarding (drag) forces in physics, for students in introductory physics classes that use
calculus. This video walks through a single scenario of an ob ject experiencing a drag force where the drag force is p roportional to
the object’s velocity.
Stress and Strain
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the strain.
Explain how forces affects the shape of an object
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wall, the car will not move past the wall but it will no ticeably change shape. A
change in shape due to the application of a force i s a deformation. Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation.
For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the object returns to its original shape when the force is
removed—that is, the deformation is elastic for small d eformations. Second, the size of the deformation is pro portional to the force
—that is, for small deformations, Hooke’s law is obeyed. In equation form, Hooke’s law is given by where is the
change in length and kk is a constant which depends on the ma terial properties of the object.
Deformations come in several types: changes in length (t ension and compression), sideways shear (stress), and change s in volume.
Tension/Compression: Tension: The rod is stretched a length when a force is a pplied parallel to its length. (b) Compression:
The same rod is compressed by forces with the same magni tude in the opposite direction. For very small deformations and uniform
materials, is approximately the same for the same mag nitude of tension or compression. For larger deformations, the crosssectional area changes as the rod is compressed or stretche d.
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the strain.
Stress and strain are related to each other by a const ant called Young’s Modulus or the elastic modulus which varies depending on
the material. Using Young’s Modulus the relation between st ress and strain is given by:.
A material with a high elastic modulus is said to have high tensile strength. Such materials are very resista nt to being stretched and
require a large amount of force to deform a small amoun t.
Translational Equilibrium
An object is said to be in equilibrium when there is no ex ternal net force acting on it.learning objectives

5.3.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Assess the role each type of equilibrium plays in mecha nical devices
We are surrounded by great engineering architecture s and mechanical devices, which are at rest in the fra me of reference of Earth.
A large part of engineering creations are static obj ects. Yet we also seek equilibrium of moving objects lik e that of floating ship,
airplane cruising at high speed, and such other mov ing mechanical devices. In both cases – static or dynam ic – net external forces
and torques are zero.
A body is said to be in mechanical equilibrium when net external force is equal to zero and net externa l torque is also zero.
Mathematically,
Since there is no net force on the object, the objec t does not accelerate. This implies two types of possi ble equilibrium. The first
type, where all particles in the system are at rest a nd do have not velocity, is known as static equilibriu m. In the second type, the
object has a velocity, but since there are no net f orces acting on it, the velocity remains constant. In the second case, the particle is
said to be in dynamic equilibrium. Static or dynamic, thes e kinds of equilibrium can be categorized as translat ional equilibrium.
Examples of translational equilibrium are all around us. A book resting on a table is pushing down on the t able with the force of its
weight. The table, in turn, is pushing back on the boo k, keeping the book from falling through the table. Since neither the table nor
the book are moving, this is an example of static equ ilibrium. The force of gravity on the book is perfe ctly counteracted by the
force of the table pushing on it.
Forces Acting on an Object at Rest: A force diagram showing the forces acting on an obje ct at rest on a surface. Notice that the
amount of force that the table is pushing upward on the ob ject (the N vector) is equal to the downward force of the object’s weight
(shown here as mg, as weight is equal to the object’s mass mul tiplied by the acceleration due to gravity): because th ese forces are
equal, the object is in a state of equilibrium (all the f orces acting on it balance to zero).
An example of dynamic (or mechanical) equilibrium is a n object sliding down a wedge. The force of gravity p ulls the object down
the wedge, but it is counteracted by the force of fric tion between the wedge and the object. If the force o f friction is equal to the
force of gravity, the object will proceed at a constant vel ocity.
Forces on a Table: These six forces are in equilibrium. The four forces o f the table leg counteract the force of the table and the
object pushing on them.learning objectives

5.3.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Connected Objects
Forces can be transferred from one object to another throu gh connections.
Analyze the affect a rigid connection has on the movement o f objects
The physics of connected objects is very similar to physics of simple objects. There are a variety of wa ys objects can be connected
to each other, and a corresponding variety of mathematica l ways to model such connections.
The simplest form of connection is a perfectly rigid connection. If two objects are connected by a perfe ctly rigid connector then
they may be thought of as the same object. Perfectly rigid connectors cannot stretch nor deform, and transf er forces instantaneously
from one side of the connection to the other. For exam ple, given two blocks (both of mass 1 kg) connected by a perfectly rigid bar,
if the first block is pulled with a force of 1 Newton, then both blocks will accelerate at the same time an d the same acceleration. In
this case the acceleration is —the same as if a for ce of mass 2 kg is exerted on one object. Thus it ca n be said that a
perfectly rigid connection makes two objects into on e large object. Of course, perfectly rigid connection s do not exist in nature.
Some deformation will always exist in any object as fo rce travels along it. However, many materials are suffic iently rigid, so that
using the perfectly rigid approximation is useful for sim plicity’s sake.
One can think of the force transferring through the c onnection by means of the “tension” force. Tension i s the pulling force exerted
by a string, chain, or similar connector on another ob ject. If two objects are connected by a string, a force exerted on one is
balanced by a tension force in the string which pulls on the other. Of course, if the tension force is greate r than the rope can
withstand, the rope will break.
Tension Forces: The forces involved in supporting a ball by a rope. Te nsion is the force of the rope on the scaffold, the force of the
rope on the ball, and the balanced forces acting on and pro duced by segments of the rope.
Circular Motion
An object in circular motion undergoes acceleration due to centripetal force in the direction of the center of rotation.
Develop an understanding of uniform circular motion as a n indicator for net external force
Uniform circular motion describes the motion of an o bject along a circle or a circular arc at constant speed. It is the basic form of
rotational motion in the same way that uniform linea r motion is the basic form of translational motion. Howev er, the two types of
motion are different with respect to the force required to maintain the motion.
Let us consider Newton’s first law of motion. It states that an object will maintain a constant velocity unle ss a net external force is
applied. Therefore, uniform linear motion indicates t he absence of a net external force. On the other hand, uniform circular motionlearning objectives
learning objectives

5.3.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939requires that the velocity vector of an object cons tantly change direction. Since the velocity vector of the object is changing, an
acceleration is occurring. Therefore, uniform circular motion indicates the presence of a net external force.
In uniform circular motion, the force is always perpend icular to the direction of the velocity. Since the di rection of the velocity is
continuously changing, the direction of the force must be a s well.
The direction of the velocity along the circular tr ajectory is tangential. The perpendicular direction to the circular trajectory is,
therefore, the radial direction. Therefore, the force (and therefore the acceleration) in uniform directi on motion is in the radial
direction. For this reason, acceleration in uniform circular motion is recognized to “seek the center” — i.e., centri petal force.
The equation for the acceleration aa required to sustai n uniform circular motion is:
where mm is the mass of the object, is the velocity of the object, and is the radius of the circle. Conseq uently, the net external
force required to sustain circular motion is:
Uniform Circular Motion: In uniform circular motion, the centripetal force is per pendicular to the velocity. The centripetal force
points toward the center of the circle, keeping the object o n the circular track.
Key Points
Friction is the force that resists relative motion betwe en two surfaces sliding across each other. Friction converts k inetic energy
into heat.
Drag force is the force that resists motion of an object trave ling through a fluid such as air or water. Drag force is proport ional
to the velocity of the object traveling.
Deformation forces are forces caused by stretching or compres sing a material. Some examples would be springs or elastics.
Kinetic (or dynamic) friction occurs when two objects are m oving relative to each other and rub together (like a s led on the
ground).
The force of friction can be represented by an equation where is the coefficient of friction and is a unitless
number that represents the strength of the friction o f the surface.
Kinetic friction and static (stationary) friction use two diff erent coefficients for the same material.
Static friction is a force that acts to resist the start of motion. It is borne of macroscopic inconsistencies in t he surfaces of
materials in contact as well as intermolecular interact ions between the materials, such as hydrogen bonding, Va n der Waal’s
interactions and electrostatic interactions.
Static friction uses a different, usually higher, coefficie nt than kinetic friction does.
The force of static friction is. Where is the coeffi cient of static friction which varies by material
and FnFn is the normal force.
Motion on an incline is resisted by friction.
The frictional force on an incline is dependent on the a ngle of the incline. is the maximum friction force on a n
incline.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.3.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939If the friction force is greater than or equal to the fo rces in the direction of motion, then the net force is 0 and the object is in
equilibrium.
Objects moving through a fluid feel a force which resists their motion. This force is known as the drag force.
The drag force is proportional to the square of the veloci ty of the object relative to the fluid.
The equation for drag is. is a constant called the dra g coefficient. ρρ is the density of the fluid. is the surf ace
area in the direction of motion.
The ratio of force to area is called stress and the ra tio of change in length to length is called the stra in.
Stress and strain are related to each other by a constant called Young’s Modulus or the elastic modulus which var ies depending
on the material. Using Young’s Modulus the relation betwee n stress and strain is given by:.
A material with a high elastic modulus is said to have high tensile strength. Such materials are very resistant to b eing stretched
and require a large amount of force to deform a small amo unt.
When there is no external net force on an object, the ob ject is said to be in equilibrium.
When an object is in equilibrium, it does not accelera te. If it had a velocity, the velocity remains constant; if it was at rest, it
remains at rest.
An equilibrium in motion is known as dynamic equilibrium; an equilibrium at rest is a static equilibrium.
If two objects are connected, a force on one has an effect on the other.
Connections can often be approximated as completely rigid. In completely rigid cases, the connection does not defor m and the
force is transferred instantaneously.
Tension is the force of a rope or cable or other connector on the object it is connected to. It is one way force is transf erred
between objects.
An object that is undergoing circular motion has a veloci ty vector that is constantly changing direction.
The force that is needed to maintain circular motion p oints toward the center of the circular path. It is ther efore known as the
centripetal force.
The velocity of an object in circular motion is always tangen t to the circle, and the centripetal force is always perpe ndicular to
the velocity.
Key Terms
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
static: Fixed in place; having no motion.
kinetic: Of or relating to motion
friction: A force that resists the relative motion or tendency to such motion of two bodies in contact.
incline: A slope.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
fluid: Any substance which can flow with relative ease, tends to assume the shape of its container, and obeys Bernoulli’s
principle; a liquid, gas or plasma.
strain: The amount by which a material deforms under stress or force, given as a ratio of the deformation to the initial
dimension of the material and typically symbolized by ϵϵ is termed the engineering strain. The true strain is de fined as the
natural logarithm of the ratio of the final dimension to the initial dimension.
stress: The internal distribution of force per unit area (pressu re) within a body reacting to applied forces which causes strain or
deformation and is typically symbolized by.
dynamic: Changing; active; in motion.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
rigid: Stiff, rather than flexible.
tangent: a straight line touching a curve at a single point withou t crossing it at that point
perpendicular: at or forming a right angle (to).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.3.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Introduction: Further Applications of Newto nu2019s Laws. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42138/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Drag (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction%23Kinetic_friction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Friction. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Friction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Friction%23Static_friction. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kinetic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Working with Friction (Application). Septemb er 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14806/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
incline. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incline. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
friction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/friction. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.3.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Drag (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fluid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fluid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Deformation (engineering). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Deformation_(engineering).
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stress. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
strain. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strain. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.3.7.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dynamic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dynamic. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
static. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
rigid. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rigid. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.3.7.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33939Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Uniform Circular Motion. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13871/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
perpendicular. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/perpendicular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
tangent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tangent. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Further Applications of Newtonu2019s Laws of Mo tion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42132/latest/Figure_04_07_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42139/latest/Figure_06_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic Friction Introduction. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqkV-4rHc4I. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Static Friction and some friction challenges. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i90-x5Tbnlc. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Friction. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14068/latest/f2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Motion on Accelerated Incline Plane (Appli cation). March 19, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m14079/latest/ai15.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Retarding and Drag Forces. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-3qJN6ntoU. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Drag Forces. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42080/latest/Figure_06_02_02a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 31, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_03a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Equilibrium. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14870/latest/e1.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Static equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_equilibrium. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Tension (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Tension_(physics). License: CC BY:
Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Uniform Circular Motion. January 31, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m13871/latest/ucm2.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
4.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws by Boundless has no license indicated.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.4: Work and Energy
5.4.1: Introduction
5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
5.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
5.4.6: Power
5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use
5.4.8: Further Topics
This page titled 5.4: Work and Energy is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

5.4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339415.4.1: Introduction
Introduction to Work and Energy
Work is the energy associated with the action of a force.
Describe relationship between work, energy, and force
The work done on a system by a constant force is the product of the component of the force in the direct ion of motion times the
distance through which the force acts. For one-way mot ion in one dimension, this is expressed in equation fo rm as,
where W is work, F is the magnitude of the force on the system, d is the magnitude of the displacement of the system, and θ is the
angle between the force vector F and the displacement ve ctor d.
Work, Pow er, and Energy | Doc Phy sicsWork, Pow er, and Energy | Doc Phy sics
Work, Power, and Energy: Biology is useful.
Take this example of work in action from: (A) The work done by the force F on this lawn mower is. Note that
is the component of the force in the direction of motion. (B) A person holding a briefcase does no work on it, because
there is no motion. No energy is transferred to or f rom the briefcase. (C) The person moving the briefcas e horizontally at a constant
speed does no work on it, and transfers no energy to it. (D) Work is done on the briefcase by carrying it up stairs at constant speed,
because there is necessarily a component of force F in the direction of the motion. Energy is transferred t o the briefcase and could,
in turn, be used to do work. (E) When the briefcase is lowered, energy is transferred out of the briefcase an d into an electriclearning objectives

5.4.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33941generator. Here the work done on the briefcase by the g enerator is negative, removing energy from the brie fcase, because F and d
are in opposite directions.
Examples of Work: This is how work in progress and energy co-exist and opera te. Work is the energy associated with the action of
a force.
In physics, a force is said to do work when it acts on a body so that there is a displacement of the point of application, however
small, in the direction of the force. Thus a force do es work when there is movement under the action of th e force. The work done
by a constant force of magnitude F on a point that moves a distance d in the direction of the force is the produc t:
For example, if a force of 10 newton (F = 10 N) acts al ong point that travels two meters (d = 2 m), then it does the work W = (10
N)(2 m) = 20 N m = 20 J. This is approximately the work d one lifting a 1 kg weight from the ground to over a person’s head
against the force of gravity. Notice that the work is doubled either by lifting twice the weight in the sa me distance or by lifting the
same weight twice the distance.
Work is closely related to energy. The conservation of energy states that the change in total internal energy of a system equals the
added heat minus the work performed by the system (see th e first law of thermodynamics, and):

5.4.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33941Baseball Pitcher: A baseball pitcher does work on a baseball by throwing t he ball at some force, F, over some distance d, which for
the average baseball field, is about 60 feet.
Also, from Newton’s second law for rigid bodies, it can b e shown that work on an object is equal to the change i n kinetic energy of
that object:
The work of forces generated by a potential function is known as potential energy and the forces are said to be conservative.
Therefore work on an object moving in a conservative forc e field is equal to minus the change of potential energ y of the object:
This shows that work is the energy associated with the actio n of a force, and so has the physical dimensions and units of energy.
Key Points
Work is the transfer of energy by a force acting on an ob ject as it is displaced.
The work done by a force is zero if the displacement is ei ther zero or perpendicular to the force.
The work done is positive if the force and displacement h ave the same direction, and the work done is negative if they have
opposite direction.
Key Terms
energy: A quantity that denotes the ability to do work and is me asured in a unit dimensioned in mass × distance²/time² (ML ²/T²)
or the equivalent.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)%23Work_and_energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/energy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Work: The Scientific Definition. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
cnx.org/content/m42146/latest/Figure_08_02_01.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Baseball pitching motion 2004. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Baseball_pitching_motion_2004.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work, Power, and Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B_5T7Er7RA. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.4.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
6.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339425.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
Force in the Direction of Displacement
The work done by a constant force is proportional to the fo rce applied times the displacement of the object.
Contrast displacement and distance in constant force situ ations
Work Done by a Constant Force
When a force acts on an object over a distance, it is said to have done work on the object. Physically, the work done on an object is
the change in kinetic energy that that object experienc es. We will rigorously prove both of these claims.
The term work was introduced in 1826 by the French mat hematician Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis as “weight lifted th rough a height,”
which is based on the use of early steam engines to li ft buckets of water out of flooded ore mines. The SI uni t of work is the
newton-meter or joule (J).
Units
One way to validate if an expression is correct is to perform dimensional analysis. We have claimed that work is the change in
kinetic energy of an object and that it is also equal to the force times the distance. The units of these two should agree. Kinetic
energy – and all forms of energy – have units of jo ules (J). Likewise, force has units of newtons (N) and dis tance has units of
meters (m). If the two statements are equivalent they sh ould be equivalent to one another.
Displacement versus Distance
Often times we will be asked to calculate the work done by a force on an object. As we have shown, this is propo rtional to the force
and the distance which the object is displaced, not moved. W e will investigate two examples of a box being moved to illu strate this.
Example Problems
Here are a few example problems:
(1.a) Consider a constant force of two newtons (F = 2 N) acting on a box of mass three kilograms (M = 3 kg). Calculate the work
done on the box if the box is displaced 5 meters.
(1.b) Since the box is displaced 5 meters and the for ce is 2 N, we multiply the two quantities together. The object’s mass will
dictate how fast it is accelerating under the force, and thus the time it takes to move the object from point a to point b. Regardless
of how long it takes, the object will have the same displacemen t and thus the same work done on it.
(2.a) Consider the same box (M = 3 kg) being pushed by a constant force of four newtons (F = 4 N). It begins at rest and is pushed
for five meters (d = 5m). Assuming a frictionless surface, calculate the velocity of the box at 5 meters.
(2.b) We now understand that the work is proportional to the change in kinetic energy, from this we can cal culate the final velocity.
What do we know so far? We know that the block begins a t rest, so the initial kinetic energy must be zero. Fro m this we
algebraically isolate and solve for the final velocity.
We see that the final velocity of the block is approxim ately 3.15 m/s.learning objectives

5.4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33942Force at an Angle to Displacement
A force does not have to, and rarely does, act on an object p arallel to the direction of motion.
Infer how to adjust one-dimensional motion for our three- dimensional world
The Fundamentals
Up until now, we have assumed that any force acting on an object has been parallel to the direction of mot ion. We have considered
our motion to be one dimensional, only acting along the x or y axis. To best examine and understand how nature operators in our
three-dimensional world, we will first discuss work in two d imensions in order to build our intuition.
A force does not have to, and rarely does, act on an object parallel to the direction of motion. In the p ast, we derived that;
such that the work done on an object is the force ac ting on the object multiplied by the displacement. But this is not the whole
story. This expression contains an assumed cosine term, wh ich we do not consider for forces parallel to the dir ection of motion.
“Why would we do such a thing? ” you may ask. We do t his because the two are equivalent. If the angle of the force along the
direction of motion is zero, such that the force is parallel to the direction of motion, then the cosin e term equals one and does not
change the expression. As we increase the force’s angl e with respect to the direction of motion, less and l ess work is done along the
direction that we are considering; and more and more work is being done in another, perpendicular, direction of motion. This
process continues until we are perpendicular to our or iginal direction of motion, such that the angle is 90, and the cosine term
would equal zero; resulting in zero work being done alon g our original direction. Instead, we are doing work in a nother direction!
Angle: Recall that both the force and direction of motion are vectors. When the angle is 90 degrees, the cosine term g oes to zero.
When along the same direction, they equal one.
Let’s show this explicitly and then look at this phenomena in t erms of a box moving along the x and y directions.
We have discussed that work is the integral of the f orce and the dot product respect to x. But in fact, d ot product of force and a very
small distance is equal to the two terms times cosine of th e angle between the two.. Explicitly,
A Box Being Pushed
Consider a coordinate system such that we have x as th e abscissa and y as the ordinate. More so, consider a box being pushed along
the x direction. What happens in the following three scenarios?
The box is being pushed parallel to the x direction?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 45 degrees to the x d irection?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 60 degrees to the x d irection?
The box is being pushed at an angle of 90 degrees to the x d irection?
In the first scenario, we know that all of the force i s acting on the box along the x-direction, which mea ns that work will only be
done along the x-direction. More so, a vertical per spective the box is not moving – it is unchanged in the y direction. Since thelearning objectives

5.4.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33942force is acting parallel to the direction of motion, the angle is equal to zero and our total work is simp ly the force times the
displacement in the x-direction.
In the second scenario, the box is being pushed at an angle of 45 degrees to the x-direction; and thus als o a 45 degree angle to the
y-direction. When evaluated, the cosine of 45 degree s is equal to, or approximately 0.71. This means is that 71% of the force is
contributing to the work along the x-direction. The oth er 29% is acting along the y-direction.
In the third scenario, we know that the force is acti ng at a 60 degree angle to the x-direction; and thu s also a 30 degree angle to the
y-direction. When evaluated, cosine of 60 degrees i s equal to 1/2. This means that the force is equall y acting in the x and ydirection! The work done is linear with respect to both x and y.
In the last scenario, the box is being pushed at an a ngle perpendicular to the x direction. In other word s, we are pushing the box in
the y-direction! Thus, the box’s position will be uncha nged and experience no displacement along the x-axi s. The work done in the
x direction will be zero.
Key Points
Understanding work is quintessential to understanding syste ms in terms of their energy, which is necessary for higher level
physics.
Work is equivalent to the change in kinetic energy of a s ystem.
Distance is not the same as displacement. If a box is moved 3 meters forward and then 4 meters to the left, the total
displacement is 5 meters, not 7 meters.
Work done on an object along a given direction of motio n is equal to the force times the displacement times the co sine of the
angle.
No work is done along a direction of motion if the force is pe rpendicular.
When considering force parallel to the direction of motio n, we omit the cosine term because it equals 1 which does no t change
the expression.
Key Terms
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
dot product: A scalar product.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work and Energy. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14098/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
dot product. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dot_product. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.4.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33942Sunil Kumar Singh, Scalar (Dot) Product. January 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14513/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
6.2: Work Done by a Constant Force by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339435.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
Work Done by a Variable Force
Integration is used to calculate the work done by a variab le force.
Describe approaches used to calculate work done by a variab le force
Using Integration to Calculate the Work Done by Variable Forces
A force is said to do work when it acts on a body so th at there is a displacement of the point of applicati on in the direction of the
force. Thus, a force does work when it results in movement.
The work done by a constant force of magnitude F on a point that moves a displacement in the direction of the force is simply
the product
In the case of a variable force, integration is necess ary to calculate the work done. For example, let’s consi der work done by a
spring. According to the Hooke’s law the restoring forc e (or spring force) of a perfectly elastic spring is proportional to its
extension (or compression), but opposite to the direc tion of extension (or compression). So the spring force acting upon an object
attached to a horizontal spring is given by:
that is proportional to its displacement (extension or compression) in the x direction from the spring’s equilibrium position, but its
direction is opposite to the x direction. For a varia ble force, one must add all the infinitesimally smal l contributions to the work
done during infinitesimally small time intervals dt (or equivalently, in infinitely small length interv als dx=v dt). In other words, an
integral must be evaluated:
This is the work done by a spring exerting a variable force on a mass moving from position x to x (from t ime 0 to time t). The
work done is positive if the applied force is in the same direction as the direction of motion; so the wo rk done by the object on
spring from time 0 to time t, is:
in this relation is the force acted upon spring by the object. and are in fact action- reaction pairs; and is equal to the
elastic potential energy stored in spring.
Using Integration to Calculate the Work Done by Constant Forces
The same integration approach can be also applied t o the work done by a constant force. This suggests th at integrating the product
of force and distance is the general way of determining th e work done by a force on a moving body.
Consider the situation of a gas sealed in a piston, the study of which is important in Thermodynamics. In this case, the Pressure
(Pressure =Force/Area) is constant and can be taken out of the integral:
Another example is the work done by gravity (a constan t force) on a free-falling object (we assign the y-ax is to vertical motion, in
this case):learning objectives
x
o

5.4.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33943Notice that the result is the same as we would have obtained by simply evaluating the produc t of force and distance.
Units Used for Work
The SI unit of work is the joule (J), which is defined as the work done by a force of one newton moving an o bject through a
distance of one meter.
Non-SI units of work include the erg, the foot-pound, th e foot-pound, the kilowatt hour, the liter-atmosphere, and the horsepowerhour.
Key Points
The work done by a constant force of magnitude F on a poin t that moves a displacement d in the direction of the fo rce is the
product:.
Integration approach can be used both to calculate work done by a variable force and work done by a constant for ce.
The SI unit of work is the joule; non- SI units of work includ e the erg, the foot-pound, the foot-poundal, the kilowatt hour, the
litre-atmosphere, and the horsepower-hour.
Key Terms
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body, which is measured in a unit dimensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Work (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
6.3: Work Done by a Variable Force by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339445.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem
Kinetic Energy and Work-Energy Theorem
The work-energy theorem states that the work done by all forces acting on a particle equals the change in the particle’s kinetic
energy.
Outline the derivation of the work-energy theorem
The Work-Energy Theorem
The principle of work and kinetic energy (also known as the work-energy theorem) states that the work done by the sum of all
forces acting on a particle equals the change in the kinetic energy of the particle. This definition can be extended to rigid bodies by
defining the work of the torque and rotational kinetic ener gy.
Kinetic Energy: A force does work on the block. The kinetic energy of the b lock increases as a result by the amount of work. This
relationship is generalized in the work-energy theorem.
The work W done by the net force on a particle equals the change i n the particle’s kinetic energy K E:
where v and v are the speeds of the particle before and after the appli cation of force, and m is the particle’s mass.
Derivation
For the sake of simplicity, we will consider the case in which the resultant force F is constant in both magnitude and direction and
is parallel to the velocity of the particle. The par ticle is moving with constant acceleration a along a straight line. The relationship
between the net force and the acceleration is given by the equation F = ma (Newton’s second law), and the particle’s displacemen t
d, can be determined from the equation:
obtaining,
The work of the net force is calculated as the produc t of its magnitude (F=ma) and the particle’s displace ment. Substituting the
above equations yields:
Key Points
The work W done by the net force on a particle equals the change i n the particle’s kinetic energy K E:
The work-energy theorem can be derived from Newton’s second law.
Work transfers energy from one place to another or one form to another. In more general systems than the particle sys tem
mentioned here, work can change the potential energy of a mechanical device, the heat energy in a thermal system, or the
electrical energy in an electrical device.learning objectives
i f

5.4.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33944Key Terms
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Work energy theorem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_energy_theorem%23Workenergy_principle. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work - Kinetic Energy Theorem. February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14095/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
6.4: Work-Energy Theorem by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339455.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Conservative and Nonconservative Forces
Conservative force—a force with the property that th e work done in moving a particle between two points is independent of the
path it takes.
Describe properties of conservative and nonconservative f orces
A conservative force is a force with the property that the work done in moving a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken. Equivalently, if a particle travels in a closed loop, the net work done (the sum of the force acting along the path
multiplied by the distance travelled) by a conservative f orce is zero.
A conservative force is dependent only on the posit ion of the object. If a force is conservative, it is po ssible to assign a numerical
value for the potential at any point. When an object moves from one location to another, the force chang es the potential energy of
the object by an amount that does not depend on the path taken. Gravity and spring forces are examples of conservati ve forces.
If a force is not conservative, then defining a scalar potential is not possible, b ecause taking different paths would lead to
conflicting potential differences between the start and end points. Nonconservative forces transfer energy from the object in motion
(just like conservative force), but they do not tra nsfer this energy back to the potential energy of the system to regain it du ring
reverse motion. Instead, they transfer the energy fro m the system in an energy form which can not be used by the force to transfer it
back to the object in motion. Friction is one such noncon servative force.
Path Independence of Conservative Force
Work done by the gravity in a closed path motion is zero. We can extend this observation to other conser vative force systems as
well. We imagine a closed path motion. We imagine this closed path motion be divided in two motions between points A and B as
diagramed in Fig 1. Starting from point A to point B a nd then ending at point A via two work paths named 1 and 2 in the figure.
The total work by the conservative force for the round t rip is zero:
Motion Along Different Paths: Motion along different paths. For a conservative force, work d one via different path is the same.
Let us now change the path for motion from A to B by another path, shown as path 3. Again, the total work by the conservative
force for the round trip via new route is zero:.
Comparing two equations,. This is true for an arbitra ry path. Therefore, work done for motion from A to B b y
conservative force along any paths are equal.
What is Potential Energy?
Potential energy is the energy difference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a reference position.
Relate the potential energy and the work
Potential energy is often associated with restoring fo rces such as a spring or the force of gravity. The a ction of stretching the spring
or lifting the mass of an object is performed by an external force that works against the force field of the potential. This work is
stored in the force field as potential energy. If t he external force is removed the force field acts o n the body to perform the work aslearning objectives
learning objectives

5.4.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945it moves the body back to its initial position, reduci ng the stretch of the spring or causing the body to fall. The more formal
definition is that potential energy is the energy di fference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a
reference position.
Potential Energy in a Bow and Arrow: In the case of a bow and arrow, the energy is converted from the potential energy in the
archer’s arm to the potential energy in the bent lim bs of the bow when the string is drawn back. When the string is released, the
potential energy in the bow limbs is transferred back throu gh the string to become kinetic energy in the arrow as it takes flight.
If the work for an applied force is independent of th e path, then the work done by the force is evaluated a t the start and end of the
trajectory of the point of application. This means that there is a function U(x), called a “potential,” that can be evaluated at th e two
points x(t = t) and x(t) to obtain the work over any trajectory between these two points. It is tradition to define this function with a
negative sign so that positive work is represented as a re duction in the potential:
Examples of Potential Energy
There are various types of potential energy, each as sociated with a particular type of force. More speci fically, every conservative
force gives rise to potential energy. For example, th e work of an elastic force is called elastic potentia l energy; work done by the
gravitational force is called gravitational potentia l energy; and work done by the Coulomb force is called elec tric potential energy.
Gravity
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associated with gravitational force, as work is required to move objects against gravity.
Generate an equation that can be used to express the grav itational potential energy near the earth
Gravitational energy is the potential energy associate d with gravitational force (a conservative force), a s work is required to elevate
objects against Earth’s gravity. The potential energ y due to elevated positions is called gravitational p otential energy, evidenced, for
example, by water held in an elevated reservoir or b ehind a dam (as an example, shows Hoover Dam). If an obje ct falls from one1 2
learning objectives

5.4.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945point to another point inside a gravitational field, the force of gravity will do positive work on the obj ect, and the gravitational
potential energy will decrease by the same amount.
Hoover Dam: Hoover dam uses the stored gravitational potential energy t o generate electricity.
Potential Near Earth
Gravitational potential energy near the Earth can be expressed with respect to the height from the surface o f the Earth. (The surface
will be the zero point of the potential energy.) We ca n express the potential energy (gravitational potenti al energy) as:
where PE = potential energy measured in joules (J), m = mass of the object (measured in kg), and h = perpen dicular height from the
reference point (measured in m); g = gravitational acceleration (9.8m/s). Near the surface of the Earth, g can be considered
constant.
General Formula
However, over large variations in distance, the approxi mation that g is constant is no longer valid. Instea d, we must use calculus
and the general mathematical definition of work to d etermine gravitational potential energy. For the comp utation of the potential
energy we can integrate the gravitational force, whos e magnitude is given by Newton’s law of gravitation (wi th respect to the
distance r between the two bodies). Using that definition, the gravitational potential energy of a system of masses m and M at a
distance r using gravitational constant G is:
where K is the constant of integration. Choosing the conve ntion that K=0 makes calculations simpler, albeit at the cost of making U
negative. For this choice, the potential at infinity is def ined as 0.
Springs
When a spring is stretched/compressed from its equilibr ium position by x, its potential energy is give as.2

5.4.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945Explain how potential energy is stored in springs
Spring force is conservative force, given by the Hooke ’s law:, where k is spring constant, measured experiment ally for a
particular spring and x is the displacement. We woul d like to obtain an expression for the work done to the spring. From the
conservation of mechanical energy (Check our Atom on “Conservation of Mechanical Energy), the work should b e equal to the
potential energy stored in spring. The displacement x is usually measured from the position of “neutral le ngth” or “relaxed length”
– the length of spring corresponding to situation whe n spring is neither stretched nor compressed. We shall identify this position as
the origin of coordinate reference (x=0).
Hooke’s Law: Plot of applied force F vs. elongation X for a helical sprin g according to Hooke’s law (solid line) and what the
actual plot might look like (dashed line). Red is used ext ension, blue for compression. At bottom, schematic pictur es of spring
states corresponding to some points of the plot; the middle one is in the relaxed state (no force applied).
Let and be the initial and final positions of the block attached to the string. As the block slowly moves, we do
work W on the spring:. When we stretch the spring. We have to apply force in the same direction as the
displacement. (Technically, work is given as the inner product of the two vectors: force and displacement.). Therefore,
the overall sign in the integral is +, not -.
If the block is gently released from the stretched pos ition (\mathrm{x = x_f}\), the stored potential energ y in the spring will start to
be converted to the kinetic energy of the block, an d vice versa. Neglecting frictional forces, Mechanical e nergy conservation
demands that, at any point during its motion,
From the energy conservation, we can estimate that, by the time the block reaches x=0 position, its speed will be.
The block will keep oscillating between x = -x and x.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy
Conservation of mechanical energy states that the mechani cal energy of an isolated system remains constant without friction.
Formulate the principle of the conservation of the mecha nical energylearning objectives
f f
learning objectives

5.4.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945Conservation of mechanical energy states that the mec hanical energy of an isolated system remains constan t in time, as long as the
system is free of all frictional forces. In any real situation, frictional forces and other non-conserva tive forces are always present,
but in many cases their effects on the system are so sma ll that the principle of conservation of mechanical energy can be used as a
fair approximation. An example of a such a system is sh own in. Though energy cannot be created nor destroyed in an isolated
system, it can be internally converted to any other form o f energy.
A Mechanical System: An example of a mechanical system: A satellite is orbiti ng the Earth only influenced by the conservative
gravitational force and the mechanical energy is there fore conserved. This acceleration is represented by a gr een acceleration vector
and the velocity is represented by a red velocity vector.
Derivation
Let us consider what form the work -energy theorem ta kes when only conservative forces are involved (lead ing us to the
conservation of energy principle). The work-energy t heorem states that the net work done by all forces ac ting on a system equals its
change in kinetic energy (KE). In equation form, this is:
If only conservative forces act, then, where W is the tot al work done by all conservative forces. Thus,.
Now, if the conservative force, such as the gravitation al force or a spring force, does work, the system loses p otential energy (PE).
That is,. Therefore,
This equation means that the total kinetic and poten tial energy is constant for any process involving onl y conservative forces. That
is,
where i and f denote initial and final values. This equation is a form of the work-energy theorem for co nservative forces; it is
known as the conservation of mechanical energy principle.
Remember that the law applies to the extent that all the forces are conservative, so that friction is negl igible. The total kinetic plus
potential energy of a system is defined to be its m echanical energy (). In a system that experiences onl y conservative
forces, there is a potential energy associated with eac h force, and the energy only changes form between KE a nd various types of
PE (with the total energy remaining constant).c

5.4.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945
Conservation of Mechanical Energy Worked ExamplConservation of Mechanical Energy Worked Exampl
Conservation of Mechanical Energy: Worked example.
Problem Solving With the Conservation of Energy
To solve a conservation of energy problem determine the system of interest, apply law of conservation of e nergy, and solve for the
unknown.
Identify steps necessary to solve a conservation of ene rgy problem
Problem-solving Strategy
You should follow a series of steps whenever you are prob lem solving:
Step One
Determine the system of interest and identify what in formation is given and what quantity is to be calcula ted. For example, let’s
assume you have the problem with car on a roller coa ster. You know that the cars of a roller coaster reac h their maximum kinetic
energy (KEKE) when at the bottom of their path. When t hey start rising, the kinetic energy begins to be co nverted to gravitational
potential energy (PEgPEg). The sum of kinetic and pot ential energy in the system should remain constant, if losses to friction are
ignored.
learning objectives

5.4.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945
Determining Energy: The cars of a roller coaster reach their maximum kinetic energy when at the bottom of their path. When they
start rising, the kinetic energy begins to be converted t o gravitational potential energy. The sum of kinetic and potential energy in
the system remains constant, ignoring losses to frictio n.
Step Two
Examine all the forces involved and determine whethe r you know or are given the potential energy from th e work done by the
forces. Then use step three or step four.
Step Three
If you know the potential energies () for the forces that enter into the problem, then forces are all con servative, and you can
apply conservation of mechanical energy simply in te rms of potential and kinetic energy. The equation ex pressing conservation of
energy is:
Step Four
If you know the potential energy for only some of the forces, then the conservation of energy law in its most general form must be
used:
where stand for all other energies, and stands for wor k done by non-conservative forces. In most problems, one or more of
the terms is zero, simplifying its solution. Do not calculate, the work done by conservative forces; it i s already incorporated in
the terms.
Step Five
You have already identified the types of work and ene rgy involved (in step two). Before solving for the un known, eliminate terms
wherever possible to simplify the algebra. For example, choose height at either the initial or final point —this will allow to set
at zero. Then solve for the unknown in the customary manne r.
Step Six
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Once you h ave solved a problem, reexamine the forms of work and energy to see if you
have set up the conservation of energy equation corr ectly. For example, work done against friction should be negative, potential
energy at the bottom of a hill should be less than that a t the top, and so on.

5.4.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945
Joy phy sics probs 05- Energy conservationJoy phy sics probs 05- Energy conservation
Energy conservation: Part of a series of videos on physics problem-solving. The problems are taken from “The Joy of Physics. ”
This one deals with energy conservation. The viewer is urged t o pause the video at the problem statement and work the pr oblem
before watching the rest of the video.
Problem Solving with Dissipative Forces
In the presence of dissipative forces, total mechani cal energy changes by exactly the amount of work done by nonconservative
forces (W).
Express the energy conservation relationship that can be app lied to solve problems with dissipative forces
INTRODUCTION
We have seen a problem-solving strategy with the con servation of energy in the previous section. Here we wi ll adopt the strategy
for problems with dissipative forces. Since the work done by nonconservative (or dissipative) forces will irre versibly alter the
energy of the system, the total mechanical energy (KE + PE) changes by exactly the amount of work done by n onconservative
forces (W). Therefore, we obtain, where KE and PE repre sent kinetic and potential energies
respectively. Therefore, using the new energy conserva tion relationship, we can apply the same problem-solvi ng strategy as with
the case of conservative forces.
c
learning objectives
c

5.4.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945EXAMPLE
Consider the situation shown in, where a baseball play er slides to a stop on level ground. Using energy consid erations, calculate
the distance the 65.0-kg baseball player slides, given that his initial speed is 6.00 m/s and the force of friction against him is a
constant 450 N.
Fig 1: The baseball player slides to a stop in a distance d. In the process, friction removes the player’s kinetic ener gy by doing an
amount of work fd equal to the initial kinetic energy.
Strategy: Friction stops the player by converting his kinetic energy into other forms, including thermal en ergy. In terms of the
work-energy theorem, the work done by friction (f), whi ch is negative, is added to the initial kinetic ener gy to reduce it to zero. The
work done by friction is negative, because f is in th e opposite direction of the motion (that is,, and s o). Thus
. The equation simplifies to.
Solution: Solving the previous equation for d and subs tituting known values yields, we get d = 2.60 m. The m ost important point of
this example is that the amount of nonconservative work equ als the change in mechanical energy.
Key Points
If a particle travels in a closed loop, the net work do ne (the sum of the force acting along the path multiplie d by the distance
travelled) by a conservative force is zero.
Conservative force is dependent only on the position of the object. If a force is conservative, it is possible to a ssign a numerical
value for the potential at any point.
Nonconservative force transfer the energy from the system i n an energy form which can not be used by the force to trans fer
back to the object in motion.
If the work for an applied force is independent of the pat h, then the work done by the force is evaluated at the star t and end of
the trajectory of the point of application. This means t hat there is a function U(x), called a ” potential “.
It is tradition to define the potential function with a negative sign so that positive work is represented as a redu ction in the
potential.
Every conservative force gives rise to potential energy. Examples are elastic potential energy, gravitational po tential energy, and
electric potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy near the earth can be expres sed with respect to the height from the surface of the Eart h as PE =
mgh. g = gravitational acceleration (9.8m/s). Near the sur face of the Earth, g can be considered constant.
Over large variations in distance, the approximation th at g is constant is no longer valid and a general formula s hould be used
for the potential. It is given as:.
Choosing the convention that the constant of integration K=0 assumes that the potential at infinity is defined to b e 0.
The displacement of spring x is usually measured from the position of “neutral length ” or “relaxed length”. Ofte n, it is most
convenient to identify this position as the origin of co ordinate reference (x=0).
If the block is gently released from the stretched positio n (), energy conservation tells us that
If the block is released from the stretched position (), by the time the block reaches x=0 position, its speed will be
. The block will keep oscillating between and.
The conservation of mechanical energy can be written as “ ”.2

5.4.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945Though energy cannot be created nor destroyed in an iso lated system, it can be internally converted to any other form of energy.
In a system that experiences only conservative forces, there is a potential energy associated with each force, and the energy only
changes form between KE and various types of PE, with the tot al energy remaining constant.
If you know the potential energies for the forces that e nter into the problem, then forces are all conservative, an d you can apply
conservation of mechanical energy simply in terms of po tential and kinetic energy. The equation expressing c onservation of
energy is:.
If you know the potential energy for only some of the forc es, then the conservation of energy law in its most general f orm must
be used:, where OE stands for all other energies.
Once you have solved a problem, always check the answer to see if it is reasonable.
Using the new energy conservation relationship
, we can apply the same problem-solving strategy as with t he case of conservative forces.
The most important point is that the amount of nonconser vative work equals the change in mechanical energy.
The work done by nonconservative (or dissipative) forces will irreversibly dissipated in the system.
Key Terms
potential: A curve describing the situation where the difference in the potential energies of an object in two different po sitions
depends only on those positions.
Coulomb force: the electrostatic force between two charges, as described b y Coulomb’s law
potential: A curve describing the situation where the difference in the potential energies of an object in two different po sitions
depends only on those positions.
conservative force: A force with the property that the work done in mov ing a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken.
Hooke’s law: the principle that the stress applied to a solid is d irectly proportional to the strain produced. This law d escribes the
behavior of springs and solids stressed within their elas tic limit.
conservation: A particular measurable property of an isolated physic al system does not change as the system evolves.
isolated system: A system that does not interact with its surroundings, t hat is, its total energy and mass stay constant.
frictional force: Frictional force is the force resisting the relative mot ion of solid surfaces, fluid layers, and material elemen ts
sliding against each other.
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
conservative force: A force with the property that the work done in mov ing a particle between two points is independent of the
path taken.
dissipative force: A force resulting in dissipation, a process in which ener gy (internal, bulk flow kinetic, or system potential) is
transformed from some initial form to some irreversible fina l form.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
curl. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/curl. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.4.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
gradient. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/gradient. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
potential. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Coulomb force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Coulomb_force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Gravity and Mechanica l Energy: Potential Energy. September 17, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m40047/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Work by Spring Force. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14102/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hooke's law. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Hooke's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Conservative Forces and Potential Energy. Sep tember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42149/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
conservation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frictional force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/frictional%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.4.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945isolated system. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isolated_system. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Conservation of Energy. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42151/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinetic_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
conservative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/conservative%20force. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution
HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conservation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIzC5TBIJNM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Wooden_roller _coaster_txgi.jpg/486pxWooden_roller_coaster_txgi.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Nonconservative Forces. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
dissipative force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dissipative%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Conservative Force. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14104/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Dam. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dam. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.4.5.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33945HookesLawForSpring-English. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:HookesLawForSpringEnglish.png. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_energy%23Conservation_and_interconv ersion_of_energy. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Conservation of Mechanical Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n637fBmj9Ko. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conservation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIzC5TBIJNM. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Wooden_roller _coaster_txgi.jpg/486pxWooden_roller_coaster_txgi.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Nonconservative Forces. February 3, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Boundless.
6.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339465.4.6: Power
What is Power?
In physics, power is the rate of doing work—the amount of en ergy consumed per unit time.
Relate power to the transfer, use, and transformation of dif ferent types of energy
In physics, power is the rate of doing work. It is the a mount of energy consumed per unit time. The unit of power is the joule per
second (J/s), known as the watt (in honor of James Watt, the eighteenth-century developer of the steam engin e). For example, the
rate at which a lightbulb transforms electrical energy into heat and light is measured in watts (W)—the more wattage, the more
power, or equivalently the more electrical energy is used p er unit time.
High School Phy sics - Pow erHigh School Phy sics - Pow er
Power: A brief overview of power in an algebra-based physics c ourse.learning objectives

5.4.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33946Energy transfer can be used to do work, so power is als o the rate at which this work is performed. The same a mount of work is
done when carrying a load up a flight of stairs wheth er the person carrying it walks or runs, but more powe r is expended during the
running because the work is done in a shorter amount of time. The output power of an electric motor is the product of the torque the
motor generates and the angular velocity of its out put shaft. The power expended to move a vehicle is th e product of the traction
force of the wheels and the velocity of the vehicle.
Examples of power are limited only by the imagination, because there are as many types as there are forms of work and energy.
Sunlight reaching Earth’s surface carries a maximum power of about 1.3 kilowatts per square meter (kW/m). A tiny fraction of this
is retained by Earth over the long term. Our consump tion rate of fossil fuels is far greater than the r ate at which they are stored, so
it is inevitable that they will be depleted. Power impl ies that energy is transferred, perhaps changing form. I t is never possible to
change one form completely into another without losi ng some of it as thermal energy. For example, a 60-W in candescent bulb
converts only 5 W of electrical power to light, with 5 5 W dissipating into thermal energy. Furthermore, the typical electric power
plant converts only 35 to 40 percent of its fuel in to electricity. The remainder becomes a huge amount of thermal energy that must
be dispersed as heat transfer, as rapidly as it is cr eated. A coal-fired power plant may produce 1,000 mega watts; 1 megawatt (MW)
is 106 W of electric power. But the power plant consum es chemical energy at a rate of about 2,500 MW, creati ng heat transfer to
the surroundings at a rate of 1,500 MW.
Coal-fired Power Plant: Tremendous amounts of electric power are generated by coal-fired power plants such as this one in
China, but an even larger amount of power goes into h eat transfer to the surroundings. The large cooling towers here are needed to
transfer heat as rapidly as it is produced. The transfe r of heat is not unique to coal plants but is an unav oidable consequence of
generating electric power from any fuel—nuclear, coal, o il, natural gas, or the like.
Humans: Work, Energy, and Power
The human body converts energy stored in food into work, thermal energy, and/or chemical energy that is stored i n fatty tissue.
Identify what factors play a role in basal metabolic rate (B MR)
Humans: Work, Energy, and Power
Our own bodies, like all living organisms, are energy conv ersion machines. Conservation of energy implies that t he chemical
energy stored in food is converted into work, thermal energy, or stored as chemical energy in fatty tissue, as shown in. Energy
consumed by humans is converted to work, thermal ene rgy, and stored fat. By far the largest fraction goes to thermal energy,
although the fraction varies depending on the type of physical activity. The fraction going into each form depends both on how
much we eat and on our level of physical activity. I f we eat more than is needed to do work and stay warm, the remainder goes into
body fat.2
learning objectives

5.4.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33946
Energy Conversion in Humans: Energy consumed by humans is converted to work, thermal energy, and stored fat. By far the
largest fraction goes to thermal energy, although the f raction varies depending on the type of physical activity.
Functions that Require Energy
All bodily functions, from thinking to lifting weight s, require energy. The many small muscle actions accom panying all quiet
activity, from sleeping to head scratching, ultimately become thermal energy, as do less visible muscle act ions by the heart, lungs,
and digestive tract. Shivering, in fact, is an involunt ary response to low body temperature that pits muscles against one another to
produce thermal energy in the body (and do no work). The kidneys and liver consume a surprising amount of energy, but the
biggest surprise of all it that a full 25% of all en ergy consumed by the body is used to maintain electr ical potentials in all living
cells. (Nerve cells use this electrical potential in n erve impulses.) This bioelectrical energy ultimately becomes mostly thermal
energy, but some is utilized to power chemical processes such a s in the kidneys and liver, and in fat production.
Basal Metabolic Rate
The rate at which the body uses food energy to susta in life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rate. The total
energy conversion rate of a person at rest is called the basal metabolic rate (BMR) and is divided among v arious systems in the
body. The largest fraction goes to the liver and spl een, with the brain coming next. Of course, during vigor ous exercise, the energy
consumption of the skeletal muscles and heart increase markedly. About 75% of the calories burned in a day go into these basic
functions. The BMR is a function of age, gender, tota l body weight, and amount of muscle mass (which burns more calories than
body fat). Athletes have a greater BMR due to this last factor.
Useful Work
Work done by a person is sometimes called useful work, which is work done on the outside world, such as lifti ng weights. Useful
work requires a force exerted through a distance on t he outside world, and so it excludes internal work, such as that done by the
heart when pumping blood. Useful work does include that done in climbing stairs or accelerating to a full r un, because these are
accomplished by exerting forces on the outside world. Forces exerted by the body are nonconservative, so that they can change the
mechanical energy (KE+PE) of the system worked upon, and th is is often the goal.
For example, what is the power output for a 60.0-kg wom an who runs up a 3.00 m high flight of stairs in 3.50 s, starting from rest
but having a final speed of 2.00 m/s?.

5.4.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33946
Woman Running Up Stairs: When this woman runs upstairs starting from rest, she conve rts the chemical energy originally from
food into kinetic energy and gravitational potential en ergy. Her power output depends on how fast she does this.
Her power output depends on how fast she does this. The work going into mechanical energy is W= KE + PE. At the bottom of the
stairs, we take both KE and PE as initially zero; thus,
where h is the vertical height of the stairs. Because all terms are given, we can calculate W and then di vide it by time to get power.
Substituting the expression for W into the definition of power given in the previous equation, yields
Entering known values yields
The woman does 1764 J of work to move up the stairs com pared with only 120 J to increase her kinetic energy; thus, most of her
power output is required for climbing rather than accele rating.
Energy consumption is directly proportional to oxyge n consumption because the digestive process is basica lly one of oxidizing
food. We can measure the energy people use during var ious activities by measuring their oxygen use. Approxi mately 20 kJ of
energy are produced for each liter of oxygen consumed, i ndependent of the type of food.
Key Points
Power implies that energy is transferred, perhaps changi ng form.
Energy transfer can be used to do work, so power is also the rate at which this work is performed.
The unit of power is the joule per second (J/s), known as the watt.
The rate at which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rat e, and the
corresponding rate when at rest is called the basal metabol ic rate (BMR).
The energy included in the basal metabolic rate is divi ded among various systems in the body, with the largest fra ction going to
the liver and spleen, and the brain coming next.
About 75% of food calories are used to sustain basic body fun ctions included in the basal metabolic rate.
Work done by a person is sometimes called useful work, wh ich is work done on the outside world, such as lifting weight s.g

5.4.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33946The energy consumption of people during various activiti es can be determined by measuring their oxygen use, because the
digestive process is basically one of oxidizing food.
Key Terms
power: A measure of the rate of doing work or transferring ene rgy.
watt: In the International System of Units, the derived unit of power; the power of a system in which one joule of energy i s
transferred per second.
basal metabolic rate: The amount of energy expended while at rest in a neutr ally temperate environment, in the post-absorptive
state.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Power (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Power (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
watt. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/watt. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Power. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK0FUxGKsG4. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. September 17, 201 3.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Human power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_power. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
basal metabolic rate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basal_metabolic_rate. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.4.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33946Power. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK0FUxGKsG4. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 4, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42153/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Atom: Energy Qua ntisation and Electron Configuration. November 4, 2012.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42152/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.4.6: Power is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
6.6: Power by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.4.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339475.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use
World Energy Use
The most prominent sources of energy used in the world are non-renewable (i.e., unsustainable).
Explain why renewable energy sources must be found and util ized
Energy Use
World energy consumption is the total amount of ene rgy used by all humans on the planet (measured on a per-year basis). This
measurement is the sum of all energy sources (and pu rposes) in use. Who measures this? Several organizatio ns publish this data,
including the International Energy Agency (IEA), the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), and the Eur opean
Environment Agency. This data is useful because evalua ting this information to discover trends might yield energy issues not
currently being addressed, thereby encouraging the search for solutions. The IEA established a goal of limiting global warming to 2
degrees Celsius, but this goal is becoming more diffic ult to reach each year that the necessary action is not taken. In global energy
use, fossil fuels make up a substantial portion. In 2 011 they received over $500 billion in subsidies—six times more than that
received by renewable energy sources.
Implementing new practices that will utilize differen t, renewable energy sources is important because hav ing access to energy is
important—it maintains our quality of life. Fossil fue ls, however, are not sustainable at the rate they are cu rrently used. About 40%
of the world’s energy comes from oil, but oil prices are dependent on uncertain factors (such as availab ility, politics, and world
events). The United States alone uses 24% of the world’s o il per year, yet it makes up only 4.5% of the world’s popula tion! In 2008,
total worldwide energy consumption was 474 exajoules (474×10 J=132,000 TWh)—equivalent to an average power usage of 15
terawatts (1.504×10 W). Potential renewable energy sour ces include: solar energy at 1600 EJ (444,000 TWh), win d power at 600
EJ (167,000 TWh), geothermal energy at 500 EJ (139,000 TWh), biomass at 250 EJ (70,000 TWh), hydropower at 50 EJ (14,000
TWh) and ocean energy at 1 EJ (280 TWh).
Types of Energy
shows a pie chart of world energy usage by category—bo th renewable and nonrenewable sources. Renewable energy comes from
sources with an unlimited supply. This includes energy from water, wind, the sun, and biomass. In the US, only 10 % of energy
comes from renewable sources (mostly hydroelectric e nergy). Nonrenewable sources makes up 85% of worldwide ene rgy usage—
from sources that eventually will be depleted, such as oil, natural gases and coal.
World Energy Use: This chart shows that the primary worldwide energy source s nonrenewable. If new practices are not put in
place now, this model will not be sustainable.
Energy Needs
In the last 50 years, the global energy demand has tr ipled due to the number of developing countries and innovations in technology.
It is projected to triple again over the next 30 ye ars. In Europe, many in such developing areas recogn ize that the need for
renewable energy sources, as the present course of ene rgy usage cannot be sustained indefinitely. While rene wable energy
development makes up a only small percentage of the field, strides are being made in natural energy, particularly win d energy.learning objectives

5.4.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33947For example, by the year 2020 Germany plans to meet 10 % of their total energy usage and 20% of its electri city usage with
renewable resources. While some countries are making im provements in this field, coal usage is still a huge problem. In China, two
thirds of the energy used each year is from commerci al coal energy. India imports 50% of its oil, and 70% of its electricity is
produced from coal, which is highly polluting.
Key Points
The energy consumption increases with the increasing numb er of developing areas. In order for this development to con tinue,
while maintaining quality of life, new and renewable energ y sources must be found and utilized.
Renewable energy comes from sources that will never deplet e, no matter how much is used. An example of this is wind en ergy,
which had been growing in popularity in countries like In dia and Germany.
Nonrenewable energy makes up 85% the energy used on earth —the most popular form of energy being oil.
Key Terms
fossil fuel: Any fuel derived from hydrocarbon deposits such as coal, pe troleum, natural gas and, to some extent, peat; these
fuels are irreplaceable, and their burning generates th e greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
renewable energy: Energy that can be replenished at the same rate as it is us ed.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, World Energy Use. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42154/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
World energy consumption. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/World_energy_consumption.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
renewable energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/renewable_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fossil fuel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fossil_fuel. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, World Energy Use. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42154/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
6.7: CASE STUDY: World Energy Use has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicati ons-spring-2009.

5.4.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339485.4.8: Further Topics
Compare the different forms of energy interrelate to one another
Other Forms of Energy
Thermal, chemical, electric, radiant, nuclear, magn etic, elastic, sound, mechanical, luminous, and mass are forms that energy can
exist in. Energy can come in a variety of forms. These for ms include:
Thermal Energy: This is energy associated with the micr oscopic random motion of particles in the media under c onsideration.
An example of something that stores thermal energy is war m bath water.
Chemical Energy: This is energy due to the way that atoms ar e arranged in molecules and various other collections of mat ter.
An example of something that stores chemical energy is f ood. When your body digests and metabolizes food it ut ilizes its
chemical energy.
Electric Energy: This is energy that is from electrical potential energy, a result of Coulombic forces. Electrica l potential energy
is associated with the way that point charges in a system are a rranged. An example of something that stores electric ener gy is a
capacitor. A capacitor collects positive charge on one p late and negative charge on the other plate. Energy is th us stored in the
resulting electrostatic field.
Radiant Energy: This is any kind of electromagnetic radi ation (see key term). An example of an electromagnetic wave i s light.
Nuclear Energy: This type of energy is liberated during the nuclear reactions of fusion and fission. Examples of th ings that
utilize nuclear energy include nuclear power plants and nuclear weapons.
Magnetic Energy: Technically magnetic energy is electri c energy; the two are related by Maxwell’s equations. An examp le of
something that stores magnetic energy is a superconduc ting magnet used in an MRI.
Elastic Energy: This is potential mechanical energy th at is stored in the configuration of a material or phys ical system as work is
performed to distort its volume or shape. An example of som ething that stores elastic energy is a stretched rubber band.
Sound Energy: This is energy that is associated with the vibration or disturbance of matter. An example of somet hing that
creates sound energy is your voice box (larynx).
Mechanical Energy: This is energy that is associated with th e motion and position of an object. It is the sum of all of the kinetic
and potential energy that the object has. An example of so mething that utilizes mechanical energy is a pendulum.
Luminous Energy: This is energy that can be seen becaus e it is visible light. An example of luminous energy is ligh t from a
flashlight.
Mass: Can be converted to energy via:. For example, mass is co nverted into energy when a nuclear bomb explodes.learning objectives

5.4.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948
Atomic bomb explosion: The mushroom cloud of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, Ja pan
In each of the aforementioned forms, energy exists as either kinetic energy, potential energy, or a comb ination of both. It is
important to note that the above list is not necess arily complete as we may discover new forms of energy in the future such as “dark
energy. ” Also, each of the forms that energy can ta ke on (as listed above) are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example,
luminous energy is radiant energy.
High School Phy sics - T y pes of EnergyHigh School Phy sics - T y pes of Energy

5.4.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948Types of Energy: A brief overview of energy, kinetic energy, gravita tional potential energy, and the work-energy theorem for
algebra-based physics students.
Energy Transformations
Energy transformation occurs when energy is changed from one form to another, and is a consequence of th e first law of
thermodynamics.
Summarize the consequence of the first law of thermodynam ics on the total energy of a system
Energy transformation occurs when energy is changed from one form to another. It is a consequence of the first law of
thermodynamics that the total energy of a given syst em can only be changed when energy is added or subtra cted from the system.
Often it appears that energy has been lost from a syst em when it simply has been transformed. For example, a n internal combustion
engine converts the potential chemical energy in ga soline and oxygen into heat energy. This heat energy is then converted to kinetic
energy, which is then used to propel the vehicle tha t is utilizing the engine. The technical term for a d evice that converts energy
from one form to another is a transducer.
Energy Transformation: These figures illustrate the concepts of energy loss an d useful energy output.
When analyzing energy transformations, it is important to consider the efficiency of conversion. The effic iency of conversions
describes the ratio between the useful output and in put of an energy conversion machine. Some energy tra nsformations can occur
with an efficiency of essentially 100%. For example, im agine a pendulum in a vacuum. As illustrated in, when t he pendulum’s
learning objectives

5.4.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948mass reaches its maximum height, all if its energy ex ists in the form of potential energy. However, when the pendulum is at its
lowest point, all of its energy exists in the form of kineti c energy.
Pendulum: This animation shows the velocity and acceleration vect ors for a pendulum. One may note that at the maximum heigh t
of the pendulum’s mass, the velocity is zero. This correspo nds to zero kinetic energy and thus all of the energy of the pendulum is
in the form of potential energy. When the pendulum’s ma ss is at its lowest point, all of its energy is in the form of ki netic energy
and we see its velocity vector has a maximum magnitude he re.
Other energy transformations occur with a much lower e fficiency of conversion. For example, the theoretical limit of the energy
efficiency of a wind turbine (converting the kinetic energy of the wind to mechanical energy) is 59%. The process of
photosynthesis is able to transform the light energy o f the sun into chemical energy that can be used by a plant with an efficiency of
conversion of a mere 6%.
Potential Energy Curves and Equipotentials
A potential energy curve plots potential energy as a fu nction of position; equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential energy.
Derive the potential of a point charge
A potential energy curve plots the potential energy of an object as a function of that object’s position. For example, see. The system
under consideration is a closed system, so the tota l energy of the system remains constant. This means that the kinetic and potential
energy always have to sum to be the same value. We obs erve that the potential energy increases as the kinet ic energy decreases and
vice versa. The utility of a potential energy curve is that we can quickly determine the potential ener gy of the object in question at a
given position.
Potential Energy Curve: This figure illustrates the potential energy of a part icle as a function of position. The kinetic energy is
also shown and is abbreviated K.learning objectives

5.4.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948Equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential energy. In, if you were to draw a straight horizontal line through the center, that
would be an equipotential line. In and, if you travel alon g an equipotential line, the electric potential will be co nstant.
Equipotential Lines for Two Equal and Opposite Point Charges: Electric field (blue) and equipotential lines (gr een) for two
equal and opposite charges
Let us examine the physical explanation for the equi potentials lines in. The equation for the potential of a point charge is,
where V is the potential, k is a constant with a value of 8.99 · 10 N m /C, Q is the magnitude of the point charge, and ris the
distance from the charge. So, every point that is the same distance from the point charge will have the s ame electric potential
energy. Therefore, if we draw a circle around the point c harge, every point on the circle will have the same potent ial energy.
Work (W) is a measure of the change in potential energy. Sin ce the potential energy does not change along
an equipotential line, you do not need to do any work to move along one. However, you do need to do work to move from one
equipotential line to another. Recall that work is z ero if force is perpendicular to motion; in the fig ures shown above, the forces
resulting from the electric field are in the same d irection as the electric field itself. So we note that each of the equipotential lines
must be perpendicular to the electric field at every p oint.
Key Points
Thermal, chemical, electric, radiant, nuclear, magnetic, elastic, sound, mechanical, luminous, and mass are forms tha t energy
can exist in.
Energy exists as either kinetic energy, potential energ y, or a combination of both.
We may discover new forms of energy (like “dark energy”) i n the future.
The total energy of a given system can only be changed when e nergy is added or subtracted from the system.
Often it appears that energy has been lost from a system when it simply has been transformed.
The efficiency of conversions describes the ratio betwe en the useful output of an energy conversion machine and the input.
A potential energy curve plots the potential energy of an object as a function of its position.
Equipotential lines trace lines of equal potential ene rgy.
You do not need to do any work to move along an equipotent ial line.
Key Terms
fusion: A nuclear reaction in which nuclei combine to form more massive nuclei with the concomitant release of energy.
electromagnetic radiation: radiation (quantized as photons) consisting of oscillat ing electric and magnetic fields oriented
perpendicularly to each other, moving through space
fission: The process of splitting the nucleus of an atom into sm aller particles; nuclear fission.
pendulum: A body suspended from a fixed support so that it swings fr eely back and forth under the influence of gravity; it is
commonly used to regulate various devices such as clocks.
first law of thermodynamics: A version of the law of conservation of energy, special ized for thermodynamical systems. It is
usually formulated by stating that the change in the int ernal energy of a closed system is equal to the amount of h eat supplied to
the system, minus the amount of work done by the system o n its surroundings.9 2 2

5.4.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948potential energy: The energy an object has because of its position (in a g ravitational or electric field) or its condition (as a
stretched or compressed spring, as a chemical reactant, or by having rest mass)
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Forms of energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Forms_of_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
fusion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fusion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
fission. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fission. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Energy conversion efficiency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_conversion_efficiency.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Energy transformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_transformation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
pendulum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pendulum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
first law of thermodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/first%20law%20of%20thermodynamics. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pendulum. License: CC BY: Attribution
EnergyTransformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EnergyTransformation.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Module 9 -- Potential Energy Graphs - PER wiki. Provided by: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Located at:
http://scripts.mit.edu/~srayyan/PERwiki/index.php?title=Module_9_--_ Potential_Energy_Graphs. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/potential%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Nagasakibomb. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Nagasakibomb.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Types of Energy. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC6tT1wkXEc. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pendulum. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.4.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33948EnergyTransformation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EnergyTransformation.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42331/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Module 9 -- Potential Energy Graphs - PER wiki. Provided by: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Located at:
http://scripts.mit.edu/~srayyan/PERwiki/index.php?title=Module_9_--_ Potential_Energy_Graphs. License: CC BY:
Attribution
5.4.8: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
6.8: Further Topics has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6013-electromagnetics-and-applications-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.5: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque
This page titled 5.5: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.5.5.1: Introduction
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
5.5.3: Stability
5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
5.5.7: The Center of Gravity
5.5.8: Torque and Angular AccelerationTopic hierarchy

5.5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339505.5.1: Introduction
Describe the effect of the torque on an object
Torque about a point is a concept that denotes the tendenc y of force to turn or rotate an object in motion. T his tendency is measured
in general about a point, and is termed as moment of force. The torque in angular motion corresponds to force i n translation. It is the
“cause” whose effect is either angular acceleration or angular deceleration of a particle in general mo tion. Quantitatively, it is
defined as a vector given by:
AP Phy sics 1 - T orqueAP Phy sics 1 - T orque
Torque: A brief introduction to torque for students studying rotational motion in algebra-based physics courses such a s AP Physics
1 and Honors Physics.
Rotation is a special case of angular motion. In the case of rotation, torque is defined with respect to an axis such that vector “r” is
constrained as perpendicular to the axis of rotatio n. In other words, the plane of motion is perpendicula r to the axis of rotation.
Clearly, the torque in rotation corresponds to force in t ranslation.
Torque is the cross product of force cross length of the moment arm; it is involved whenever there is a r otating object. Torque can
also be expressed in terms of the angular acceleration of t he object.learning objectives

5.5.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33950The determination of torque’s direction is relativel y easier than that of angular velocity. The reason f or this is simple: the torque
itself is equal to vector product of two vectors, unlik e angular velocity which is one of the two operands of the vector product.
Clearly, if we know the directions of two operands here, the d irection of torque can easily be interpreted.
Since torque depends on both the force and the distance from the axis of rotation, the SI units of torque are newt on-meters.
Torque: Torque in terms of moment arm.
Key Points
Torque is found by multiplying the applied force by the distance to the axis of rotation, called the moment arm.
Torque is to rotation as force is to motion.
The unit of torque is the newton-meter.
Key Terms
vector: A directed quantity, one with both magnitude and di rection; the between two points.
angular velocity: A vector quantity describing an object in circular moti on; its magnitude is equal to the speed of the particle
and the direction is perpendicular to the plane of its c ircular motion.
angular motion: The motion of a body about a fixed point or fixed axis (as of a planet or pendulum). It is equal to the angle
passed over at the point or axis by a line drawn to the body.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Sunil Kumar Singh, Torque. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14402/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
angular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/angular%20motion. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
vector. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/angular-velocity.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Torque. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14402/latest/tp4.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
Torque. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMjtN5l08-w. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
This page titled 5.5.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
8.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339515.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
Identify the first condition of equilibrium
First Condition of Equilibrium
For an object to be in equilibrium, it must be experi encing no acceleration. This means that both the net force and the net torque on
the object must be zero. Here we will discuss the first condit ion, that of zero net force.
In the form of an equation, this first condition is:
In order to achieve this conditon, the forces acting along each axis of motion must sum to zero. For example, the net external forces
along the typical x– and y-axes are zero. This is written as
and.
The condition must be true for both static equilib rium, where the object’s velocity is zero, and dynami c equilibrium, where
the object is moving at a constant velocity.
Below, the motionless person is in static equilibrium. T he forces acting on him add up to zero. Both forces are ve rtical in this case.
Person in Static Equilibrium: This motionless person is in static equilibrium.
Below, the car is in dynamic equilibrium because it is moving at constant velocity. There are horizontal and vertical forces, but the
net external force in any direction is zero. The appl ied force between the tires and the road is balanced by air friction, and the
weight of the car is supported by the normal forces, here sh own to be equal for all four tires.
learning objectives

5.5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33951A Car in Dynamic Equilibrium: This car is in dynamic equilibrium because it is movin g at constant velocity. The forces in all
directions are balanced.
Second Condition
The second condition of static equilibrium says that t he net torque acting on the object must be zero.
Identify the second condition of static equilibrium
A child’s seesaw, shown in, is an example of static e quilibrium. An object in static equilibrium is one th at has no acceleration in any
direction. While there might be motion, such motion is co nstant.
Two children on a seesaw: The system is in static equilibrium, showing no accele ration in any direction.
If a given object is in static equilibrium, both the net for ce and the net torque on the object must be zero. Let’s b reak this down:
Net Force Must Be Zero
The net force acting on the object must be zero. The refore all forces balance in each direction. For exam ple, a car moving along a
highway at a constant speed is in equilibrium, as it is not accelerating in any forward or vertical direc tion. Mathematically, this is
stated as.
Net Torque Must Be Zero
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibriu m involves avoiding accelerated rotation (maintaini ng a constant angular
velocity). A rotating body or system can be in equi librium if its rate of rotation is constant and remain s unchanged by the forces
acting on it.
To understand what factors affect rotation, let us thi nk about what happens when you open an ordinary door by rotating it on its
hinges.The magnitude, direction, and point of applicat ion of the force are incorporated into the definiti on of the physical quantity
called torque—the rotational equivalent of a force. It is a measure of the effectiveness of a force in changing or accelerating a
rotation (changing the angular velocity over a period of time).
In equation form, the magnitude of torque is defined to be where τ (the Greek letter tau) is the symbol for torque, r is
the distance from the pivot point to the point where the force is applied, F is the magnitude of the forc e, and θ is the angle between
the force and the vector directed from the point of a pplication to the pivot point.
Two-Component Forces
In equilibrium, the net force and torque in any particu lar direction equal zero.learning objectives

5.5.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33951Calculate the net force and the net torque for an object in equilibrium
An object with constant velocity has zero acceleratio n. A motionless object still has constant (zero) veloci ty, so motionless objects
also have zero acceleration. Newton’s second law states that:
so objects with constant velocity also have zero net external force. This means that all the forces acting on the object are balanced
— that is to say, they are in equilibrium.
This rule also applies to motion in a specific direct ion. Consider an object moving along the x-axis. If no net force is applied to the
object along the x-axis, it will continue to move along the x-axis at a constant velocity, with no acceleration.
Car Moving at Constant Velocity: A moving car for which the net x and y force components a re zero
We can easily extend this rule to the y-axis. In any system, unless the applied forces cancel e ach other out (i.e., the resultant force is
zero), there will be acceleration in the direction o f the resultant force. In static systems, in which motio n does not occur, the sum of
the forces in all directions always equals zero. This c oncept can be represented mathematically with the following equations:
This rule also applies to rotational motion. If the r esultant moment about a particular axis is zero, the object will have no rotational
acceleration about the axis. If the object is not spin ning, it will not start to spin. If the object is spin ning, it will continue to spin at
the same constant angular velocity. Again, we can exte nd this to moments about the y-axis as well. We can represent this rule
mathematically with the following equations:
Key Points
There are two conditions that must be met for an object to b e in equilibrium.
The first condition is that the net force on the objec t must be zero for the object to be in equilibrium.
If net force is zero, then net force along any direction i s zero.
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium involves avoiding accelerated rotation.
A rotating body or system can be in equilibrium if its rate of rotation is constant and remains unchanged by the forces acting on
it.
The magnitude of torque about a axis of rotation is def ined to be.
In equilibrium, the net force in all directions is zero.
If the net moment of inertia about an axis is zero, the objec t will have no rotational acceleration about the axis.
In each direction, the net force takes the form: and t he net torque take the form: where the sum
represents the vector sum of all forces and torques ac ting.learning objectives

5.5.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33951Key Terms
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body which is measured in a unit dim ensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
translation: Motion of a body on a linear path, without deformation or r otation, i.e. such that every part of the body moves at
the same speed and in the same direction; also (in phy sics), the linear motion of a body considered independentl y of its rotation.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
translation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/translation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Statics/Newton's Laws and Equilibrium. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Statics/Newton's_Laws_and_Equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42167/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, The First Condition for Equilibrium. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/Figure_10_01_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42171/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.5.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33951OpenStax College, College Physics. March 1, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42170/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
8.2: Conditions for Equilibrium by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.5.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339525.5.3: Stability
Explain the relationship between how center of mass is de fined and static equilibrium
For an object to be in static equilibrium, we expect it to stay in the same state indefinitely. If it sta rts accelerating away from its
current position, it would hardly be in equilibrium. To qua ntify equilibrium for a single object, there are two condit ions:
1. The net external force on the object is zero:
2. The net external torque, regardless of choice of origi n, is also zero:
Those two conditions hold regardless of whether the ob ject we are talking about is a single point particle, a rigid body, or a
collection of discrete particles. Being in equilibri um means that we expect no changes to the linear mom entum or the angular
momentum. Note that this does not mean that the syste m is not moving or rotating; instead it simply means t hat its movement will
not change as time goes on.
In a special case when the external forces are govern ed by some potential (e.g. gravitational potential) we can gain insight into the
nature of the equilibrium. From the definition of a p otential we know that. When the first derivative is zero, we can
take the second derivative to find whether the equili brium is stable or unstable. Explicitly, if the poten tial is concave-up at x,
, then the system is stable; conversely, if the potent ial is concave-down, then the equilibrium is unstable. If the second
derivative is zero or does not exist, then the equilib rium is neutral—neither stable nor unstable.
Mathematically, we can view this as a Taylor series expansion on the force slightly away from equilibrium,
and when it is initially at equilibrium,
If the ball is at the top of the hill (where the pote ntial is concave-down) it is possible for it to be p erfectly balanced, and therefore at
equilibrium. But if it gets pushed just slightly to the side, then it will roll down the hill with increasing speed, and the equilibrium is
unstable.
Unstable Equilibrium: A ball on top of a hill can initially be balanced, but if it moves slightly left or right, it gets pushed furth er
and further away from the initial equilibrium position. T his is an example of unstable equilibrium.
Our notion of “balance” comes directly from the form ulation of equilibrium. For something to be “balance d” means that the net
external forces are zero. For example, a coin could ba lance standing up on a table. Initially the coin wil l feel no net external force
or torque; it is in equilibrium. But if pushed slight ly to the side, it will become “off-balance,” experi encing both a force and a
torque causing it to fall to the table. It might hav e been initially “balanced” and at equilibrium, but it was an unstable equilibrium,
prone to being disturbed. But why all this talk of ex ternal forces, with no mention of internal forces? The reason is that all the
internal forces must sum to zero. This follows directl y from Newton’s Third Law,. Every time we consider a f orce from
particle 1 on particle 2 inside of a system, we know t hat it will later be cancelled out by the correspond ing force from particle 2 on
particle 1. We could include those forces in the sum, but it is unnecessary and internal forces are often more complicated than
internal forces.
This differentiation between internal and external fo rces is a powerful one. It also implies that you can trace the motion of the
system as a whole (ignoring motion inside the system) through the net external force acting on a center o f mass. A center of mass
acts as if it has the entire mass of the system, locat ed at one point, and only feels external forces. Its position is defined as thelearning objectives
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.5.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33952weighted average of all the particles in the system: or if we have a continuous density of mass,,
then we can integrate:. The power of the center of m ass is that it hides all the details of what is happe ning internally.
We do not always want to lose the information of what i s happening internally, but it is a useful tool to re member, when dealing
with a number of complicated interactions.
Key Points
Equilibrium is defined by no net forces or torques.
Stability of an equilibrium can be determined by the seco nd derivative of the potential.
Defining a center of mass allows a simple way to study the beh avior of a system or object as a whole.
Stable equilibrium requires a restoring force. This res toring force can be derived by a Taylor expansion of the force, F(x).
Key Terms
stable equilibrium: The response [of a system in static equilibrium] to a sm all perturbation is forces that tend to restore the
equilibrium.
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
stable equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/stable%20equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Unstable equilibrium. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Unstable_equilibrium.svg.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.5.3: Stability is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
8.3: Stability by Boundless has no license indicated.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.5.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339535.5.4: Solving Statics Problems
Formulate and apply six steps to solve static problems
Statics is the study of forces in equilibrium. Recall t hat Newton’s second law states:
Therefore, for all objects moving at constant velocit y (including a velocity of 0 — stationary objects), the net external force is zero.
There are forces acting, but they are balanced — that is t o say, they are “in equilibrium. ”
When solving equilibrium problems, it might help to use the following steps:
1. First, ensure that the problem you’re solving is in fa ct a static problem—i.e., that no acceleration (including a ngular
acceleration) is involved Remember: for these situation s. If rotational motion is involved, the condition
must also be satisfied, where is torque, is the moment of inertia, and is the angular acceleration.
2. Choose a pivot point. Often this is obvious because the problem involves a hinge or a fixed point. If the choice is not obvious,
pick the pivot point as the location at which you have the m ost unknowns. This simplifies things because forces at the p ivot
point create no torque because of the cross product:
3. Write an equation for the sum of torques, and then write equations for the sums of forces in the x and y directions. Set these
sums equal to 0. Be careful with your signs.
4. Solve for your unknowns.
5. Insert numbers to find the final answer.
6. Check if the solution is reasonable by examining the ma gnitude, direction, and units of the answer. The importa nce of this last
step cannot be overstated, although in unfamiliar appli cations, it can be more difficult to judge reasonable ness. However, these
judgments become progressively easier with experience.
Key Points
First, ensure that the problem you’re solving is in fact a static problem—i.e., that no acceleration (including ang ular
acceleration) is involved.
Choose a pivot point — use the location at which you have the most unknowns.
Write equations for the sums of torques and forces in the x and y directions.
Solve the equations for your unknowns algebraically, and in sert numbers to find final answers.
Key Terms
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
moment of inertia: A measure of a body’s resistance to a change in its an gular rotation velocity
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42173/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42167/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
moment of inertia. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/moment_of_inertia. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlikelearning objectives

5.5.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33953This page titled 5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
8.4: Solving Statics Problems by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.5.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339545.5.5: Applications of Statics
Develop an understanding of how a machine applies forc e to work against a load force
Simple Machines
A simple machine is a device that changes the direc tion or magnitude of a force. They can be described as the simplest mechanisms
that use mechanical advantage (or leverage) to mult iply force. Usually, the term “simple machine” is refer ring to one of the six
classical simple machines, defined by Renaissance scient ists.
Simple Machines (1 of 7) Pulley s; De ning Forces, DSimple Machines (1 of 7) Pulley s; De ning Forces, D
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA: Describes the following terms as they relate to simple ma chine; input
force, output force, input distance, output distance, mech anical advantage.
Simple machines are devices used to multiply or augm ent a force that we apply—often at the expense of a d istance through which
we apply the force. Some common examples include:
Leverlearning objectives

5.5.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954Wheel and Axle
Pulley
Inclined Plane
Wedge
Screw
When a device with a specific movement, called a mecha nism, is joined with others to form a machine, these mac hines can be
broken down into elementary movements. For example, a bic ycle is a mechanism made up of wheels, levers, and pulleys.
Simple Machines: Table of simple mechanisms, from Chambers’ Cyclopedia, 1728. [1] Simple machines provide a “vocabulary”
for understanding more complex machines.
Mechanics
A simple machine has an applied force that works again st a load force. If there are no frictional losses, the work done on the load is
equal to the work done by the applied force. This all ows an increase in the output force at the cost of a proportional decrease in
distance moved by the load. The ratio of the output force to the input force is the mechanical advantag e of the machine. If the
machine does not absorb energy, its mechanical advant age can be calculated from the machine’s geometry. Fo r instance, the
mechanical advantage of a lever is equal to the ratio of i ts lever arms.
Simple machines which do not experience frictional lo sses are called ideal machines. For these ideal mach ines, the power in (rate
of energy input) in equal to the power out (rate of energy output): Pin=PoutPin=Pout.

5.5.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954
Lever: The amount of force produced by a machine can not be greater than the amount of force put into it.
Further Examples
Wheelbarrows and shovels are also examples of simple machines (these utilize levers). They use only three forces: the input force,
output force, and force on the pivot. In the case of wheelbarrows, the output force is between the pivot (wh eel’s axle) and the input
force. In the shovel, the input force is between the pivot and the load.
Examples of Simple Machines: Both of these machines use the concept of levers.

5.5.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954Arches and Domes
Arches and domes are structures that exhibit structural strength and can span large areas with no intermediate su pports.
Explain how an arch exhibits structural strength and how a dome c an span a large area without intermediate supports
Arches and domes are structures that exhibit structur al strength and can span large areas with no interme diate supports. In this
atom, we will discuss the history and physics behind arches and domes.
Arches
An arch is a structure that spans a space, and supports structure and weight above it. Arches have been being bu ilt from as long ago
as the second millennium, but were not used for a var iety of structures until the Romans took advantage of their capabilities.
Arches are a pure compression form. They span large a reas by resolving forces into compressive stresses and eliminating tensile
stresses (referred to as arch action). As the forces in an arch are carried toward the ground, the arch wi ll push outward at the base
(called thrust). As the height of the arch decreases, t he outward thrust increases. To prevent the arch from co llapsing, the thrust
needs to be restrained, either with internal ties or externa l bracing. This external bracing is often called an abutme nt, as shown in.
Arches: A masonry arch1. Keystone 2. V oussoir 3. Extrados 4. Impos t 5. Intrados 6. Rise 7. Clear span 8. Abutment
The most common true arch configurations are the fi xed arch, the two-hinged arch and the three-hinged ar ch. The fixed arch is
most often used in reinforced concrete bridge and t unnel construction, where the spans are short. Because it is subject to additional
internal stress caused by thermal expansion and cont raction, this type of arch is considered to be stati cally indeterminate. The twohinged arch is most often used to bridge long spans. This type of arch has pinned connections at the base. Unlike the fixed arch, the
pinned base is able to rotate, allowing the structure to move freely and compensate for the thermal expan sion and contraction
caused by changes in outdoor temperature. Because the structure is pinned between the two base connections, which can result in
additional stresses, the two-hinged arch is also statically i ndeterminate, although not to the degree of the fixed ar ch.
Domes
A dome is an element of architecture that resembles the hollow upper half of a sphere. Dome structures made of various materials
(from mud to stone, wood, brick, concrete, metal, glass and pl astic) and have a long architectural lineage extending into prehistory.
A dome is basically an arch that has been rotated ar ound its central vertical axis. Domes have the same pro perties and capabilities
of arches, they can span large areas without interme diate supports and have a great deal of structural st rength. When the base of a
dome is not the same shape as its supporting walls, for example when a circular dome is on a square structu re, techniques are
employed to transition between the two. Pendentives are triangular sections of a sphere used to transition f rom the flat surfaces of
supporting walls to the round base of a dome.
Domes can be divided into two kinds, simple and compo und. Simple domes use pendentives that are part of t he same sphere as the
dome itself. Compound domes are part of the structure of a large sphere below that of the dome itself, forming a circular base, as
shown in.learning objectives

5.5.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954
Compound Dome: A compound dome (red) with pendentives (yellow) fro m a sphere of greater radius than the dome.
Muscles and Joints
Most skeletal muscles and joints exert much larger forces wi thin the body than the limbs will apply to the outside wor ld.
Explain the forces exerted by muscles
Muscles and Joints
Muscles and joints involve very interesting applicatio ns of statics. Muscles can only contract, so they occur in pairs. In the arm, the
biceps muscle is a flexor: it closes the limb. The tri ceps muscle is an extensor that opens the limb. This configuration is typical of
skeletal muscles, bones, and joints in humans and oth er vertebrates. Most skeletal muscles exert much larg er forces within the body
than the limbs will apply to the outside world. The rea son is clear, since most muscles are attached to bones via tendons close to
joints, causing these systems to have mechanical adv antages much less than one. Viewing them as simple ma chines, the input force
is much greater than the output force, as seen in.
learning objectives

5.5.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954The Forearm of a Person Holding a Book: (a.) The biceps exert a force FB to support the weight of t he forearm and the book.
The triceps are assumed to be relaxed. (b.) An approximatel y equivalent mechanical system with the pivot at the elbow joint
Very large forces are also created in the joints. Bec ause muscles can contract but not expand beyond the ir resting length, joints and
muscles often exert forces that act in opposite dire ctions, and thus subtract. Forces in muscles and joint s are largest when their load
is far from the joint. For example, in racquet sport s like tennis, the constant extension of the arm du ring game play creates large
forces. The mass times the lever arm of a tennis racqu et is an important factor, and many players use the heaviest racquet they can
handle. It is no wonder that joint deterioration and d amage to the tendons in the elbow, such as ‘tennis e lbow,’ can result from
repetitive motion, undue torques, and possible poor racque t selection in such sports.
Various tried techniques for holding and using a rac quet, bat, or stick can not only increase sporting pr owess but can minimize
fatigue and long-term damage to the body. Training coaches and physical therapists use the knowledge of the relationships between
forces and torques in the treatment of muscles and j oints. In physical therapy, an exercise routine can apply a particular force and
torque, which can revive muscles and joints in time. Some exercises should be performed under water, thus r equiring the exertion
of more force and further strengthening muscles.
Key Points
The six classifications of simple machines were establish ed by renaissance scientists; they are as follows: lever, whee l and axle,
pulley, inclined plane, wedge and screw.
Simple machines can be joined with other devices to create a m ore complicated machine. These building blocks are used to
explain how machines work.
The force output by a simple machine can exceed the force that was put into the machine.
Arches span large areas by resolving forces into compressive s tresses and eliminating tensile stresses.
The most common true arch configurations are the fixed ar ch, the two-hinged arch, and the three-hinged arch.
A dome is basically an arch that has been rotated aroun d its central vertical axis.
Domes are basically arches that have been rotated on the ir vertical axis, and have the same capabilities and pro perties of arches.
Domes can be divided into two kinds, simple and compound.
It is helpful to view muscles as a simple machines and draw the m as free body diagrams.
In muscles, the input force is often much greater than the output force.
Very large forces are also created in the joints. Becau se muscles can contract but not expand beyond their res ting length, joints
and muscles often exert forces that act in opposite directi ons, and thus subtract.
Key Terms
machine: A mechanical or electrical device that performs or ass ists in the performance of human tasks, whether physical or
computational, laborious or for entertainment.
leverage: A force amplified by means of a lever rotating around a pivot.
mechanical advantage: In a simple machine, the ratio of the output force to t he input force.
compressive stress: Stress on materials that leads to a smaller volume.
tensile stress: Stress state leading to expansion; that is, the length of a material tends to increase in the tensile direction wh ile
the volume remains constant.
pendentive: The concave triangular sections of vaulting that pro vide the transition between a dome and the square base on
which it is set and transfer the weight of the dome.
muscle: A contractile form of tissue which animals use to effe ct movement.
joint: Any part of the body where two bones join, in most cases al lowing that part of the body to be bent or straightened.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION

5.5.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954OpenStax College, Simple Machines. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple machines. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_machines. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
leverage. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leverage. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
machine. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/machine. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dome%23General_types. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
pendentive. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pendentive. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
compressive stress. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/compressive%20stress. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
tensile stress. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/tensile%20stress. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pendentive and Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pendentive_and_Dome.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints. Sep tember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42175/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
muscle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/muscle. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
joint. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/joint. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Table of Mechanicks, Cyclopaedia, V olume 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_Mechanicks,_Cyclopaedia,_Volum e_2.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, Simple Machines. February 13, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42174/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.5.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33954Simple Machines, Pulleys; Forces, Distances and MA. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ9MELhhW6U.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Arch. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pendentive and Dome. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pendentive_and_Dome.png.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints. Feb ruary 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42175/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.5.5: Applications of Statics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
8.5: Applications of Statics by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.5.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339555.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
Identify properties of elastic objects
We now move from consideration of forces that affect t he motion of an object (such as friction and drag) t o those that affect an
object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wa ll, the car will not move once it hits the wall, but it will noticeably change
shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is a deformation. Even very small forces are k nown to cause some
deformation. For small deformations, two important chara cteristics are observed. First, the object returns to it s original shape when
the force is removed—that is, the deformation is ela stic for small deformations. Second, the size of the de formation is proportional
to the force—that is, for small deformations, Hooke’ s law is obeyed. In equation form, Hooke’s law is given b y, where
is the change in length.
Elasticity is a measure of how difficult it is to stre tch an object. In other words it is a measure of how small kk is. Very elastic
materials like rubber have small kk and thus will stretch a lot with only a small force.
Stress is a measure of the force put on the object over the ar ea.
Strain is the change in length divided by the original len gth of the object.
Experiments have shown that the change in length (ΔL) depends on only a few variables. As already noted, ΔL i s proportional to
the force F and depends on the substance from which th e object is made. Additionally, the change in length is proportional to the
original length L0 and inversely proportional to th e cross-sectional area of the wire or rod. For example, a long guitar string will
stretch more than a short one, and a thick string will stret ch less than a thin one.
learning objectives

5.5.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33955Tension/Compression: Tension: The rod is stretched a length ΔL when a force is applied parallel to its length. (b) Compression:
The same rod is compressed by forces with the same magni tude in the opposite direction. For very small deformations and uniform
materials, ΔL is approximately the same for the same magnitu de of tension or compression. For larger deformations, the crosssectional area changes as the rod is compressed or stretche d.
Fracture
Fracture is caused by a strain placed on an object such that it deforms beyond its elastic limit and breaks.
Relate fracture with the elastic limit of a material
Materials cannot stretch forever. When a strain is applie d to a material it deforms elastically proportional to the force applied.
However, after it has deformed a certain amount, the ob ject can no longer take the strain and will break or fracture. The zone in
which it bends under strain is called the elastic regi on. In that region the object will bend and then retu rn to its original shape when
the force is abated. Past that point, if more strain is adde d, the object may permanently deform and eventually fract ure.
Fracture strength, also known as breaking strength, is the stress at which a specimen fails via fracture. This is usually determined
for a given specimen by a tensile test, which charts the stres s-strain curve. The final recorded point is the fracture st rength.
Fracture: This is a graph of deformation ΔL versus applied force F. The straight segment is the linear region where Hooke’s la w is
obeyed. The slope of the straight region is 1k. For larger forces, the graph is curved but the deformation is still elastic—L will
return to zero if the force is removed. Still greater f orces permanently deform the object until it finally fractures. The shape of the
curve near fracture depends on several factors, includ ing how the force F is applied. Note that in this graph the slop e increases just
before fracture, indicating that a small increase in F is p roducing a large increase in L near the fracture.
Bones, on the whole, do not fracture due to tension or compression. Rather they generally fracture due to s ideways impact or
bending, resulting in the bone shearing or snapping. Th e behavior of bones under tension and compression is important because it
determines the load the bones can carry. Bones are classified as weight-bearing structures such as columns i n buildings and trees.
Weight-bearing structures have special features; column s in building have steel-reinforcing rods while trees and bones are fibrous.
The bones in different parts of the body serve diff erent structural functions and are prone to differen t stresses. Thus, the bone in the
top of the femur is arranged in thin sheets separate d by marrow while, in other places, the bones can be cy lindrical and filled with
marrow or just solid. Overweight people have a tendenc y toward bone damage due to sustained compressions in bone joints and
tendons.learning objectives

5.5.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33955Key Points
Elasticity is a measure of the deformation of an object when a force is applied. Objects that are very elastic like ru bber have
high elasticity and stretch easily.
Stress is force over area.
Strain is change in length over original length.
Most objects behave elastically for small strains and return to their original shape after being bent.
If the strain on an object is greater than the elastic lim it of the object, it will permanently deform or eventually fracture.
Fracture strength is a measure of the force needed to bre ak an object.
Key Items
deformation: A transformation; change of shape.
strain: The amount by which a material deforms under stress or force, given as a ratio of the deformation to the initial
dimension of the material and typically symbolized by ε is termed the engineering strain. The true strain is def ined as the
natural logarithm of the ratio of the final dimension to the initial dimension.
elastic: Capable of stretching; particularly, capable of stretch ing so as to return to an original shape or size when forc e is
released.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. September 17, 2 013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
deformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deformation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 16, 20 15. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fracture. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fracture. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
strain. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strain. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
elastic. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elastic. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. January 16, 20 15. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Elasticity: Stress and Strain. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42081/latest/Figure_06_03_01a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
8.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.5.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339565.5.7: The Center of Gravity
Describe how the center of mass of an oddly shaped object is f ound
Center of Gravity
When people think of objects, they think of them as singular particles of matter. In fact, every object is m ade up of millions of
particles, all of which behave differently when moved. When people observe a stick being thrown in the air, it seems as though the
entire object is moving at the same trajectory and ve locity, but each particle is being subjected to a d ifferent motion in space and
acceleration, depending on its place. The different p arts of the body have different motions. shows the mo tion of a stick in the air: it
seems to rotate around a single point. Three-dimension al bodies have a property called the center of mass, o r center of gravity. This
center of mass’s main characteristic is that it appears t o carry the whole mass of the body.
Center of Gravity: Although the center of mass is in the midpoint of the st ick, all of the particles are moving as well.
The center of mass does not actually carry all the mass, despite appearances. Given a hollow sphere, the c enter is the center of
mass, even though it does not actually have anything i n it. As seen in, it looks as if the external forces of gravity appear to be
working only on the center of mass, but each particle is being pushed or pulled by gravity. The center of mass is much easier to use
when discussing bodies, because no one has to analyze each ind ividual particle.
Mathematical Expression: The mathematical relation of center of gravity is read as: ‘the position of the center of mass and
weighted average of the position of the particles. ‘
Specifically: ‘the total mass x the position of the c enter of mass= ∑ the mass of the individual particle x the position of the particle.
‘ The center of mass is a geometric point in three-d imensional volume. When using the definition above, i t yields the following
equation for center of mass:
where is the reference axis x, y, or z; m is individual mass; is the individual position; and M is the total mass.
When taking the center of mass of an oddly shaped obj ect, it is helpful to break it down into smaller sectio ns whose mass and
properties are easier to evaluate, and then add the pr oducts of the individual masses and positions and divide by the total mass.learning objectives
Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.5.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33956
Center of Mass: This child’s toy uses the principles of ‘center of mass’ to stay balanced on a finger.
Key Points
The center of mass ‘s main characteristic is that it app ears to carry the whole mass of the body.
The total mass x the position of the center of mass= ∑ m ass of the individual particle x the position of the part icle.
The center of mass is a geometric point in three-dimens ional volume. By using the definition above, the followin g equation for
center of mass can be derived:
Key Terms
center of mass: The center of mass (COM) is the unique point at the cen ter of a distribution of mass in space that has the
property that the weighted position vectors relative to this point sum to zero.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Center of gravity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_gravity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
center of mass. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/center%20of%20mass. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Connexions. Provided by: Connexions. Located at: http://cnx.org. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Center of Mass. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m14119/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.5.7: The Center of Gravity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
8.7: The Center of Gravity has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computerscience/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-spring- 2009.Double subscripts: use braces to clarify

5.5.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339575.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
Express the relationship between the torque and the angular a cceleration in a form of equation
Torque and angular acceleration are related by the following formula where is the objects moment of iner tia and αα is the angular
acceleration.
T orque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the CT orque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the C
Torque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the Church in the French Revolut ion: Why do things change their angular
velocity? Soon, you’ll know.
Just like Newton’s Second Law, which is force is equal t o the mass times the acceleration, torque obeys a si milar law. If you
replace torque with force and rotational inertia with mass and angular acceleration with linear accelerat ion, you get Newton’s
Second Law back out. In fact, this equation is Newton’s se cond law applied to a system of particles in rotation about a given axis. It
makes no assumptions about constant rotational velocity.
The net torque about an axis of rotation is equal t o the product of the rotational inertia about that axis and the angular acceleration,
as shown in Figure 1.learning objectives

5.5.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33957
Figure 1: Relationship between force (F), torque (τ), momentum (p), an d angular momentum (L) vectors in a rotating system
Similar to Newton’s Second Law, angular motion also obey s Newton’s First Law. If no outside forces act on an ob ject, an object in
motion remains in motion and an object at rest rema ins at rest. With rotating objects, we can say that un less an outside torque is
applied, a rotating object will stay rotating and an ob ject at rest will not begin rotating.
If a turntable were spinning counter clockwise (when v iewed from the top), and you applied your fingers to opposite sides the
turntable would begin to slow its spinning. From a trans lational viewpoint, at least, there would be no net fo rce applied to the
turntable. The force that points to one side would b e cancelled by the force that points to the other. T he forces of the two fingers
would cancel. Therefore, the turntable would be in tra nslational equilibrium. Despite that, the rotational velocity would be
decreased meaning that the acceleration would no lon ger be zero. From this we might conclude that just bec ause a rotating object is
in translational equilibrium, it is not necessarily in ro tational equilibrium.
Key Points
When a torque is applied to an object it begins to rota te with an acceleration inversely proportional to its mome nt of inertia.
This relation can be thought of as Newton’s Second Law for ro tation. The moment of inertia is the rotational mass and th e
torque is rotational force.
Angular motion obeys Newton’s First Law. If no outside forces act on an object, an object in motion remains in moti on and an
object at rest remains at rest.
Key Terms
angular acceleration: The rate of change of angular velocity, often represen ted by α.
torque: A rotational or twisting effect of a force; (SI unit ne wton-meter or Nm; imperial unit foot-pound or ft-lb)
rotational inertia: The tendency of a rotating object to remain rotating unless a torque is applied to it.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Richard Baldwin, Phy1320: Angular Momentum -- The Mathemati cs of Torque. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax
CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m38460/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/rotational-inertia.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
angular acceleration. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/angular_acceleration. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/0/09/Torque_animation.g if.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Torque, Angular Acceleration, and the Role of the Church i n the French Revolution. Located at:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1yvWP4J44A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms:
Standard YouTube license
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.5.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339578.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicati ons-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.6: Fluids
5.6.1: Introduction
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle
5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
5.6.5: Fluids in Motion
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
This page titled 5.6: Fluids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

5.6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339595.6.1: Introduction
Assess the distinguishing characteristics of the four state s of matter
There are a number of properties that can be observe d in a material that identify what state the matter i s in — solid, liquid, gas, or
plasma.
Solids
Solid: Solids are in a state of matter that maintains a fixed volume and shape.
A solid is in a state of matter that maintains a fixed volume and shape. A solid’s particles fit closely to gether. The forces between
the particles are so strong that the particles can n ot move freely; they can only vibrate. This causes a solid to be a stable, noncompressible shape with definite volume.
Liquids
Liquid: Liquids maintain a fixed volume, but their shape will mol d to the shape of the container they are being held in.
A liquid maintains a fixed volume, but its shape will mold to the shape of the container it is being hel d in. In, you can see that even
though the liquid’s shape is determined by the conta iner, it has a free surface that is not controlled by the container. The particles
are close together but not as close as in solids; the y are still able to move around, which causes the liqu id to flow. Liquids usually
have a higher volume than their solid counterparts, exce pt for certain molecules, such as H O (water).
Gases
Gas: The particles are much farther from each other, usual ly a farther length than the size of the particles, and mov e a lot
shows a gas, whose particles move around a lot and are much farther apart from each other, usually farther a part than the diameter
of the particles themselves. The gas behaves like a liquid; the particles are moving but are still attr acted to each other, so they still
flow. Unlike a solid or a liquid, the gas will try to fill whatever container it is in, adapting its volume accord ingly.learning objectives

5.6.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33959Plasma
Plasma is a gas that has been ionized. That is to say, sufficient energy has been supplied to the gas such t hat the electrons have
enough energy to escape their atoms or molecules. Plasm a contains ions and electrons that can move around fre ely. Matter in the
plasma state has variable volume and shape. Plasma is t he most common form of visible matter in the univers e. Lightning, sparks,
neon lights, and the sun are all examples of matter in the plasma state.
Plasma: Matter in the plasma state has variable volume and shap e, but as well as neutral atoms, it contains a significan t number of
ions and electrons, both of which can move around freely.
Phase Transitions
shows the different states of matter and how they can change from one to another as a function of enthalp y and pressure and
temperature changes. A solid can change to a liquid with an enthalpy increase. The process of a liquid g oing to a solid is known as
melting. A liquid can change into a gas when it hits its boiling point or can even enter a plasma state if the enthalpy is increased
enough. When the enthalpy is lowered, a liquid can tra nsform into a solid through freezing. Sometimes, a sol id can skip freezing
and go directly to a gaseous state; this process is called su blimation.
States of Matter: This figure illustrates the relationship between the en thalpy of a system and the state of matter that the system is
in.
What is a Fluid?
A fluid is a substance that continually deforms (flows) u nder an applied shear stress.
Explain the properties of substances under an applied she ar stress
A fluid is a substance that continually deforms (flows) under an applied shear stress. Fluids are a subset of the states of matter and
include three of the four states—liquids, gases, and plasma (shown in).learning objectives

5.6.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33959
Four Fundamental States of Matter: Four fundamental states of matter: 1) top left corner corr esponds to solid; 2) top right corner
corresponds to liquid; 3) bottom left corner correspond s to gas; 4) bottom right corner corresponds to plasma.
Liquids form a free surface (i.e., a surface not crea ted by the container) while gases do not. The distincti on between solids and fluid
is not entirely obvious. The distinction is made by evaluating the viscosity of the substance. Silly Putty can be considered to behave
like a solid or a fluid, depending on the time period over which it is observed. It is best described as a viscoelastic fluid.
Fluids display properties such as:
a) not resisting deformation or resisting it only lightly (viscosity), and
b) the ability to flow (also described as the ability to tak e on the shape of the container).
This also means that all fluids have the property of fluidity. These properties are typically a functio n of their inability to support a
shear stress in static equilibrium.
Solids can be subjected to shear stresses, and norma l stresses—both compressive and tensile. In contrast, i deal fluids can only be
subjected to normal, compressive stress (called pressu re). Real fluids display viscosity and so are capable of being subjected to low
levels of shear stress.
Although the term fluid includes both the liquid and gas phases, it is also c ommonly used as a synonym for liquid, with no
implication that gas could also be present. For exam ple, “brake fluid” is hydraulic oil and will not perf orm its required function if
there is gas in it. This colloquial usage of the ter m is also common in the fields of medicine and nutri tion (e.g., “take plenty of
fluids”).
Key Points
Solids are non-compressible and have constant volume and con stant shape.
Liquids are non-compressible and have constant volum e but can change shape. A liquid’s shape is dictated by th e shape of the
container it is in.
Gases do not have a constant volume or shape; they not only take the shape of the container they are in, they try to f ill the entire
container.
Matter in the plasma state has variable volume and shape. Plasma contains ions and electrons, both of which can move a round
freely.
Fluids are a subset of the states of matter and include liquid s, gases, and plasma.
Fluids display properties such as: not resisting deformati on or resisting it only lightly (viscosity), and the abilit y to flow (also
described as the ability to take on the shape of the conta iner).
Ideal fluids can only be subjected to normal, compress ive stress which is called pressure. Real fluids display vis cosity and thus
are capable of being subjected to low levels of shear st ress.
Key Items
plasma: a state of matter consisting of partially ionized gas

5.6.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33959enthalpy: the total amount of energy in a system, including both t he internal energy and the energy needed to displace its
environment
sublimation: the transition of a substance from the solid phase dire ctly to the vapor state such that it does not pass through t he
intermediate, liquid phase
fluidity: A measure of the extent to which something is fluid. The reciprocal of its viscosity.
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
shear stress: The component of stress that causes parallel layers of a material to move relative to each other in their own planes.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
sublimation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sublimation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
enthalpy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enthalpy. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
plasma. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plasma. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Physics matter state transition 1 en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Physics_matter_state_transition_1_en. svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron Sea (Plasma). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electron_Sea_(Plasma).jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Teilchenmodell Fluessigkeit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Teilchenmodell_Fluessigkeit.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Stohrem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stohrem.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY: Attribution
Fluids. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluids. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, What Is a Fluid?. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42186/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
fluidity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fluidity. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
shear stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shear_stress. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Physics matter state transition 1 en. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Physics_matter_state_transition_1_en. svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electron Sea (Plasma). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electron_Sea_(Plasma).jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Teilchenmodell Fluessigkeit. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Teilchenmodell_Fluessigkeit.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Stohrem. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stohrem.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
State of matter. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_matter. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/d/de/Four_Fundamental_State s_of_Matter.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.6.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33959This page titled 5.6.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339605.6.2: Density and Pressure
Identify factors that determine the pressure exerted by t he gas
Pressure is an important physical quantity—it plays an essential role in topics ranging from thermodynamics to solid and fluid
mechanics. As a scalar physical quantity (having mag nitude but no direction), pressure is defined as the force per unit area applied
perpendicular to the surface to which it is applied. Pressure c an be expressed in a number of units depending on the cont ext of use.
AP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s Principle
Pressure and Pascal’s Principle: A brief introduction to pressure and Pascal’s Principle, i ncluding hydraulics.
Units, Equations and Representations
In SI units, the unit of pressure is the Pascal (Pa), whi ch is equal to a Newton / meter (N/m). Other important uni ts of pressure
include the pound per square inch (psi) and the stan dard atmosphere (atm). The elementary mathematical expression for pressure is
given by:
where is pressure, is the force acting perpendicular to the surface to which this force is applied, and is the area of the surface.
Any object that possesses weight, whether at rest or not, exerts a pressure upon the surface with which it is in contact. The
magnitude of the pressure exerted by an object on a given surface is equal to its weight acting in the di rection perpendicular to that
surface, divided by the total surface area of conta ct between the object and the surface. shows the grap hical representations andlearning objectives
2 2

5.6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960corresponding mathematical expressions for the case i n which a force acts perpendicular to the surface of contact, as well as the
case in which a force acts at angle θ relative to the sur face.
Representation of Pressure: This image shows the graphical representations and corresp onding mathematical expressions for the
case in which a force acts perpendicular to the surface of contact, as well as the case in which a force acts at angle θ re lative to the
surface.
Pressure as a Function of Surface Area
Since pressure depends only on the force acting perpe ndicular to the surface upon which it is applied, onl y the force component
perpendicular to the surface contributes to the press ure exerted by that force on that surface. Pressure ca n be increased by either
increasing the force or by decreasing the area or ca n oppositely be decreased by either decreasing the force or increasing the area.
illustrates this concept. A rectangular block weighin g 1000 N is first placed horizontally. It has an area of contact (with the surface
upon which it is resting) of 0.1 m, thus exerting a pressure of 1,000 Pa on that surface. That same block in a different
configuration (also in Figure 2), in which the block is placed vertically, has an area of contact with the surface upon which it is
resting of 0.01 m, thus exerting a pressure of 10,000 Pa—10 times larger than the first configuration due to a decrease in the
surface area by a factor of 10.
Pressure as a Function of Surface Area: Pressure can be increased by either increasing the forc e or by decreasing the area or can
oppositely be decreased by either decreasing the force or increasing the area.
A good illustration of this is the reason a sharp kni fe is far more effective for cutting than a blunt k nife. The same force applied by a
sharp knife with a smaller area of contact will exert a much greater pressure than a blunt knife having a considerably larger area of
contact. Similarly, a person standing on one leg on a trampoline causes a greater displacement of the tra mpoline than that same
person standing on the same trampoline using two legs —not because the individual exerts a larger force when standing on one leg,
but because the area upon which this force is exerte d is decreased, thus increasing the pressure on the t rampoline. Alternatively, an
object having a weight larger than another object of the same dimensionality and area of contact with a g iven surface will exert a
greater pressure on that surface due to an increase i n force. Finally, when considering a given force of c onstant magnitude acting on
a constant area of a given surface, the pressure exer ted by that force on that surface will be greater th e larger the angle of that force
as it acts upon the surface, reaching a maximum when that forc e acts perpendicular to the surface.
Liquids and Gases: Fluids
Just as a solid exerts a pressure on a surface upon which it is in contact, liquids and gases likewise exert pre ssures on surfaces and
objects upon which they are in contact with. The pressu re exerted by an ideal gas on a closed container in which it is confined is
best analyzed on a molecular level. Gas molecules in a gas container move in a random manner throughout t he volume of the
container, exerting a force on the container walls u pon collision. Taking the overall average force of a ll the collisions of the gas
molecules confined within the container over a unit time allows for a proper measurement of the effectiv e force of the gas
molecules on the container walls. Given that the contai ner acts as a confining surface for this net force, the gas molecules exert a
pressure on the container. For such an ideal gas con fined within a rigid container, the pressure exerted by the gas molecules can be
calculated using the ideal gas law:2

5.6.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960where n is the number of gas molecules, R is the ideal gas constant (R = 8.314 J mol K), T is the temperature of the gas, and V is
the volume of the container.
The pressure exerted by the gas can be increased by: increasing the number of collisions of gas molecules per unit time by
increasing the number of gas molecules; increasing th e kinetic energy of the gas by increasing the temper ature; or decreasing the
volume of the container. offers a representation of the ideal gas law, as well as the effect of varying th e equation parameters on the
gas pressure. Another common type of pressure is that e xerted by a static liquid or hydrostatic pressure. Hydr ostatic pressure is
most easily addressed by treating the liquid as a co ntinuous distribution of matter, and may be considered a measure of energy per
unit volume or energy density. We will further discuss hy drostatic pressure in other sections.
Pressure of an Ideal Gas: This image is a representation of the ideal gas law, as wel l as the effect of varying the equation
parameters on the gas pressure.
Variation of Pressure With Depth
Pressure within static fluids depends on the properties of the fluid, the acceleration due to gravity, and the dep th within the fluid.
Identify factors that determine the pressure exerted by s tatic liquids and gases
Pressure is defined in simplest terms as force per unit area. However, when dealing with pressures exerted by gase s and liquids, it is
most convenient to approach pressure as a measure of energy per unit volume by means of the definition o f work (W = F·d). The
derivation of pressure as a measure of energy per un it volume from its definition as force per unit area is given in. Since, for gases
and liquids, the force acting on a system contributi ng to pressure does not act on a specific point or particular surface, but rather as
a distribution of force, analyzing pressure as a mea sure of energy per unit volume is more appropriate. For liquids and gases at rest,
the pressure of the liquid or gas at any point within the medium is called the hydrostatic pressure. At any such point within a
medium, the pressure is the same in all directions, as if the pressure was not the same in all directions, the fluid, whether it is a gas
or liquid, would not be static. Note that the following discussion and expressions pertain only to incompressi ble fluids at static
equilibrium.
Energy per Unit Volume: This equation is the derivation of pressure as a measu re of energy per unit volume from its definition as
force per unit area.
The pressure exerted by a static liquid depends only on the depth, density of the liquid, and the accele ration due to gravity. gives
the expression for pressure as a function of depth wit hin an incompressible, static liquid as well as the der ivation of this equation
from the definition of pressure as a measure of energ y per unit volume (ρ is the density of the gas, g i s the acceleration due to
gravity, and h is the depth within the liquid). For any given liquid with constant density throughout, pressure increases with-1 -1
learning obectives

5.6.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960increasing depth. For example, a person under water at a depth of h will experience half the pressure as a person under water at a
depth of. For many liquids, the density can be assu med to be nearly constant throughout the volume of t he liquid and, for
virtually all practical applications, so can the accel eration due to gravity (g = 9.81 m/s). As a result, pre ssure within a liquid is
therefore a function of depth only, with the pressure increasing at a linear rate with respect to increasin g depth. In practical
applications involving calculation of pressure as a function of depth, an important distinction must be made as to whether the
absolute or relative pressure within a liquid is desi red. Equation 2 by itself gives the pressure exerted b y a liquid relative to
atmospheric pressure, yet if the absolute pressure is desired, the atmospheric pressure must then be added t o the pressure exerted by
the liquid alone.
Pressure as Energy per Unit Volume: This equation gives the expression for pressure as a fu nction of depth within an
incompressible, static liquid as well as the derivation of th is equation from the definition of pressure as a measu re of energy per
unit volume (ρ is the density of the gas, g is the accelerat ion due to gravity, and h is the depth within the liquid).
When analyzing pressure within gases, a slightly differe nt approach must be taken as, by the nature of gase s, the force contributing
to pressure arises from the average number of gas m olecules occupying a certain point within the gas pe r unit time. Thus the force
contributing to the pressure of a gas within the medi um is not a continuous distribution as for liquids an d the barometric equation
given in must be utilized to determine the pressure e xerted by the gas at a certain depth (or height) wit hin the gas (p is the pressure
at h = 0, M is the mass of a single molecule of gas, g is the acceleration due to gravity, k is the Boltzm ann constant, T is the
temperature of the gas, and h is the height or dept h within the gas). Equation 3 assumes that the gas is i ncompressible and that the
pressure is hydrostatic.
Pressure within a gas: The force contributing to the pressure of a gas within the medium is not a continuous distribution as for
liquids and the barometric equation given in this figure m ust be utilized to determine the pressure exerted by the gas at a certain
depth (or height) within the gas (p0 is the pressure at h = 0, M is the mass of a single molecule of gas, g is the accele ration due to
gravity, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperat ure of the gas, and h is the height or depth within the gas)
Static Equilibrium
Any region or point, or any static object within a static flui d is in static equilibrium where all forces and torques are equal to zero.
Identify required conditions for a fluid to be in rest
Static equilibrium is a particular state of a physica l system. It is qualitatively described by an objec t at rest and by the sum of all
forces, with the sum of all torques acting on that obj ect being equal to zero. Static objects are in static equilibrium, with the net
force and net torque acting on that object being eq ual to zero; otherwise there would be a driving mecha nism for that object to
undergo movement in space. The analysis and study o f objects in static equilibrium and the forces and torques acting on them is
called statics—a subtopic of mechanics. Statics is par ticularly important in the design of static and loa d bearing structures. As it
pertains to fluidics, static equilibrium concerns the forces acting on a static object within a fluid medium.
Fluids
For a fluid at rest, the conditions for static equili brium must be met at any point within the fluid medi um. Therefore, the sum of the
forces and torques at any point within the static liqu id or gas must be zero. Similarly, the sum of the fo rces and torques of an object
at rest within a static fluid medium must also be zer o. In considering a stationary object within a liquid medium at rest, the forces
acting at any point in time and at any point in spa ce within the medium must be analyzed. For a stationar y object within a static1
learning obectives

5.6.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960liquid, there are no torques acting on the object so the sum of the torques for such a system is immediate ly zero; it need not concern
analysis since the torque condition for equilibrium is fulfilled.
Density
At any point in space within a static fluid, the sum of the acting forces must be zero; otherwise the condit ion for static equilibrium
would not be met. In analyzing such a simple system, c onsider a rectangular region within the fluid medium with density ρ (same
density as the fluid medium), width w, length l, and h eight h, as shown in. Next, the forces acting on this reg ion within the medium
are taken into account. First, the region has a force of gravity acting downwards (its weight) equal to its d ensity object, times its
volume of the object, times the acceleration due to g ravity. The downward force acting on this region due to the fluid above the
region is equal to the pressure times the area of c ontact. Similarly, there is an upward force acting on t his region due to the fluid
below the region equal to the pressure times the area of contact. For static equilibrium to be achieved, th e sum of these forces must
be zero, as shown in. Thus for any region within a flui d, in order to achieve static equilibrium, the press ure from the fluid below the
region must be greater than the pressure from the f luid above by the weight of the region. This force wh ich counteracts the weight
of a region or object within a static fluid is called the buoyant force (or buoyancy).
Static Equilibrium of a Region Within a Fluid: This figure shows the equations for static equilibrium of a region within a fluid.
Region Within a Static Fluid: This figure is a free body diagram of a region within a static fluid.
In the case on an object at stationary equilibrium within a static fluid, the sum of the forces acting on that object must be zero. As
previously discussed, there are two downward acting forc es, one being the weight of the object and the other being the force
exerted by the pressure from the fluid above the obj ect. At the same time, there is an upwards force exert ed by the pressure from
the fluid below the object, which includes the buoyant force. shows how the calculation of the forces acting on a stationary object
within a static fluid would change from those presente d in if an object having a density ρ different from that of the fluid medium is
surrounded by the fluid. The appearance of a buoyant force in static fluids is due to the fact that press ure within the fluid changes
as depth changes. The analysis presented above can furthermore be extended to much more complicated sy stems involving
complex objects and diverse materials.
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s Principle states that pressure is transmitted and u ndiminished in a closed static fluid.
Apply Pascal’s Principle to describe pressure behavior in sta tic fluids
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s Principle (or Pascal’s Law) applies to static fluids and takes advantage of the height dependency of pressure in static
fluids. Named after French mathematician Blaise Pascal, who established this important relationship, Pascal’s Pr inciple can be used
to exploit pressure of a static liquid as a measure of energy per unit volume to perform work in applic ations such as hydraulic
presses. Qualitatively, Pascal’s Principle states that p ressure is transmitted undiminished in an enclosed s tatic liquid. Quantitatively,
Pascal’s Law is derived from the expression for determin ing the pressure at a given height (or depth) within a fluid and is defined
by Pascal’s Principle:L
S
learning obectives

5.6.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960
AP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Pressure and Pascal' s Principle
Pressure and Pascal’s Principle: A brief introduction to pressure and Pascal’s Principle, i ncluding hydraulics.
where p is the external applied pressure, ρ is the densi ty of the fluid, Δh is the difference in height of the static liquid, and g is the
acceleration due to gravity. Pascal’s Law explicitly d etermines the pressure difference between two differen t heights (or depths)
within a static liquid. As, by Pascal’s Law, a change in pressure is linearly proportional to a change in he ight within an
incompressible, static liquid of constant density, d oubling the height between the two points of referenc e will double the change of
pressure, while halving the height between the two points wil l half the change in pressure.
Enclosed Static Liquids
While Pascal’s Principle applies to any static fluid, it is most useful in terms of applications when consi dering systems involving
rigid wall closed column configurations containing ho mogeneous fluids of constant density. By exploiting th e fact that pressure is
transmitted undiminished in an enclosed static liquid, such as in this type of system, static liquids can be used to transform small
amounts of force into large amounts of force for many app lications such as hydraulic presses.
As an example, referring to, a downwards force of 10 N i s applied to a bottle filled with a static liquid of constant density ρ at the
spout of cross-sectional area of 5 cm, yielding an a pplied pressure of 2 N/cm. The cross-sectional area of the bottle changes with
height so that at the bottom of the bottle the cross- sectional area is 500 cm. As a result of Pascal’s Law, the pressure change
(pressure applied to the static liquid) is transmitte d undiminished in the static liquid so that the appl ied pressure is 2 N/m at the
bottom of the bottle as well. Furthermore, the hydrost atic pressure due to the difference in height of the liquid is given by Equation
1 and yields the total pressure at the bottom surfac e of the bottle. Since the cross-sectional area at the bottom of the bottle is 100
times larger than at the top, the force contributing to the pressure at the bottom of the bottle is 1000 N plus the force from the
2 2

5.6.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960weight of the static fluid in the bottle. This exampl e shows how, through Pascal’s Principle, the force exer ted by a static fluid in a
closed system can be multiplied by changing the heigh t and the surface area of contact.
Pressure Applied to a Hydrostatic Fluid: A downwards force of 10 N is applied to a bottle filled wit h a static liquid of constant
density ρ at the spout of cross-sectional area of 5 cm2, y ielding an applied pressure of 2 N/cm2.
Pressure Transmitted Throughout an Entire Fluid
As stated by Pascal’s Principle, the pressure applied to a static fluid in a closed container is transmitted throughout the entire fluid.
Taking advantage of this phenomenon, hydraulic press es are able to exert a large amount of force requir ing a much smaller amount
of input force. This gives two different types of hydr aulic press configurations, the first in which there i s no difference in height of
the static liquid and the second in which there is a difference in height Δh of the static liquid. In the first configuration, a force F is
applied to a static liquid of density ρ across a surfa ce area of contact A, yielding an input pressure of P. On the other side of the
press configuration, the fluid exerts an output pres sure P across a surface area of contact A, where A > A. By Pascal’s Principle,
P = P, yielding a force exerted by the static fluid of F, where F > F. Depending on the applied pressure and geometry of the
hydraulic press, the magnitude of F can be changed. I n the second configuration, the geometry of the syste m is the same, except
that the height of the fluid on the output end is a height Δh less than the height of the fluid at the input end. The difference in height
of the fluid between the input and the output ends c ontributes to the total force exerted by the fluid. For a hydraulic press, the force
multiplication factor is the ratio of the output to the i nput contact areas.
Hydraulic Press Diagrams: Two different types of hydraulic press configurations, the first in which there is no difference in
height of the static liquid and the second in which there is a difference in height Δh of the static liquid.
Gauge Pressure and Atmospheric Pressure
Pressure is often measured as gauge pressure, which is defined as the absolute pressure minus the atmospheric pressure.
Explain the relationship among absolute pressure, gauge pressure, and atmospheric pressure
Atmospheric Pressure
An important distinction must be made as to the type of pressure quantity being used when dealing with pre ssure measurements
and calculations. Atmospheric pressure is the magnitude of pressure in a system due to the atmosphere, such as the pressure exerted
by air molecules (a static fluid) on the surface o f the earth at a given elevation. In most measurement s and calculations, the
atmospheric pressure is considered to be constant at 1 atm or 101,325 Pa, which is the atmospheric pressure un der standard
conditions at sea level.
Atmospheric pressure is due to the force of the mole cules in the atmosphere and is a case of hydrostatic pressure. Depending on the
altitude relative to sea level, the actual atmospher ic pressure will be less at higher altitudes and more at lower altitudes as the
weight of air molecules in the immediate atmosphere c hanges, thus changing the effective atmospheric pressur e. Atmospheric
pressure is a measure of absolute pressure and can b e affected by the temperature and air composition of the atmosphere but can1
1 2
1 2 2 1
1 2 2 2 1
learning obectives

5.6.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960generally be accurately approximated to be around s tandard atmospheric pressure of 101,325 Pa. Within t he majority of earth’s
atmosphere, pressure varies with height according to. In this equation p is the pressure at sea level (101, 325 Pa), g is the
acceleration due to gravity, M is the mass of a single molecule of air, R is the universal gas constant, T i s the standard temperature
at sea level, and h is the height relative to sea level.
Pressure and Height: Atmospheric pressure depends on altitude or height.
Gauge Pressure
For most applications, particularly those involving p ressure measurements, it is more practical to use gau ge pressure than absolute
pressure as a unit of measurement. Gauge pressure is a relative pressure measurement which measures pressur e relative to
atmospheric pressure and is defined as the absolute pressure minus the atmospheric pressure. Most pressur e measuring equipment
give the pressure of a system in terms of gauge press ure as opposed to absolute pressure. For example, tire pres sure and blood
pressure are gauge pressures by convention, while atm ospheric pressures, deep vacuum pressures, and altimete r pressures must be
absolute.
For most working fluids where a fluid exists in a closed system, gauge pressure measurement prevails. Pressure instruments
connected to the system will indicate pressures relat ive to the current atmospheric pressure. The situation changes when extreme
vacuum pressures are measured; absolute pressures are typicall y used instead.
To find the absolute pressure of a system, the atmos pheric pressure must then be added to the gauge press ure. While gauge pressure
is very useful in practical pressure measurements, most calculations involving pressure, such as the ideal gas law, require pressure
values in terms of absolute pressures and thus require gauge pressures to be converted to absolute pressures.
Measurements: Gauge Pressure and the Barometer
Barometers are devices used for measuring atmospheric and g auge pressure indirectly through the use of hydrostatic flu ids.
Compare design and operation of aneroid and hydrostat ic based barometers
Gauge Pressure
In practice, pressure is most often measured in terms of gauge pressure. Gauge pressure is the pressure of a system above
atmospheric pressure. Since atmospheric pressure is mostl y constant with little variation near sea level, wher e most practical
pressure measurements are taken, it is assumed to be approximately 101,325 Pa. Modern pressure measuring devic es sometimes
have incorporated mechanisms to account for changes in atmospheric pressure due to elevation changes. Gauge pressure is much
more convenient than absolute pressure for practical measurements and is widely used as an established m easure of pressure.
However, it is important to determine whether it is nec essary to use absolute (gauge plus atmospheric) pressur e for calculations, as
is often the case for most calculations, such as tho se involving the ideal gas law. Pressure measurements have been accurately taken
since the mid-1600s with the invention of the tradit ional barometer. Barometers are devices used to mea sure pressure and were
initially used to measure atmospheric pressure.
Hydrostatic Based Barometers
Early barometers were used to measure atmospheric pre ssure through the use of hydrostatic fluids. Hydrost atic based barometers
consist of columnar devices usually made from glass and filled with a static liquid of consistent density. T he columnar section is
sealed, holds a vacuum, and is partially filled with t he liquid while the base section is open to the atmosp here and makes an
interface with the surrounding environment. As the atm ospheric pressure changes, the pressure exerted by the a tmosphere on the
fluid reservoir exposed to the atmosphere at the bas e changes, increasing as the atmospheric pressure incre ases and decreasing as
the atmospheric pressure decreases. This change in press ure causes the height of the fluid in the columnar st ructure to change,
increasing in height as the atmosphere exerts greate r pressure on the liquid in the reservoir base and decreasing as the atmosphere0
learning obectives

5.6.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960exerts lower pressure on the liquid in the reservoir base. The height of the liquid within the glass colum n then gives a measure of
the atmospheric pressure. Pressure, as determined by hyd rostatic barometers, is often measured by determining the height of the
liquid in the barometer column, thus the torr as a u nit of pressure, but can be used to determine pressure in SI units. Hydrostatic
based barometers most commonly use water or mercury as the static liquid. While the use of water is much less hazardous than
mercury, mercury is often a better choice for fabrica ting accurate hydrostatic barometers. The density of mercury is much higher
than that of water, thus allowing for higher accuracy o f measurements and the ability to fabricate more co mpact hydrostatic
barometers. In theory, a hydrostatic barometer can be placed in a closed system to measure the absolute p ressure and the gauge
pressure of the system by subtracting the atmospheric pr essure.
Aneroid Barometer
Another type of barometer is the aneroid barometer, which consists of a small, flexible sealed metal box called an aneroid cell. The
aneroid cell is made from beryllium-copper alloy an d is partially evacuated. A stiff spring prevents the an eroid cell from collapsing.
Small changes in external air pressure cause the cell to expand or contract. This expansion and contraction is amplified by
mechanical mechanisms to give a pressure reading. Suc h pressure measuring devices are more practical than hydrostatic
barometers for measuring system pressures. Many moder n pressure measuring devices are pre-engineered to o utput gauge pressure
measurements. While the aneroid barometer is the un derlying mechanism behind many modern pressure measu ring devices,
pressure can also be measured using more advanced measuring mechanisms.
Hydrostatic Column Barometer: The concept of determining pressure using the fluid he ight in a hydrostatic column barometer
Variation of Pressure with Height: The density of the liquid is p, g is the acceleration d ue to gravity, and h is the height of the
fluid in the barometer column.
Pressure in the Body
Pressure plays an essential role in a number of critical b odily functions including respiration and blood circulati on.
Explain role played by pressure in the circulatory and r espiratory systems
The Role of Pressure in the Circulatory System
Pressure plays an essential role in various critical bodily systems that are necessary for survival. One su ch critical bodily system
which relies on pressure for functionality is the circ ulatory system, which is an example of a closed fluid system under pressure.
The circulatory system is responsible for transportin g oxygen and essential nutrients to all organs within the body as well as
removing waste materials from these organs. Blood can be regarded as a viscous liquid contained within the c irculatory system that
travels throughout this closed system as a result of pressu re and pressure differences within the circulatory system.
As the volume of blood within the circulatory system i s confined to the veins, arteries, and capillaries th ere is a pressure within this
closed system. Furthermore, through a complicated system of veins, arteries, and capillaries of varying diame ter as well as valves
and the heart acting as a continuous pump, pressure d ifferences arise within the circulatory system that r esult in the potential for
blood to circulate throughout the circulatory system, thus carrying out essential bodily functions for survival.learning obectives

5.6.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960Pressure within the circulatory system is referred to a s blood pressure, and is a primary and crucial vital s ign which can be used to
diagnose or indicate a number of medical conditions. Blood pressure varies throughout the body as well as f rom one individual to
another and depends on a number of factors such as he art rate, blood volume, resistance of the circulatory s ystem (veins, arteries,
and capillaries), and the viscosity of blood. Any medical conditions affecting any of these factors will have a n effect on blood
pressure and the overall health of the circulatory system.
Approximation for Mean Arterial Pressure: In practice, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) can be appr oximated from easily
obtainable blood pressure measurements.
The mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average pressu re over a cardiac cycle and is determined by, where C O is the cardiac
outputs, SVR is the systemic vascular resistance, and CVP i s the central venous pressure (CVP). In practice, the mea n arterial
pressure (MAP) can be approximated from easily obtain able blood pressure measurements in, where P is the mea sured systolic
pressure and P is the measured diastolic pressure. One particularly common and dangerous circulatory syste m condition is
partial blockage of blood vessels due to a number o f factors, such as plaque build-up from high cholesterol, which results in a
reduction of the effective blood vessel cross-section al diameter and a corresponding reduction in blood flow rate and thus an
increase in blood pressure to restore normal blood flow ac cording to Poiseuille’s Law.
Equation for Mean Arterial Pressure: The mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average pressure over a cardiac cycle and is
determined this equation, where CO is the cardiac outputs, SVR is the systemic vascular resistance, and CVP is the central venous
pressure (CVP).
The Role of Pressure in the Respiratory System
Pressure also plays an essential role in the respirato ry system, as it is responsible for the breathing m echanism. Pressure differences
between the lungs and the atmosphere create a potent ial for air to enter the lungs, resulting in inhalatio n. The mechanism resulting
in inhalation is due to lowering of the diaphragm, whic h increases the volume of the thoracic cavity surro unding the lungs, thus
lowering its pressure as determined by the ideal gas l aw. The reduction in pressure of the thoracic cavity, which normally has a
negative gauge pressure, thus keeping the lungs inf lated, pulls air into the lungs, inflating the alve oli and resulting in oxygen
transport needed for respiration. As the diaphragm res tores and moves upwards, pressure within the thoracic ca vity increases,
resulting in exhalation. The cycle repeats itself, r esulting in the respiration which as discussed is mecha nically due to pressure
changes. Without pressure in the body, and the corr esponding potential that it has for dynamic bodily processes, essential functions
such as blood circulation and respiration would not be pos sible.
Key Points
Pressure is a scalar quantity defined as force per unit ar ea. Pressure only concerns the force component perpendicul ar to the
surface upon which it acts, thus if the force acts at an ang le, the force component along the direction perpendicul ar to the
surface must be used to calculate pressure.
The pressure exerted on a surface by an object increases as the weight of the object increases or the surface area of contact
decreases. Alternatively the pressure exerted decreases a s the weight of the object decreases or the surface area of contact
increases.
Pressure exerted by ideal gases in confined containers is due to the average number of collisions of gas molecules with the
container walls per unit time. As such, pressure depend s on the amount of gas (in number of molecules), its temper ature, and the
volume of the container.
Hydrostatic pressure refers to the pressure exerted by a fl uid (gas or liquid) at any point in space within that fluid, assuming that
the fluid is incompressible and at rest.sys
dias

5.6.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960Pressure within a liquid depends only on the density of the l iquid, the acceleration due to gravity, and the depth with in the
liquid. The pressure exerted by such a static liquid increa ses linearly with increasing depth.
Pressure within a gas depends on the temperature of the gas, the mass of a single molecule of the gas, the acceleratio n due to
gravity, and the height (or depth) within the gas.
Hydrostatic balance is the term used for a region or statio nary object within a static fluid which is at static equilibriu m, and for
which the sum of all forces and sum of all torques is equal t o zero.
A region or static object within a stationary fluid experien ces downward forces due to the weight of the region or o bject, and the
pressure exerted from the fluid above the region or obje ct, as well as an upward force due to the pressure exerted fro m the fluid
below the region or object.
For a region or static object within a static fluid, the downwar d force due to the weight of the region or object is counter acted by
the upward buoyant force, which is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by the region or object.
Pascal’s Principle is used to quantitatively relate the pres sure at two points in an incompressible, static fluid. It s tates that
pressure is transmitted, undiminished, in a closed static fluid.
The total pressure at any point within an incompressible, static fluid is equal to the sum of the applied pressure a t any point in
that fluid and the hydrostatic pressure change due to a diffe rence in height within that fluid.
Through the application of Pascal’s Principle, a static liqu id can be utilized to generate a large output force using a much
smaller input force, yielding important devices such as hy draulic presses.
Atmospheric pressure is a measure of absolute pressure and is due to the weight of the air molecules above a certain he ight
relative to sea level, increasing with decreasing altitu de and decreasing with increasing altitude.
Gauge pressure is the additional pressure in a system relati ve to atmospheric pressure. It is a convenient pressure me asurement
for most practical applications.
While gauge pressure is more convenient for practical measurements, absolute pressure is necessary for most pressu re
calculations, thus the atmospheric pressure must be added t o the gauge pressure for calculations.
Gauge pressure is the pressure of a system above atmospheri c pressure, which must be converted to absolute pressure fo r most
calculations.
The barometer is a device which uses hydrostatic fluids to dir ectly determine atmospheric pressure and may be used to
indirectly measure the gauge pressure of systems.
The hydrostatic column barometer uses a liquid like wate r or mercury for functionality, while the aneroid baromet er uses an
evacuated flexible metal cell.
Pressure, along with the potential for work arising from dif ferences in pressure, plays an essential role in the functionality of
several critical bodily functions and systems necessary for survival.
The circulatory system relies on pressure differences fo r circulating blood, along with oxygen, necessary nutrien ts, and waste
products throughout the body.
Respiration is made possible as a result of pressure diffe rences between the thoracic cavity, the lungs, and the en vironment and
is largely regulated by movement of the diaphragm.
Key Terms
ideal gas: Theoretical gas characterized by random motion whose i ndividual molecules do not interact with one another and are
chemically inert.
kinetic energy: The energy associated with a moving particle or objec t having a certain mass.
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
static equilibrium: the physical state in which all components of a system are at rest and the net force is equal to zero
throughout the system
Buoyancy: The power of supporting a body so that it floats; upwar d pressure exerted by the fluid in which a body is immersed.
torque: Something that produces or tends to produce torsion or r otation; the moment of a force or system of forces tendin g to
cause rotation.
equilibrium: A state of rest or balance due to the equal action of o pposing forces.
hydraulic press: Device that uses a hydraulic cylinder (closed static flu id) to generate a compressive force.
Gauge Pressure: The pressure of a system above atmospheric pressure.
Torr: A unit of pressure equal to one millimeter of mercury (760 torr = 101,325 Pa).

5.6.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960Aneroid Barometer: A device for measuring pressure, often specially cali brated for use as an altimeter, consisting of a box or
chamber partially exhausted of air, having an elastic t op and a pointer to indicate the degree of compression of the top caused by
the external air.
Thoracic Cavity: A hollow place or space, or a potential space, within th e body or one of its organs.
Poiseuille’s Law: The law that the velocity of a liquid flowing through a capillary is directly proportional to the pressure of the
liquid and the fourth power of the radius of the capillar y and is inversely proportional to the viscosity of the liq uid and the
length of the capillary.
Alveoli: Small air sacs or cavities in the lung that give the tissue a honeycomb appearance and expand its surface area for the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
ideal gas. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ideal_gas. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fluid statics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluid_statics%23Pressure_in_fluids_at_rest.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
static equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/static_equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mechanical equilibrium. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_equilibrium. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Hydrostatic equilibrium). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrostatic_equilibrium). License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
torque. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/torque. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.6.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pascal's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pressure measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure_measurement. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Atmospheric pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmospheric_pressure. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Pressure measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Pressure_measurement. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Barometer. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Barometer. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.6.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33960Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/poiseuille-s-law--3.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Blood pressure. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_pressure. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/alveoli--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/thoracic-cavity. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure and Pascal's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK_cG85iOO4. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.6.2: Density and Pressure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.2: Density and Pressure by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.6.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339615.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle
Calculate the direction of the buoyancy force
When you rise from soaking in a warm bath, your arms may feel strangely heavy. This effect is due to the loss of the buoyant
support of the water. What creates this buoyant forc e? Why is it that some things float and others do not? Do objects that sink get
any support at all from the fluid? Is your body buoyed by t he atmosphere, or are only helium balloons affected?
Buoyant Force: Cause and Calculation
We find the answers to the above questions in the fac t that in any given fluid, pressure increases with dep th. When an object is
immersed in a fluid, the upward force on the bottom o f an object is greater than the downward force on the top of the object. The
result is a net upward force (a buoyant force) on any object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater than the object’s weight, the
object will rise to the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the buoyan t force
equals the object’s weight, the object will remain susp ended at that depth. The buoyant force is always prese nt in a fluid, whether
an object floats, sinks or remains suspended.
The buoyant force is a result of pressure exerted by t he fluid. The fluid pushes on all sides of an immerse d object, but as pressure
increases with depth, the push is stronger on the bottom surface of the object than in the top (as seen in).
You can calculate the buoyant force on an object by adding up the forces exerted on all of an object’s sides. For example, consider
the object shown in.
The top surface has area and is at depth; the pressure at that depth is:
where ρρ is the density of the fluid and is the gravita tional acceleration. The magnitude of the force on the to p surface is:
This force points downwards. Similarly, the force on the botto m surface is:
and points upwards. Because it is cylindrical, the net force on the object’s sides is zero—the forces on diff erent parts of the surface
oppose each other and cancel exactly. Thus, the net upwa rd force on the cylinder due to the fluid is:
The Archimedes Principle
Although calculating the buoyant force in this way is always possible it is often very difficult. A simpler method follows from the
Archimedes principle, which states that the buoyant fo rce exerted on a body immersed in a fluid is equal t o the weight of the fluid
the body displaces. In other words, to calculate the buoyant force on an object we assume that the submer sed part of the object is
made of water and then calculate the weight of that water (as seen in).
Archimedes principle: The buoyant force on the ship (a) is equal to the weight of the water displaced by the ship—shown as the
dashed region in (b).learning objectives

5.6.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961The principle can be stated as a formula:
The reasoning behind the Archimedes principle is that the buoyancy force on an object depends on the pre ssure exerted by the fluid
on its submerged surface. Imagine that we replace the submerged part of the object with the fluid in which it is contained, as in (b).
The buoyancy force on this amount of fluid must be th e same as on the original object (the ship). However, we also know that the
buoyancy force on the fluid must be equal to its wei ght, as the fluid does not sink in itself. Therefore, the buoyancy force on the
original object is equal to the weight of the “displaced flu id” (in this case, the water inside the dashed region (b)).
The Archimedes principle is valid for any fluid—not o nly liquids (such as water) but also gases (such as air). We will explore this
further as we discuss applications of the principle in subseq uent sections.
J e sse M a son
How to Solve a Buoyant Force P roblem - Simple Ex
How to Solve a Buoyant Force P roblem - Simple Ex
Watch on
Archimedes’ Principle – Simple Example: We use Archimedes’ Principle to determine the number o f penguins an ice float can
dryly support.
Complete Submersion
The buoyancy force on a completely submerged object of volume is.
Identify factors determining the buoyancy force on a comp letely submerged object
learning objectivies

5.6.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961The Archimedes principle is easiest to understand and apply in the case of entirely submersed objects. In this section we discuss a
few relevant examples. In general, the buoyancy force on a c ompletely submerged object is given by the formula:
where is the volume of the object, is the density of the fluid, and is gravitational acceleration. T his follows immediately from
the Archimedes’ principle, and the fact that the obje ct is completely submerged (and so the volume of the fluid displaced is just the
volume of the object).
Cylinder
In the previous section, we calculated the buoyancy f orce on a cylinder (shown in) by considering the fo rce exerted on each of the
cylinder’s sides. Now, we’ll calculate this force using Archimedes’ principle. The buoyancy force on the cyli nder is equal to the
weight of the displaced fluid. This weight is equal to the m ass of the displaced fluid multiplied by the gravitatio nal acceleration:
Buoyant force: The fluid pushes on all sides of a submerged objec t. However, because pressure increases with depth, the upward
push on the bottom surface (F2) is greater than the downward push on the top surface (F1). Therefore, the ne t buoyant force is
always upwards.
The mass of the displaced fluid is equal to its volume mul tiplied by its density:
However (and this is the crucial point), the cylinder is entirely submerged, so the volume of the displaced fluid is just the volume
of the cylinder (see), and:

5.6.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961
Archimedes principle: The volume of the fluid displaced (b) is the same as t he volume of the original cylinder (a).
The volume of a cylinder is the area of its base multiplie d by its height, or in our case:
Therefore, the buoyancy force on the cylinder is:
This is the same result obtained in the previous section by co nsidering the force due to the pressure exerted by the flu id.
Helium Airship
Consider the USS Macon, a helium-filled airship (shown i n). Its envelope (the “balloon”) contained 184,059.5 cubic meters of
helium. Ignoring the small volume of the gondola, wha t was the buoyancy force on this airship? If the airsh ip weighed 108,000 kg,
how much cargo could it carry? Assume the density of air is 1.225 kg per meter cubed. The buoyancy force on an airship is due to
the air in which it is immersed. Although we don’t know t he exact shape of the airship, we know its volume and t he density of the
air, and thus we can calculate the buoyancy force:
Helium airship: The USS Macon, a 1930s helium-filled airship.
To find the cargo capacity of the airship, we subtract the weight of the airship from the buoyancy force:

5.6.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961The mass the airship can carry is:
Flotation
An object floats if the buoyancy force exerted on it by the fluid balances its weight.
Express the relationship between the buoyancy force and th e weight for a floating object
Why do some objects float, but others don’t? If you p ut a metal coin into a glass of water it will sink. Bu t most ships are built of
metal, and they float. So how is this possible?
Condition for Flotation
An object will float if the buoyancy force exerted on it b y the fluid balances its weight, i.e. if FB=mgFB=mg.
But the Archimedes principle states that the buoyant force is the weight of the fluid displaced. So, for a floating object on a liquid,
the weight of the displaced liquid is the weight of t he object. Thus, only in the special case of floating does the buoyant force acting
on an object equal the object’s weight. Consider a on e-ton block of solid iron. As iron is nearly eight ti mes denser than water, it
displaces only 1/8 ton of water when submerged, which is not enough to keep it afloat. Suppose the same iron block is reshaped
into a bowl. It still weighs one ton, but when it is pu t in water, it displaces a greater volume of water tha n when it was a block. The
deeper the iron bowl is immersed, the more water it di splaces, and the greater the buoyant force acting o n it. When the buoyant
force equals one ton, it will sink no further.
When any boat displaces a weight of water equal to it s own weight, it floats. This is often called the “pri nciple of flotation” where a
floating object displaces a weight of fluid equal to its own weight. Every ship, submarine, and dirigible m ust be designed to
displace a weight of fluid equal to its own weight. A 10,000-ton ship must be built wide enough to displace 10,000 tons of water
before it sinks too deep in the water. The same is true for vessels in air (as air is a fluid): A dirigible t hat weighs 100 tons displaces
at least 100 tons of air; if it displaces more, it r ises; if it displaces less, it falls. If the dirigible displaces exactly its weight, it hovers
at a constant altitude.
Flotation and Density
Density plays a crucial role in Archimedes’ principle. The average density of an object is what ultimately de termines whether it
floats. If its average density is less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. This is because the fluid, having a higher density,
contains more mass and thus more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which equals the weight of the fluid displaced, is
thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, a n object denser than the fluid will sink. The extent to which a floating object
is submerged depends on how the object’s density is re lated to that of the fluid. For example, an unloaded ship has a lower density,
and less of it is submerged compared with the same shi p loaded with cargo. We can derive a quantitative exp ression for the fraction
submerged by considering density. The fraction submerg ed is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
Density and Submersion: An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a lo aded ship (b).learning objectives

5.6.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid disp laced, which we call. Now we can obtain the relationship between the
densities by substituting into the expression. This give s
where is the average density of the object and ρflρfl is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, i ts mass and that of the
displaced fluid are equal, and so they cancel from the eq uation, leaving
There are a couple things to note about this expression:
1. Note that it mentions the average density of the objec t. This can be much less than the density of the materia l the object is made
of. For instance, a steel ship is actually mostly filled wit h air (think of the corridors, cargo holds, etc.), so its ave rage density is
between that of air and steel. To be more precise, the average density is defined as the total mass of an object divided by its total
volume:
2. This formula makes sense only if the density of the obje ct is smaller than the density of the fluid. Otherwise, the f raction
submerged becomes greater than one—a sign that the objec t does not float at all, but it sinks!
Key Points
The buoyancy force is caused by the pressure exerted by the fluid in which an object is immersed.
The buoyancy force always points upwards because the press ure of a fluid increases with depth.
You can calculate the buoyancy force either directly by computing the force exerted on each of the object’s s urfaces, or
indirectly by finding the weight of the displaced fluid.
If an object is completely submerged, the volume of the flu id displaced is equal to the volume of the object.
The buoyancy force on hot-air balloons, dirigibles and other objects can be calculated by assuming that they are e ntirely
submerged in air.
The buoyancy force does not depend on the shape of the ob ject, only on its volume.
The buoyancy force experienced by an object depends on its shape.
The fraction of an object’s volume that’s submerged is gi ven by the ratio of its average density to that of the fl uid:.
An object floats if the buoyancy force exerted on it by the fluid balances its weight.
Key Terms
buoyant force: An upward force exerted by a fluid that opposes the weight o f an immersed object.
Archimedes principle: The buoyant force exerted on a body immersed in a flu id is equal to the weight of the fluid the body
displaces.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
buoyant force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/buoyant%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.6.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33961Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
USS Macon F9C. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USS_Macon_F9C.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes_principle. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Archimedes principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes%20principle. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Archimedes' Principle - Simple Example. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4aig_pg3k. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/50953ccfe4b0b4558d8e546b/Shi ps.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
USS Macon F9C. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USS_Macon_F9C.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/l atest. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42196/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.3: Archimedes’ Principle by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.6.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339625.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
Explain the phenomena of surface tension and capillary a ction
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type ar e called cohesive forces. Liquids can, for example, be kept in open
containers because cohesive forces hold the molecule s together. Attractive forces between molecules of diff erent types are called
adhesive forces. Such forces cause liquid drops to cling to window panes, for example. In this section we exami ne effects of
cohesive and adhesive forces in liquids.
Surface Tension
Surface tension is a contractive tendency of the sur face of a liquid that allows it to resist an externa l force. It is shown, for example,
in the floating of some objects on the surface of wat er, even though they are denser than water, and in th e ability of some insects
(e.g., water striders) to run on water’s surface. This p roperty is caused by cohesion of similar molecules and is responsible for many
of the behaviors of liquids.
The cohesive forces among liquid molecules are respo nsible for the phenomenon of surface tension, as sho wn in. In the bulk of the
liquid, each molecule is pulled equally in every dir ection by neighboring liquid molecules, resulting in a net force of zero. The
molecules at the surface do not have other molecules on all sides of them and therefore are pulled inward s. This creates some
internal pressure and forces liquid surfaces to contract to the minimal area.
Diagram of Surface-Tension Forces: Diagram of the forces on molecules of a liquid
Surface tension has the unit of force per unit length, or of energy per unit area. The two units are equiv alent. However, when we
refer to energy per unit of area, we use the term surface energy, which is more general in that it applies to solid s as well as liquids.
Capillary Action
Capillary action, or capillarity, is the ability of a liquid to flow in narrow spaces without the assistance of, and in opposition to,
external forces like gravity. The effect can be see n in the drawing-up of liquids between the hairs of a paint-brush, in a thin tube, in
porous materials such as paper, in some non-porous ma terials such as liquified carbon fiber, and in a ce ll. It occurs because of
intermolecular attractive forces between the liquid and solid surrounding surfaces. If the diameter of t he tube is sufficiently small,
then the combination of surface tension (which is ca used by cohesion within the liquid) and adhesive force s between the liquid and
the container act to lift the liquid.
With some pairs of materials, such as mercury and glass (see), the intermolecular forces within the liquid exceed those between the
solid and the liquid, so a convex meniscus forms, and capi llary action works in reverse.learning objectives

5.6.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33962
Capillarity: Capillary action of water compared to mercury, in each c ase with respect to glass
Key Points
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type are called cohesive forces.
Attractive forces between molecules of different types are called adhesive forces.
Surface tension is a contractive tendency of the surface o f a liquid that allows it to resist an external force.
Capillary action, or capillarity, is the ability of a l iquid to flow in narrow spaces without the assistance of, and in opposition to,
external forces such as gravity.
Key Term
Pressure: the amount of force that is applied over a given are a divided by the size of that area
intermolecular: from one molecule to another; between molecules
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Capillary action. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Capillary_action. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Adhesion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Adhesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Cohesion (chemistry). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohesion_(chemistry). License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.6.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33962intermolecular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/intermolecular. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Pressure. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Pressure. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
File:Capillarity.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedi a. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Capillarity.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Wassermolek%C3%BCleInTr%C3%B6pfchen.svg&page=1. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.4: Cohesion and Adhesion by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.6.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339635.6.5: Fluids in Motion
Determine the flow rate based on velocity and area or el apsed time and justify the use of continuity in expressing p roperties
of a fluid and its motion
The flow rate of a fluid is the volume of fluid which passes through a surface in a given unit of time. It is usually represented by the
symbol Q.
AP Phy sics 2 - Continuity Equation for FluidsAP Phy sics 2 - Continuity Equation for Fluids
Continuity Equation for Fluids: A brief introduction to the Continuity Equation fo r Fluids.
Flow Rate
V olumetric flow rate is defined as
where Q is the flow rate, v is the velocity of the flu id, and a is the area of the cross section of the space the fluid is moving through.
V olumetric flow rate can also be found with
where Q is the flow rate, V is the V olume of fluid, and t is ela psed time.learning objectives

5.6.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33963Continuity
The equation of continuity works under the assumption that the flow in will equal the flow out. This can be u seful to solve for
many properties of the fluid and its motion:
Flow in = Flow out: Using the known properties of a fluid in one condition, we can use the continuity equation to solve for the
properties of the same fluid under other conditions.
This can be expressed in many ways, for example:. The equation of continuity applies to any incompressibl e fluid.
Since the fluid cannot be compressed, the amount of f luid which flows into a surface must equal the amount flowing out of the
surface.
Applying the Continuity Equation
You can observe the continuity equation’s effect in a garden hose. The water flows through the hose and when it reaches the
narrower nozzle, the velocity of the water increases. Speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, an d speed decreases
when cross-sectional area increases. This is a consequence of the continuity equation. If the flow Q is held cons tant, when the area
A decreases, the velocity v must increase proportion ally. For example, if the nozzle of the hose is half t he area of the hose, the
velocity must double to maintain the continuous flow.
Key Points
Flow rate can be expressed in either terms of cross sectional a rea and velocity, or volume and time.
Because liquids are incompressible, the rate of flow into a n area must equal the rate of flow out of an area. This is kno wn as the
equation of continuity.
The equation of continuity can show how much the speed o f a liquid increases if it is forced to flow through a smaller ar ea. For
example, if the area of a pipe is halved, the velocity of th e fluid will double.
Although gases often behave as fluids, they are not incom pressible the way liquids are and so the continuity equation does not
apply.
Key Terms
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
continuity: Lack of interruption or disconnection; the quality o f being continuous in space or time.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Equation of continuity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Equation_of_continuity. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity. Sept ember 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42205/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Bernoulli's equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli's_equation. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.6.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33963Flow rate. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_rate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
continuity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/continuity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Continuity Equation for Fluids. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fR368Ps-xBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity. Febr uary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42205/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.6.5: Fluids in Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.5: Fluids in Motion by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.6.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339645.6.6: Deformation of Solids
Explain how length of an object is determined
Length
In geometric measurements, length is the longest dim ension of an object. In other contexts “length” is th e measured dimension of
an object. For example: it is possible to cut a length of a wire which is shorter than wire thickness. Length m ay be distinguished
from height, which is vertical extent, and width or brea dth, which are the distance from side to side, measurin g across the object at
right angles to the length.
Length is a measure of one dimension, whereas area is a measure of two dimensions (length squared) and volu me is a measure of
three dimensions (length cubed). In most systems of measurement, the unit of length is a fundamental uni t, from which other units
are defined.
After Albert Einstein’s Special Relativity Theory, length can no longer be thought of being constant in all r eference frames. Thus, a
ruler that is one meter long in one frame of refere nce will not be one meter long in a reference frame that is travelling at a velocity
relative to the first frame. This means that the length of an object is variable depending on the observer.
Units
One of the oldest units of length measurement used in the ancient world was the ‘cubit,’ which was the length of the arm from the
tip of the finger to the elbow. This could then be su bdivided into shorter units like the foot, hand (which at 4 inches is still used
today for expressing the height of horses) or finger, or added together to make longer units like the stri de. The cubit could vary
considerably due to the different sizes of people.
In the physical sciences and engineering, when one spe aks of “units of length”, the word “length” is synonymous with “distance”.
There are several units that are used to measure leng th. Units of length may be based on lengths of human body parts, the distance
traveled in a number of paces, the distance between la ndmarks or places on the Earth, or arbitrarily on th e length of some fixed
object.In the International System of Units (SI), the ba sic unit of length is the meter and is now defined in terms of the speed of
light. The centimeter and the kilometer, derived fro m the meter, are also commonly used units. In U.S. customa ry units, English or
Imperial system of units, commonly used units of lengt h are the inch, the foot, the yard, and the mile. Unit s used to denote
distances in the vastness of space, as in astronomy, are much longer than those typically used on Earth and include the astronomical
unit, the light-year, and the parsec.
Length: The metric length of one kilometre is equivalent to t he imperial measurement of 0.62137 miles.
Shape
The shape of an object is a description of space that the object takes up; the shape can change if the object i s deformed.
Describe effects of deformations, rotations, and magnific ations
The shape of an object located in some space is a ge ometrical description of the part of that space occu pied by the object, as
determined by its external boundary – abstracting f rom location and orientation in space, size, and othe r properties such as
color, content, and material compositionLearning objectives
learning objectives
Shape

5.6.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33964Simple and Complex Shapes
Simple shapes can be described by basic geometry obj ects such as a set of two or more points, a line, a cur ve, a plane, a plane
figure (e.g. square or circle), or a solid figure (e.g. cube or sphere). Most shapes occurring in the physical world are complex.
Some, such as plant structures and coastlines, may be so arbitrary as to defy traditional mathematical de scription – in which case
they may be analyzed by differential geometry, or as fr actals.
In geometry, two subsets of a Euclidean space have t he same shape if one can be transformed to the other by a combination of
translations, rotations (together also called rigid tra nsformations), and uniform scalings. In other words, the shape of a set of points
is all the geometrical information that is invarian t to translations, rotations, and size changes. Having the same shape is an
equivalence relation, and accordingly a precise math ematical definition of the notion of shape can be g iven as being an equivalence
class of subsets of a Euclidean space having the same shap e.
Shapes of physical objects are equal if the subsets of space these objects occupy satisfy the definitio n above. In particular, the shape
does not depend on the size and placement in space of t he object.
Shapes: Examples of shapes.
Volume
V olume is a measure of the three-dimensional space an obj ect occupies, usually taken in terms of length, width and height.
Explain how is volume measured geometrically
V olume is the quantity of three-dimensional space con tained by a closed boundary; it is the space that a substance (solid, liquid, gas
or plasma) or shape occupies or contains. V olume is o ften quantified numerically using an SI derived unit, the cubic meter.
However, for liquids the unit of volume used is known as the liter (equivalent to 0.001 cubic meters).
Measuring Volume: A measuring cup can be used to measure volumes of liq uids. This cup measures volume in units of cups, fluid
ounces and millilitres.
V olume is measured geometrically by multiplying an object’s three dimensions—usually taken as length, wid th and height. Some
common volumes are taken as follows:
The volume of a cube: length times width times height.
The volume of a cylinder: the cross-sectional area time s the height of the cylinder.
The volume of a sphere: 4/3 times the radius cubed times p i.
The volume of a solid can be determined by the volume o f liquid it displaces when submerged.learning objectives

5.6.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33964The volume of a container is generally understood a s the capacity of the container, meaning the amount of fluid (gas or liquid) the
container can hold, rather than the amount of space the container itself displaces. Measuring cups, as seen in, work by taking a
known cross sectional area of a cup and multiplying t hat by a variable height. Since liquid will always cov er the cross section (if
there is enough liquid), adding more liquid will increase the height inside the container.
Liquids take the shape of their container, filling up the minimum height needed. Gases, on the other hand, ta ke up the maximum
amount of volume possible. Thus a measuring cup can accurately measure the volume of a liquid, whereas a gas will always fill the
entire container, more or less uniformly, no matter how litt le gas there is.
Stress and Strain
A point charge creates an electric field that can be calcul ated using Coulomb’s Law.
The electric field of a point charge is, like any e lectric field, a vector field that represents the eff ect that the point charge has on
other charges around it. The effect is felt as a for ce and when charged particles are not in motion this force is known as the
electrostatic force. The electrostatic force is, much l ike gravity, a force that acts at a distance. Therefo re, we rationalize this action
at a distance by saying that charges create fields aro und them that have effects on other charges.
Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size that contains a certain charge, electric field lines emanate radially in all
directions. If the charge is positive, field lines poi nt radially away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point radially
towards it.
Electric field of positive point charge: The electric field of a positively charged particle points radially away from the charge.
Electric field of negative point charge: The electric field of a negatively charged particle p oints radially toward the particle.
The reason for these directions can be seen in the d erivation of the electric field of a point charge. Let’s first take a look at the
definition of electric field of a point particle:

5.6.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33964In the above equation, q represents the charge of th e particle creating the electric field and the cons tant k is a result of simply
lumping the constants together. This charge is eithe r positive or negative. If the charge is positive, as shown above, the electric field
will be pointing in a positive radial direction from the charge q (away from the charge) and the following text explains why. The
above equation is defined in radial coordinates which can be seen in.
Radial Coordinate System: The electric field of a point charge is defined in rad ial coordinates. The positive r direction points
away from the origin, and the negative r direction points to ward the origin. The electric field of a point charge is sy mmetric with
respect to the θ direction.
If we now place another positive charge, Q (called the test charge), at some radial distance, R, away from th e original particle, the
test charge will feel a force given by
The thing to keep in mind is that the force above i s acting on the test charge Q, in the positive radial d irection as defined by the
original charge q. This means that because the charg es are both positive and will repel one another, the f orce on the test charge
points away from the original charge.
If the test charge were negative, the force felt on that c harge would be
Notice that this points in the negative direction, whic h is toward the original charge. This makes sense bec ause opposite charges
attract and the force on the test charge will tend t o push it toward the original positive charge creatin g the field. The above
mathematical description of the electric field of a point charge is known as Coulomb ‘s Law.
Key Points
Length is typically a measure of the longest dimension of an object.
The deformation of an object is typically a change in le ngth.
The SI unit of length is the meter.
The shape of an object is a representation of the space taken up by the object.
Deformations can change the shape of an object.
Objects that have the same shape can be transformed in to each other by rotation or magnification.
V olume is often quantified numerically using an SI derived unit, the cubic meter. However, for liquids the unit of vo lume used
is known as the liter (equivalent to 0.001 cubic meters).
This can also be understood as the amount of fluid a submerged object displaces.
V olume can be measured for geometrically regular obje cts by simple formulas. However, more complicated objects are easier to
measure with fluid displacement.
The electric field is a vector field around a charged particle that represents the force that other charged pa rticles would feel
when placed near the particle creating the electric field.

5.6.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33964Given a point charge, or a particle of infinitesimal size, t hat contains a certain charge, electric field lines emana te from equally
in all radial directions.
If the point charge is positive, field lines point away from it; if the charge is negative, field lines point towards it.
Key Terms
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
special relativity: A theory that (neglecting the effects of gravity) re conciles the principle of relativity with the observation that
the speed of light is constant in all frames of referenc e.
plane: A level or flat surface.
Euclidean: Adhering to the principles of traditional geometry, in wh ich parallel lines are equidistant.
cross section: A section formed by a plane cutting through an object, usually at right angles to an axis.
dimension: A measure of spatial extent in a particular direction, such as height, width or breadth, or depth.
coulomb’s law: the mathematical equation calculating the electrosta tic force vector between two charged particles
vector field: a construction in which each point in a Euclidean space i s associated with a vector; a function whose range is a
vector space
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
special relativity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/special_relativity. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Shape. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shape. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
plane. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plane. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Euclidean. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Euclidean. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
dimension. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dimension. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cross section. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cross_section. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY: Attribution
vector field. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vector_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Electric field. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_field. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Coulomb's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb's_law. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Length. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Length. License: CC BY: Attribution
Polygon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon. License: CC BY: Attribution
V olume. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.6.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33964480px-VFPt_plus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_plus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
480px-VFPt_minus_thumb.svg.png. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VFPt_minus_thumb.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/51225257e4b0c14bf4651470 /radialCoords.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
This page titled 5.6.6: Deformation of Solids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
10.6: Deformation of Solids by Boundless has no license indicated.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.7: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications
5.7.1: Overview
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
5.7.4: Other Applications
This page titled 5.7: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.

5.7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339665.7.1: Overview
Interpret the circulatory system in terms of your knowledge of fluid dynamics
We have discussed many situations in which fluids are st atic, though there are many situations where fluids fl ow. For example, a
column of smoke rises from a camp fire, water streams fro m a fire hose, blood courses through your veins. Why does rising smoke
curl and twist? How does a nozzle increase the speed of water emerging from a hose? How does the body regulate blood flow?
Fluid dynamics, the physics of fluids in motion, allows us to an swer these and many other questions.
Application in the Circulatory System
For example, consider the circulatory system—a connect ed series of tubes with fluid flowing through them. Th e heart is the driver
of the circulatory system, generating cardiac output (CO) by rhythmically contracting and relaxing. This c reates changes in
regional pressures and (combined with a complex valvu lar system in the heart and the veins) ensures that t he blood moves around
the circulatory system in one direction. The “beating ” of the heart generates pulsatile blood flow, conduc ted into the arteries across
the micro-circulation and then back via the venous sy stem to the heart.
The aorta, the main artery, leaves the left side of the heart and proceeds to divide into smaller and sm aller arteries that first become
arterioles and eventually become capillaries, throu gh which oxygen transfer occurs. The capillaries conne ct to venules, into which
the deoxygenated blood passes from the cells back into the blood. The blood then travels back through the network of veins to the
right heart. The micro-circulation (arterioles, capi llaries and venules) constitutes most of the area of the vascular system and is the
site of the transfer of O into the cells.
The venous system returns the de-oxygenated blood to the right heart where it is pumped into the lungs to become oxygenated.
This is also where CO and other gaseous wastes are exc hanged and expelled during breathing. Blood then ret urns to the left side
of the heart where it begins the process again. The he art, vessels and lungs are all actively involved in mai ntaining healthy cells and
organs, and all influence the fluid dynamics of the bloo d.
Fluids and Diffusion
Now consider how nutrients are transported through a hum an body. Diffusion is the movement of substances due t o random
thermal molecular motion. Fluids can even diffuse th rough solids (such as fumes or odors entering ice c ubes). Diffusion is the
dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and waste products occurs between the blood and tissue, and between air
and blood in the lungs. In the evolutionary process, as organisms became larger they needed quicker method s of transportation than
net diffusion, due to the larger distances involved in the transport. This factor lead to the developmen t of circulatory systems. Less
sophisticated, single-celled organisms still rely totally on diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptak e of nutrients.
Another important form of fluid movement is osmosis—the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane (shown in)
from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration. It is driven by the imbalance in water concentration.
Similarly, dialysis is the transport of any other mol ecule through a semipermeable membrane due to its co ncentration difference.
Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the kidneys t o cleanse the blood, and the medical application of dialysis through machinery
is important in the treatment of individuals with failing kidney function.learning objectives

5.7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33966
A Semipermeable Membrane: A semipermeable membrane with small pores that allow only small molecules to pass through.
Flow Rate and Velocity
Flow velocity and volumetric flow rates are important q uantities in fluid dynamics used to quantify motion of a fluid and are
interrelated.
Assess the significance of studying volumetric flow in ad dition to flow velocity
Fluid dynamics is the study of fluids in motion and cor responding phenomena. A fluid in motion has a veloci ty, just as a solid
object in motion has a velocity. Like the velocity of a solid, the velocity of a fluid is the rate of c hange of position per unit of time.
In mathematical terms, the velocity of a fluid is the derivative of the position vector of the fluid with respect to time, and is
therefore itself a vector quantity. The flow velocity vector is a function of position, and if the velocit y of the fluid is not constant
then it is also a function of time. Equation 1 shows the mathematical expression for the velocity of a f luid in motion. As a vector
quantity, fluid velocity must have at least one non- zero directional component and may have up to three non-zero directional
components. The velocity vector has non-zero components in any orthogonal direction along which motion of the f luid occurs.
Flow Velocity: Mathematical Expression for Flow Velocity
Turbulent Flow vs. Laminar Flow
Fluid velocity can be affected by the pressure of th e fluid, the viscosity of the fluid, and the cross-s ectional area of the container in
which the fluid is travelling. These factors affect fl uid velocity depending on the nature of the fluid f low—particularly whether the
flow is turbulent or laminar in nature. In the case of turbulent flow, the flow velocity is complex in n ature and thus hard to predict;
it must be analyzed on a system per system basis. In the case of Laminar flow, however, fluid flow is much simpler and flow
velocity can be accurately calculated using Poiseuill e’s Law. In SI units, fluid flow velocity is expressed in terms of meters per
seconds. The magnitude of the fluid flow velocity is the fluid flow speed. Fluid flow velocity effectively d escribes everything about
the motion of a fluid.
Volumetric Flow
In addition to flow velocity, volumetric flow rate is a n important quantity in fluid dynamics analysis. V olum etric flow is defined as
the volume of fluid that passes through a given surfa ce per unit time. Qualitatively, Figure 1 shows the notio n of volumetric flow
rate regarding a cross-sectional surface of area A. Mat hematically, volumetric flow rate is the derivative o f the volume of fluid that
passes through a given surface with respect to time; in SI units this is expressed as meterscubed per seco nd. V olumetric flow rate is
related to the flow velocity vector as the surface i ntegral with respect to the surface in question. If th e surface area in question is a
flat, plane cross-section, the surface integral reduc es as shown in Equation 2, where A is the surface area of the surface in question
and v is the flow velocity of the fluid.learning objectives

5.7.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33966
Volumetric Flow Rate: V olumetric Flow Rate Surface Integral and its simplificat ion
Flow Velocity – Volumetric Flow Rate Relation: This figure shows the relation between flow velocity and volumetric flow rate.
Moreover, only the flow velocity component parallel to the surface normal of the surface in question, or al ternatively the flow
velocity component perpendicular to the surface in question contributes to the volumetric flow rate. Figur e 1 and Equation 2
illustrate decomposition of the flow velocity vector, making an angle θ with respect to the normal of the surface plane in order to
calculate volumetric flow rate through that surface. Thus, volumetric flow rate for a given fluid velocity and cross-sectional surface
area increases as θ decreases, and is maximized when θ = 0. V olumetric flow rate is an important scalar quan tity in fluid dynamics
and is used widely in fluid flow measurements. V olume tric flow rate can be converted to mass flow rate if t he density of the fluid is
known. Flow of fluids through a closed system is often analyzed as a hydraulic circuit analogous to electr on flow in an electronic
circuit where: 1) the volumetric fluid flow is analogo us to the electric current, 2) pressure is analogous to the voltage, and 3) fluid
velocity is analogous to current density.
Key Points
There are many fluids in biology and understanding their beh avior in motion is crucial to effective medicine.
The heart pumps a fluid, blood, throughout a series of tubes in the body.
Circulation may be understood through a study of fluid d ynamics.
Diffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchang e of nutrients and waste products occur between the blood and
tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs.
Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the kidneys to cl eanse the blood, and the medical application of dialysis through
machinery is important in the treatment of individuals with failing kidney function.
Flow velocity is a vector quantity used to describe the mo tion of a fluid. It can be easily determined for laminar flow but
complex to determine for turbulent flow.
V olumetric flow rate is the volume of a liquid that passes through a given surface per unit time. It is found fro m the flow
velocity and the surface area of the surface through whic h the fluid passes.
Fluid flow through a closed hydraulic system is analyzed m uch like electron flow through an electronic circuit — where
volumetric flow rate is analogous to current, flow veloci ty is analogous to current density, and pressure is analogous t o voltage
(electrical potential).
Key Terms
vascular: Of, pertaining to, or containing vessels that conduct or c irculate fluids (such as blood, lymph, or sap) through the
body of an animal or plant.
osmosis: The net movement of solvent molecules from a region of high solvent potential to a region of lower solvent poten tial
through a partially permeable membrane.
dialysis: A method of separating molecules or particles of diff erent sizes by differential diffusion through a semipermeab le
membrane.
Laminar Flow: Non-turbulent motion of a fluid in which parallel layer s have different velocities relative to each other.
Turbulent Flow: The motion of a fluid having local velocities and pres sures that fluctuate randomly.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS

5.7.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33966CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Introduction to Fluid Dynamics and Its Bio logical and Medical Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42204/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Haemodynamics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Haemodynamics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
dialysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/dialysis. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
osmosis. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/osmosis. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vascular. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vascular. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Flow measurement). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_measurement). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Flow measurement. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_measurement. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
V olumetric flow rate. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Volumetric_flow_rate. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/turbulent-flow. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/laminar-flow. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. March 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.7.1: Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
11.1: Overview by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339675.7.2: Flow in Tubes
Contrast turbulent and laminar flow in constant velocity
Virtually all moving fluids exhibit viscosity, which i s a measure of the resistance of a fluid to flow. Vis cosity is a basic property
necessary for the analysis of fluid flow.
Measure of Fluid Friction
It describes a fluid’s internal resistance to movement and can be thought of as a measure of fluid frictio n. The greater the viscosity,
the ‘thicker’ the fluid and the more the fluid will resist movement.
Mathematically, viscosity is a proportionality constan t relating an applied shear stress to the resulting s hear velocity and is given,
along with a representative diagram, (see). As shown, when a force is applied to a fluid, creating a shear stress, th e fluid will
undergo a certain displacement. The viscosity of the fluid is then its inherent resistance to undergo this displacem ent.
Representation of Viscosity: A proportionality constant relating an applied she ar stress to the resulting shear velocity.
Different fluids exhibit different viscous behavior ye t, in this analysis, only Newtonian fluids (fluids with co nstant velocity
independent of applied shear stress) will be considere d. Viscosity in fluids generally decreases with incre asing temperature. The
study of the viscous nature of fluids is called rheology.
In analyzing the properties of moving fluids, it is ne cessary to determine the nature of flow of the fluid. This is generally split into
two categories, laminar and turbulent flow.
Turbulent Flow
Turbulent flow is characterized by irregular flow of a fluid in which there are both inconsistent flow patte rns and velocity
variations throughout the volume of the fluid in mot ion. Analysis of turbulent flow can be very complex a nd often requires
advanced mathematical analysis to simulate flow in syste ms on a near case-by-case basis.
It occurs when the Reynolds number is above a certain critical threshold while mixed turbulent–laminar flo w occurs within a range
of Reynolds number below this threshold value. At the lower limit of this mixed turbulent–laminar flow Reyn olds number region
there is another critical threshold value, below which only laminar flow is possible.
Laminar Flow
Laminar flow consists of a regular-flow pattern with co nstant-flow velocity throughout the fluid volume and is much easier to
analyze than turbulent flow.
Relative Magnitudes of Velocity Vectors: Laminar fluid flow in a circular pipe at the same directio n.learning objectives

5.7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33967Laminar flow is often encountered in common hydrauli c systems, such as where fluid flow is through an enclose d, rigid pipe; the
fluid is incompressible, has constant viscosity, and t he Reynolds number is below this lower critical threshol d value. It is
characterized by the flow of a fluid in parallel lay ers, in which there is no disruption or interaction be tween the different layers, and
in which each layer flows at a different velocity alo ng the same direction. The variation in velocity be tween adjacent parallel layers
is due to the viscosity of the fluid and resulting shear fo rces.
This figure (see) gives a representation of the rel ative magnitudes of the velocity vectors of each of these layers for laminar fluid
flow through a circular pipe, in a direction parallel to the pipe axis.
Poiseuille’s Equation: Can be used to determine the pressure drop of a constant vis cosity fluid exhibiting laminar flow through a
rigid pipe.
Considering laminar flow of a constant density, incom pressible fluid such as for a Newtonian fluid travelin g in a pipe, with a
Reynolds number below the upper limit level for fully laminar flow, the pressure difference between two poin ts along the pipe can
be found from the volumetric flow rate, or vice vers a. For such a system with a pipe radius of r, fluid visc osity η, distance between
the two points along the pipe Δx = x – x, and the vo lumetric flow rate Q, of the fluid, the pressure differ ence between the two
points along the pipe Δp is given by Poiseuille’s equation (see).
This equation is valid for laminar flow of incompressi ble fluids only, and may be used to determine a numb er of properties in the
hydraulic system, if the others are known or can be me asured. In practice, Poiseuille’s equation holds for m ost systems involving
laminar flow of a fluid, except at regions where features di srupting laminar flow, such as at the ends of a pipe, are pre sent.
Poiseuille’s equation as given in this example (see) is analogous to Ohm ‘s equation for determining the resistance in an electronic
circuit and is of great practical use in hydraulic-circu it analysis.
Poiseuille’s Equation: Analogous to Ohm’s Law Analogy
Blood Flow
Blood flow is the continuous running of blood through the cardiovascular system, which consists of the vessels and the heart.
Outline how normal plasma behaves in a mammalian cardiovas cular system
Blood flow is the continuous running of blood through vessels in the cardiovascular system (the mammalian ca rdiovascular system
is shown in). Blood is the viscous fluid composed of plasma and cells. The composition of the blood include s plasma, red blood
cells, white blood cells and platelets. In microcirculati on, the properties of the blood cells have an important i nfluence on flow.2 1
learning objectives

5.7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33967
An illustrative overview of the mammalian cardiovascular system: Keep in mind that both circular paths are working
simultaneously and not in a sequential manner as the numb ering in the illustration might suggest. Both the ventric les are working
together in harmony; as tiny amounts of blood are moving in the pulmonary circuit, the remainder of the blood moves through the
systemic circuit.
The cardiovascular system, which consists of blood vess els and the heart, helps to distribute nutrients, O, and other products of
metabolism. The blood moves in the blood vessels, whil e the heart serves as the pump for the blood. The ve ssel walls of the heart
are elastic and movable, therefore causing the bloo d and the wall to exert forces on each other and in turn influencing their
respective motion.
The major quantity of interest in describing the mot ion of blood particles is velocity—the rate of chang e of the position of an object
with time:
Blood velocities in arteries are higher during syst ole than during diastole. One parameter to quantify this difference is pulsatility
index (PI), which is equal to the difference between t he peak systolic velocity and the minimum diastolic velocity divided by the
mean velocity during the cardiac cycle.
Another important parameter is the acceleration—the rat e of change of velocity:
Normal plasma behaves like a Newtonian fluid at rates o f shear. Typical values for the viscosity of normal human plasma at 37°C is
1.2Nsm. The viscosity of normal plasma varies with tem perature in the same way as does that of its solvent, water. (a 5°C
increase of temperature in the physiological range red uces plasma viscosity by about 10%).
The osmotic pressure of the plasma affects the mechan ics of the circulation in several ways. An alteration of the osmotic pressure
difference across the membrane of a blood cell cause s a shift of water and a change in cell volume. The change, both in shape and
flexibility, affects the mechanical properties of whol e blood. Therefore, a change in plasma osmotic press ure alters the hematocrit
(the volume concentration of red cells in the whole b lood) by redistributing water between the intravascul ar and extravascular
spaces. This in turn affects the mechanics of the whole bloo d.2
-2

5.7.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33967Key Points
Viscosity is the resistance of a fluid to flow. Virtuall y all fluids have viscosity which generally changes as a fun ction of
temperature; although different types of fluids exhibi t different types of fluid–shear velocity dependencies.
Laminar flow of a fluid is characterized by its flow in par allel layers in which there is no disruption or interaction between the
different layers, and in which each layer flows at a differ ent velocity along the same direction.
Poiseuille’s equation pertains to moving incompressible fluids exhibiting laminar flow. It relates the difference in pressure at
different spatial points to volumetric flow rate for fluids in motion in certain cases, such as in the flow of fluid thr ough a rigid
pipe.
The major quantity of interest in describing the motion of blood particles is the velocity – the rate of change of t he position of
an object with time:.
Blood velocities in arteries are higher during systol e than during diastole.
The mechanics of the circulation depends on osmotic pressure of plasma.
Key Terms
viscosity: The property of a fluid that resists the force which tend s to cause it to flow.
shear stress: The external force acting on an object or surface pa rallel to the slope or plane in which it lies; the stress tending to
produce shear.
Reynolds Number: A dimensionless number,, where v is the fluid velocity, ρ the density, η the viscosity and l a dimension
of the system. The value of the number indicates the type of fluid flow.
systole: The rhythmic contraction of the heart, by which blood i s driven through the arteries.
vessel: A tube or canal that carries fluid in an animal or plant.
diastole: The phase or process of relaxation and dilation of the heart chambers, between contractions, during which they fil l
with blood; an instance of the process.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Poiseuille. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Poiseuille. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Laminar flow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Laminar_flow. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Viscosity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Poiseuille. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Poiseuille. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/reynolds-number.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
shear stress. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shear_stress. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Blood flow. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_flow. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
diastole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diastole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.7.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33967systole. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/systole. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
vessel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vessel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Provided by: N/A. Located at: N/A. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Circulatory System en. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Circulatory_System_en.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.7.2: Flow in Tubes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
11.2: Flow in Tubes by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339685.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
Adapt Bernoulli’s equation for flows that are either unstea dy or compressible
Application of Bernoulli’s Equation
The relationship between pressure and velocity in ide al fluids is described quantitatively by Bernoulli’s e quation, named after its
discoverer, the Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1 782). Bernoulli’s equation states that for an incompr essible and inviscid
fluid, the total mechanical energy of the fluid is consta nt. (An inviscid fluid is assumed to be an ideal fluid with no viscosity.)
Da n F u lle rton (AP lu sP h y sics)
AP P hysics 2 - Bernoulli' s P rinciple
AP P hysics 2 - Bernoulli' s P rinciple
Watch on
Bernoulli’s Principle: A brief introduction to Bernoulli’ s Principle for stude nts studying fluids.
The total mechanical energy of a fluid exists in two forms: potential and kinetic. The kinetic energy of the fluid is stored in static
pressure, psps, and dynamic pressure, 12ρV212ρV2, where \rh o is the fluid density in (SI unit: kg/m) and V is t he fluid velocity
(SI unit: m/s). The SI unit of static pressure and dynami c pressure is the pascal.learning objectives

5.7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968
Syphoning: Syphoning fluid between two reservoirs. The flow rate ou t can be determined by drawing a streamline from point (A)
to point (C).
Static pressure is simply the pressure at a given poin t in the fluid, dynamic pressure is the kinetic energ y per unit volume of a fluid
particle. Thus, a fluid will not have dynamic pressure u nless it is moving. Therefore, if there is no change i n potential energy along
a streamline, Bernoulli’s equation implies that the total energy along that streamline is constant and i s a balance between static and
dynamic pressure. Mathematically, the previous statement i mplies:
along a streamline. If changes there are significant changes in height or if the fluid density is high, the change in potential energy
should not be ignored and can be accounted for with,
This simply adds another term to the above version of the Be rnoulli equation and results in
Deriving Bernoulli’s Equation
The Bernoulli equation can be derived by integratin g Newton’s 2nd law along a streamline with gravitationa l and pressure forces as
the only forces acting on a fluid element. Given that any energy exchanges result from conservative force s, the total energy along a
streamline is constant and is simply swapped between poten tial and kinetic.
Applying Bernoulli’s Equation
Bernoulli’s equation can be applied when syphoning f luid between two reservoirs. Another useful application of the Bernoulli
equation is in the derivation of Torricelli’s law fo r flow out of a sharp edged hole in a reservoir. A s treamline can be drawn from the
top of the reservoir, where the total energy is known, t o the exit point where the static pressure and potenti al energy are known but
the dynamic pressure (flow velocity out) is not.
Adapting Bernoulli’s Equation
The Bernoulli equation can be adapted to flows that are both unsteady and compressible. However, the assumpt ion of inviscid flow
remains in both the unsteady and compressible versio ns of the equation. Compressibility effects depend o n the speed of the flow

5.7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968relative to the speed of sound in the fluid. This i s determined by the dimensionless quantity known as t he Mach number. The Mach
number represents the ratio of the speed of an object m oving through a medium to the speed of sound in the mediu m.
Torricelli’s Law
Torricelli’s law is theorem about the relation betwee n the exit velocity of a fluid from a hole in a res ervoir to the height of fluid
above the hole.
Infer the exit velocity through examining the Bernoulli equation
Torricelli’s law is theorem in fluid dynamics about th e relation between the exit velocity of a fluid from a sharp-edged hole in a
reservoir to the height of the fluid above that exi t hole. This relationship applies for an “ideal” fl uid (inviscid and incompressible)
and results from an exchange of potential energy,
AP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s PrincipleAP Phy sics 2 - Bernoulli' s Principle
Torricelli’s Principle: A brief introduction to Torricelli’s Principle for st udents studying fluids.
mghmgh, for kinetic energy,
, at the exit.
This relationship can be derived by applying the Ber noulli equation between the top of the reservoir and the exit hole. Applying
Bernoulli between the top of a reservoir and an exit hole a t a height h below the top of the reservoir results in,learning objectives

5.7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968
Exchange of Energy: Potential energy at the top of the reservoir becomes k inetic energy at the exit.
where subscript t implies evaluation at the top of th e reservoir and subscript e implies evaluation at t he exit. If we assume both the
top of reservoir and the exit are open to the atmosp here, the zero for potential energy is at the exit h ole, and the fluid velocity at the
top of the reservoir is essentially zero (large reservoir, small hole), we arrive at
This can be solved for the exit velocity, resulting in,
where again h is the height difference between the to p of the reservoir and the exit hole. Due to the assu mption of an ideal fluid, all
forces acting on the fluid are conservative and thus there is an exchange between potential and kinetic e nergy. The result is that the
velocity acquired by the fluid is the same that a body woul d acquire when simply dropped from the height h
A simple experiment to test Torricelli’s law involves filling a soda bottle with water and puncturing the bottom with a small hole
(about 1 cm in diameter). As the height in the reser voir decreases, the exit velocity will decrease as wel l. The exit velocity can be
increased by capping the top of the reservoir and pressur izing it.
Toricelli’s Law: The exit velocity depends on the height of the fluid abo ve the exit hole.
Ideal Fluid: Applies to an ideal fluid (inviscid, incompressible)
Surface Tension
The tendency of the surface of a liquid to resist a force and behave like a membrane and is a result of cohesion between liquid
molecules.t
t.

5.7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968Summarize the cause for different surface tensions at a liquid’s surface
Surface tension is the tendency of a liquid surface t o resist forces applied to it. This effect is a res ult of cohesion of the molecules of
the liquid causing the surface of the liquid to con tract to the smallest area possible. This effect is vi sible in nature with water strider
insects that are able to walk on water. Also, a paper clip o r pin can be supported by the surface tension at a wate r air interface.
Surface Tension FBD: Force diagrams showing the direction of forces for wate r supporting a water strider (insect) foot and a pin.
In both cases, the vertical component of the surface tensio n is enough to support the weight of the object.
In the bulk of the liquid, the molecules are pulled equally in all directions. The molecules at the surf ace feel a greater attractive
force toward the bulk material than the interface ma terial.
The surface of a liquid is an interface between anoth er fluid, a solid body, or both. Therefore, the surfac e tension will be a property
of the interface rather than simply the liquid. Adhes ion describes the attractive force between molecules of different types. The
surface of a liquid in a container is an interface between the liquid, the air, and the container. Where the surfaces meet, forces must
be in equilibrium. This results in a contact angle at the interface. The contact angle is measured in the liquid and depends on the
relative strength of cohesive forces in the liquid and adhesive forces between the liquid and interface materials. If liquid molecules
are strongly attracted to the molecules of the solid surface (adhesive forces > cohesive forces), the d rop will tend to spread out and
the contact angle will be close to zero degrees. If t he cohesive forces are greater than the adhesive for ces, the resulting contact
angles will be large and will form a more circular drop.
Water Droplet on Leaf: When a water droplet forms on a leaf, the cohesive forces betw een the water molecules are greater than
the adhesive forces between the water and leaf surface. The lea f is a hydrophobic surface.
learning objectives

5.7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968Contact Angle: The contact angle is the angle, measured in the fluid, that results when a liquid-gas interface, meets a solid surfac e.
When the liquid is water, a surface where the contact angle is small is said to be hydrophilic. Large cont act angles are present on
hydrophobic surfaces. The contact angle determines the wettability of the surface.
Key Points
The simplest form of Bernoulli’s equation (steady and incom pressible flow) states that the sum of mechanical energy, poten tial
energy and kinetic energy, along a streamline is const ant. Therefore, any increase in one form results in a decr ease in the other.
Bernoulli’s equation considers only pressure and gravita tional forces acting on the fluid particles. Therefore, if th ere is no
change in height along a streamline, Bernoulli’s equatio n becomes a balance between static pressure and velocity.
The steady-state, incompressible Bernoulli equation, can be derived by integrating Newton’s 2nd law along a str eamline.
Torricelli’s law applies to an inviscid, incompressible fluid (“ideal” fluid).
You can ascertain results from applying the Bernoulli e quation between the top of the reservoir and the exit hole.
The relationship arises from an exchange of potentia l energy at the top of the reservoir to kinetic energy at the exit.
The final kinetic energy is equivalent to what a solid bod y would acquire when falling from height h.
Surface tension is a result of cohesion between the molecul es of the liquid. The molecules at the surface of the liqui d feel an
attractive force pulling them toward the bulk of the liq uid more than the solid or fluid at the interface.
When a liquid-solid-gas interface is encountered, the c ontact angle represents a measure of the relative streng th of adhesive and
cohesive forces.
The contact angle determines the wettability of a surface.
Key Terms
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
Ideal Fluid: An inviscid and incompressible fluid
incompressible: Unable to be compressed or condensed.
inviscid: A fluid with zero viscosity (internal friction). In real ity viscosity is always present. However, it is often very sm all
compared with other forces (e.g. gravity, pressure) and for com mon fluids (water and air) the fluid can be approximated as
having zero viscosity.
cohesion: Various intermolecular forces that hold solids and liq uids together.
wettability: The ability of a solid surface to reduce the surface tens ion of a liquid in contact with it such that it spreads over the
surface and wets it.
adhesion: The ability of a substance to stick to an unlike substance.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/ideal-fluid. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
incompressible. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/incompressible. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/inviscid. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.7.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33968Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/TorricelliLa w.svg/200px-TorricelliLaw.svg.png. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d670e4b010f3dd6d22de/idea l.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d406e4b010f3dd6d22c1/peke.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Torricelli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Surface tension. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension%23Effects_of_surface_tensio n. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
adhesion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adhesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
cohesion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cohesion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wettability. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wettability. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Syphoning2. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Syphoning2.svg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Bernoulli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/TorricelliLa w.svg/200px-TorricelliLaw.svg.png. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d670e4b010f3dd6d22de/idea l.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Boundless. Provided by: Amazon Web Services. Located at:
s3.amazonaws.com/figures.boundless.com/5106d406e4b010f3dd6d22c1/peke.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Torricelli's Principle. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57OB21-I2lQ. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Erik Christensen, College Physics II. February 5, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42197/latest/?collection=col11458/1.2. License: CC BY: Attribution
SurfTensionContactAngle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:SurfTensionContactAngle.png.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Dew 2. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dew_2.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
This page titled 5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
11.3: Bernoulli’s Equation by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339695.7.4: Other Applications
Predict if flow will be laminar or turbulent
It is possible to predict if flow will be laminar or turbulent. At low velocity, flow in a very smooth tube or around a smooth,
streamlined object will be laminar. At high velocity, even the flow in a smooth tube or around a smooth obj ect will experience
turbulence. However, between low and high velocity, flow is more difficult to predict. In fact, at intermedia te velocities, flow may
oscillate back and forth indefinitely between laminar an d turbulent.
An occlusion (narrowing) of an artery, such as shown in, is likely to cause turbulence because of the irregu larity of the blockage, as
well as the complexity of blood as a fluid. Turbulenc e in the circulatory system (such as aneurysms, or ballo oning of arteries) is
noisy and can sometimes be detected with a stethosco pe (such as when measuring diastolic pressure in the upper arm’s partially
collapsed brachial artery). These turbulent sounds, at the onset of blood flow when the cuff pressure becom es sufficiently small, are
called Korotkoff sounds. Heart murmurs, consistent with their name, are sou nds produced by turbulent flow around damaged and
insufficiently closed heart valves. Another method of detecting this type of turbulence is ultrasound, used as a medical indicator in
a process analogous to Doppler-shift radar (used to detec t storms).
Turbulent Flow in an Artery: Flow is laminar in the large part of this blood vessel and tur bulent in the part narrowed by plaque,
where velocity is high. In the transition region, the flow c an oscillate chaotically between laminar and turbulent fl ow.
Turbulence manifests in other areas, with varying caus es. During an airplane flight, for example, the turbu lence experienced is due
to the mixing of warm and cold air in the atmosphere, causing the airplane to shake. The mixing currents i n oceans creates a similar
effect.
The phenomenon of turbulent air flow must be account ed for in many applications. For example, race cars ar e unable to follow
each other around fast corners because the leading car creates turbulent air flow in its wake (this can lead to under-steering).
Industrial equipment, such as pipes, ducts, and heat exchangers are often designed to induce the flow reg ime of interest (laminar or
turbulent). When flow is turbulent, particles exhibit a dditional transverse motion. This enhances the rate o f energy and momentum
exchange between them, increasing the heat transfer. T urbulent flow is thus desirable in applications where a relatively cool fluid is
mixed with a warmer fluid to reduce the temperature of the warmer fluid.
It is imperative to take into account turbulent flo w when designing certain structures, such as a bridge support, as shown in. In the
late summer and fall, when river flow is slow, water flows smoothly around the support legs. In the spring, when t he flow is faster,
the flow may start off laminar but it is quickly sep arated from the leg and becomes turbulent. The bridge supports must be designed
so that they can withstand the turbulent flow of the water i n the spring.learning objectives

5.7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969
Longtown Bridge: Turbulent flow is visible around the bridge supports of t he Longtown bridge.
Motionof an Object in a Viscous Field
Objects moving in a viscous fluid feel a resistive force p roportional to the viscosity of the fluid.
Assess the relationship of the parameters to one another i n determining the inertia of an object moving in fluid
Overview
A moving object in a viscous fluid is equivalent to a stationary object in a flowing fluid stream. (For e xample, when you ride a
bicycle at 10 m/s in still air, you feel the air in y our face exactly as if you were stationary in a 10-m /s wind.) Flow of the stationary
fluid around a moving object may be laminar, turbule nt, or a combination of the two. Just as with flow in tu bes, it is possible to
predict when a moving object creates turbulence. We u se another form of the Reynolds number N′R, defined f or an object moving
in a fluid to be
where L is a characteristic length of the object (a sp here’s diameter, for example), the fluid density, its viscosity, and v the object’s
speed in the fluid. If N′R is less than about 1, flow a round the object can be laminar, particularly if the object has a smooth shape.
The transition to turbulent flow occurs for N′R betwee n 1 and about 10, depending on surface roughness and so on. Depending on
the surface, there can be a turbulent wake behind the object with some laminar flow over its sur face. For an N′R between 10 and
10^6, the flow may be either laminar or turbulent and may oscillate between the two. For N′R greater than abo ut 10^6, the flow is
entirely turbulent, even at the surface of the objec t. (See.) Laminar flow occurs mostly when the objects in the fluid are small, such
as raindrops, pollen, and blood cells in plasma.
Motion of an object in a viscous fluid.: (a) Motion of this sphere to the right is equivalent to fl uid flow to the left. Here the flow is
laminar with N′R less than 1. There is a force, called viscous drag FV, to the left on the ball due to the fluid’s viscosi ty. (b) At a
higher speed, the flow becomes partially turbulent, creat ing a wake starting where the flow lines separate from the surface. Pressure
in the wake is less than in front of the sphere, because fl uid speed is less, creating a net force to the left F′V that i s significantly
greater than for laminar flow. Here N′R is greater than 10. (c) At much higher speeds, where N′R is greater than 10^6, fl ow
becomes turbulent everywhere on the surface and behind the sphere. Drag increases dramatically.learning objectives

5.7.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969Viscous Drag
One of the consequences of viscosity is a resistance f orce called viscous drag FVFV that is exerted on a movin g object. This force
typically depends on the object’s speed (in contrast wi th simple friction). Experiments have shown that for laminar flow (N′R less
than about one) viscous drag is proportional to spee d, whereas for N′R between about 10 and 106, viscous drag is proportional to
speed squared. (This relationship is a strong dependen ce and is pertinent to bicycle racing, where even a s mall headwind causes
significantly increased drag on the racer. Cyclists t ake turns being the leader in the pack for this rea son.) For N′R greater than 106,
drag increases dramatically and behaves with greater complexity. For laminar flow around a sphere, FVFV is prop ortional to fluid
viscosity, the object’s characteristic size L, and its speed v. All of which makes sense—the more viscous the fluid and the larger the
object, the more drag we expect. Recall Stoke’s law FS=6π rηvFS=6πrηv. For the special case of a small sphere of radius R, moving
slowly in a fluid of viscosity, the drag force FSFS is given by
FS=6πRηvFS=6πRηv.
Molecular Transport Phenomena
Molecular transport phenomena are ways in which molecul es are transported from one region to another. These include diffusion
and osmosis.
Predict the role diffusion plays in blood transport througho ut the body
Diffusion
Atoms and molecules are in constant motion at any tem perature. In fluids they move about randomly even in the absence of
macroscopic flow.
Diffusion is the movement of substances due to rando m thermal molecular motion. Fluids, like fish fumes o r odors entering ice
cubes, can even diffuse through solids. Diffusion is a slow process over macroscopic distances. The densities of common materials
are great enough that molecules cannot travel very far before having a collision that can scatter them in any direction, including
straight backward. More massive molecules diffuse more slo wly.
Another interesting point is that the diffusion rate for oxygen in air is much greater than for oxygen in water. In water, an oxygen
molecule makes many more collisions in its random walk and is slowed considerably. In water, an oxygen molecule moves only
about 40μm in 1 s. (Each molecule actually collides about 1010 times per second!). Finally, note that diff usion constants increase
with temperature, because average molecular speed incr eases with temperature. This is because the average kine tic energy of
molecules, 1/2mv, is proportional to absolute tempe rature. Because diffusion is typically very slow, i ts most important effects
occur over small distances. For example, the cornea of t he eye gets most of its oxygen by diffusion through the thin tear layer
covering it.
If you very carefully place a drop of food coloring in a still glass of water, it will slowly diffuse into the colorless surroundings
until its concentration is the same everywhere. This type of diffusion is called free diffusion, because there are no barriers inhibiting
it. Let us examine its direction and rate. Molecular motion is random in direction, and so simple chance dictates that more
molecules will move out of a region of high concentr ation than into it. The net rate of diffusion is hi gher initially than after the
process is partially completed. The rate of diffusion is proportional to the concentration difference. M any more molecules will
leave a region of high concentration than will enter it from a region of low concentration. In fact, if th e concentrations were the
same, there would be no net movement. The rate of dif fusion is also proportional to the diffusion constant D, which is determined
experimentally. Many of the factors that affect the r ate are hidden in the diffusion constant D. For examp le, temperature and
cohesive and adhesive forces all affect values of D. Di ffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and
waste products occur between the blood and tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs. In the evolutiona ry process, as
organisms became larger, they needed quicker methods o f transportation than net diffusion, because of the larger distances involved
in the transport, leading to the development of circ ulatory systems. Less sophisticated, single-celled org anisms still rely totally on
diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptake o f nutrients.learning objectives

5.7.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969
Food Coloring: Food coloring spreading on a thin water film.
Osmosis and Dialysis – Diffusion Across Different Membranes
Some of the most interesting examples of diffusion o ccur through barriers that affect the rates of diff usion. For example, when you
soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, water diffuses throu gh your skin. Many substances regularly move through c ell membranes;
oxygen moves in, carbon dioxide moves out, nutrient s go in, and wastes go out, for example. Because memb ranes are thin
structures (typically 6.5×10 to 10×10 m across) diffus ion rates through them can be high.
Diffusion through membranes is an important method of transport. Membranes are generally selectively perme able, or
semipermeable. In other types of membranes, the molec ules may actually dissolve in the membrane or react with molecules in the
membrane while moving across. Membrane function, in f act, is the subject of much current research, involvin g not only physiology
but also chemistry and physics. Osmosis is driven by t he imbalance in water concentration. For example, water is more
concentrated in your body than in Epsom salt. When you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, the water moves out of your body
into the lower-concentration region in the salt. Simi larly, dialysis is the transport of any other molecul e through a semipermeable
membrane due to its concentration difference. Both osmos is and dialysis are used by the kidneys to cleanse the bloo d.
Diffusion: (a) Two sugar-water solutions of different concentrati ons, separated by a semipermeable membrane that passes wat er
but not sugar. Osmosis will be to the right, since water is less co ncentrated there. (b) The fluid level rises until the ba ck pressure
ρgh equals the relative osmotic pressure; then, the net tra nsfer of water is zero.
Pumps and the Heart
The heart pumps blood through the body by contracting a nd relaxing, increasing and decreasing the pressure.
Contrast systole and diastole in cardiovascular circulat ion
The Heart and its Parts
The heart is made up of four chambers. Two atria at th e top of the heart receive blood and two ventricles a t the bottom of the heart
pump blood out of the heart. The septum divides the l eft and right side of the heart, while the valves of th e heart ensure that blood
only flows in one direction.They include the tricuspid valve-found between the right atrium and the right ventricle-and the mitral−9 −9
learning objectives

5.7.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969valve-found between the left atrium and the left ven tricle. The list of heart valves also includes the s emi-lunar valves, which are
located at the bottom of the aorta and pulmonary ar tery. Strong tendinous chords attached to valves prev ent them from turning
inside out when they close.
The human heart will undergo over 3 billion contract ion cycles during a normal lifetime. A complete card iac cycle is one round of
the heart pumping blood and consists of two parts: s ystole (contraction of the heart muscle) and diastole (relaxation of the heart
muscle). During the cycle, the top half of the heart works a s one unit, while the bottom half of the heart works as one unit.
The heart beat can be heard as a sound that the val ves make when they close. The ‘lub’ sound is made when the atrio ventricular
valves close and the ‘dub’ sound is made when the semi lunar valves close. Blood pressure is produced by th e left ventricle
contractions.The rhythm of ventricle diastole, often just referred to as diastole, causes the pulse, which can be felt by holding two
fingers to the side of the throat.
Cardiac Cycle: The heart pumps blood through the body.
Key Points
For low velocity, flow in a smooth tube will be laminar.
At higher velocities or if there are obstructions, the flo w turns turbulent.
Turbulent flow is very chaotic, with rapid variations in vel ocity and pressure.
Viscous fluids exert a resitive force on objects attempt ing to move through them.
This resistive force is called viscous drag and is propor tional to the viscosity of the fluid and the motion of the object.
An object moving in a fluid can be thought of as a sta tionary object in a moving fluid.
Diffusion is the movement of molecules due to random th ermal motion.
Osmosis is the movement of molecules due to different concen trations. Molecules will move from regions of high
concentrations to lower concentrations.
These transport phenomena can take place through membr anes if the pressure is great enough.
Key Terms
turbulent: Being in, or causing, disturbance or unrest.
streamlined: Designed to offer little resistance to the flow of fluid, especially by having sleek, graceful lines.
laminar: Of fluid motion, smooth and regular, flowing as though i n different layers.
viscosity: A quantity expressing the magnitude of internal frict ion in a fluid, as measured by the force per unit area resi sting
uniform flow.
turbulence: Disturbance in a gas or fluid, characterized by eviden ce of internal motion or unrest.
diffusion: the intermingling of the molecules of a fluid due to ra ndom thermal agitation
ventricle: One of two lower chambers of the heart.
contraction: A reversible reduction in size.

5.7.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969atrium: An upper chamber of the heart that receives blood fro m the veins and forces it into a ventricle. In higher vertebrates,
the right atrium receives blood from the superior ve na cava and inferior vena cava, and the left atrium rece ives blood from the
left and right pulmonary veins.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Turbulence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Turbulence%23Examples_of_turbulence.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Turbulence. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Turbulence%23Examples_of_turbulence.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
streamlined. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/streamlined. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
turbulent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/turbulent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
laminar. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/laminar. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Septe mber 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Viscous. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscous%23Newtonian_and_non-Newtonian_fluids.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
viscosity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viscosity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
turbulence. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/turbulence. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/diffusion. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. February 16, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.7.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33969Food coloring. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_coloring. License: CC BY: Attribution
Daniel Williamson, 2.3.1 Blood Circulatory System. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
contraction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
atrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrium. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
ventricle. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ventricle. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, The Onset of Turbulence. February 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42210/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Longtown Bridge (C) Oliver Dixon:: Geograph Britain and Ir eland. Provided by: Geograph. Located at:
http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/2638153. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid. Febru ary 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42211/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes. February 16, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42212/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Food coloring. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_coloring. License: CC BY: Attribution
Daniel Williamson, 2.3.1 Blood Circulatory System. Februa ry 16, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m43150/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.7.4: Other Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
11.4: Other Applications by Boundless has no license indicated.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.8: Waves and Vibrations
This page titled 5.8: Waves and Vibrations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.5.8.1: Introduction
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
5.8.5: Waves
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
5.8.7: Waves on StringsTopic hierarchy

5.8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339715.8.1: Introduction
Contrast mechanical and electromagnetic waves
Overview
A wave is an oscillation that travels through space, accompanied by a transfer of energy. Wave motion tran sfers energy from one
point to another, often with no permanent displacemen t of the particles of the medium —that is, with little or no associated mass
transport. They consist, instead, of oscillations or vibr ations around almost fixed locations. There are two main types of waves.
Mechanical waves propagate through a medium, and the s ubstance of this medium is deformed. The deformation reverses itself
owing to restoring forces resulting from its deformation.
The second main type of wave, electromagnetic waves, do not require a medium (although they may still propa gate through a
medium). Instead, they consist of periodic oscillatio ns in electrical and magnetic fields generated by ch arged particles, and can
therefore travel through a vacuum.
Wave Equation
The shape of a wave can take the form of any functio n that repeats itself over some characteristic spat ial scale λλ, the wavelength
(see). More generally, waveforms are scalar function s uu which satisfy the wave equation,. This equation s imply
states that the acceleration of the waveform (Left: second derivative with respect to time) is proportional to the Laplacian (Right:
second spatial derivative) of the same waveform. The constant of proportionality,, is the square of the pr opagation speed of the
wave.
Common waveforms: A sample of several common, simple waveforms. A waveform is a function that repeats in space.
Sine Wave
Plot of Sine: The sine function graphed on the Cartesian plane. In this graph, the angle x is given in radians (π = 180°).learning objectives

5.8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33971Consider one of the most common waveforms, the sinusoi d. A general form of a sinusoidal wave is,
where A is the amplitude of the wave, is the wave’s an gular frequency, k is the wavenumber, and is the pha se of the sine wave
given in radians. This waveform gives the displacement position (“y”) of a particle in a medium from its equ ilibrium as a function
of both position “x” and time “t”.
By taking derivatives, it is evident that the wave e quation given above holds for, which is also called the phase speed of the
wave. To find the velocity of a particle in the mediu m at x and t, we take the temporal derivative of the waveform to get
. Likewise, to find the acceleration of the displaced particle in the medium at x and t, we take the
second derivative to get. Note the phase relationsh ip among the trigonometric functions in
. When the particle displacement is maximum or mini mum, the velocity is 0. When the displacement is 0,
particle velocity is either maximum or minimum. Simila rly, the particle acceleration is maximum (or minimu m) when the particle
displacement is minimum (or maximum), respectively.
Arbitrary Wave
We looked closely into the sinusoidal wave. But how abou t waves that has a general form? One important aspect of the wave
equation is its linearity: the wave equation is linea r in u and it is left unaltered by translations in space a nd time. Since a wave with
an arbitrary shape can be represented by a sum of ma ny sinusoidal waves (this is called Fourier analysis), we can generate a great
variety of solutions of the wave equation by translating a nd summing sine waves that we just looked closely into.
Key Points
The wave equation requires that the second time derivativ e of the waveform be proportional to its second spatial der ivative.
Waveforms describe the shape of physical waves, and can t ake the form of any function that repeats in space.
One of the most common waveforms in physics is the sinusoid. Sin ce any arbitray waveform can be generated by adding a set
of sine waves, the physics governing a wave of an arbitrary shape can be described by using its sine wave components.
Key Terms
waveform: The shape of a physical wave, such as sound or electrom agnetic radiation. The shape can be any function that
repeats in space.
Fourier analysis: The study of the way general functions may be represented or approximated by sums of simpler
trigonometric functions.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sinusoidal wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinusoidal_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/waveform. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Fourier analysis. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier%20analysis. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
File:Waveforms.svg - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:Waveforms.svg&page=1. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Plot of Sine. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/a/a2/Sine.svg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.8.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.

5.8.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/3397115.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339725.8.2: Hooke’s Law
Generate the mathematical expression of Hooke’s law
In mechanics (physics), Hooke’s law is an approximation of the response of elastic (i.e., springlike) bodies. It states: the extension
of a spring is in direct proportion with the load ap plied to it. For instance, the spring is pulled downwards with either no load, F, or
twice F.
Diagram of Hooke’s Law: The extension of the spring is linearly proportional to the force.
High School Phy sics - Springs and Hooke' s LawHigh School Phy sics - Springs and Hooke' s Lawlearning objectives
p
p

5.8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33972Springs and Hooke’s Law: A brief overview of springs, Hooke’s Law, and elastic po tential energy for algebra-based physics
students.
Many materials obey this law of elasticity as long as th e load does not exceed the material’s elastic limit. Materials for which
Hooke’s law is a useful approximation are known as lin ear-elastic or “Hookean” materials. Hookean materials are broadly defined
and include springs as well as muscular layers of the h eart. In simple terms, Hooke’s law says that stress is dire ctly proportional to
strain. Mathematically, Hooke’s law is stated as:
where:
x is the displacement of the spring’s end from its equili brium position (a distance, in SI units: meters);
F is the restoring force exerted by the spring on that end (in SI units: N or kg·m/s); and
k is a constant called the rate or spring constant (in SI units: N/m or kg/s). When this holds, the behavior is sai d to be linear. If
shown on a graph, the line should show a direct variation.
It’s possible for multiple springs to act on the same point. In such a case, Hooke’s law can still be applied. As with any other set of
forces, the forces of many springs can be combined into o ne resultant force.
When Hooke’s law holds, the behavior is linear; if shown on a graph, the line depicting force as a function of displacement should
show a direct variation. There is a negative sign on t he right hand side of the equation because the resto ring force always acts in the
opposite direction of the displacement (for example, whe n a spring is stretched to the left, it pulls back to the ri ght).
Hooke’s law is named after the 17th century British p hysicist Robert Hooke, and was first stated in 1660 as a Latin anagram, whose
solution Hooke published in 1678 as Ut tensio, sic vis, meaning, “As the extension, so the force.”

5.8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33972
Hooke’s Law: The red line in this graph illustrates how force, F, v aries with position according to Hooke’s law. The slop e of this
line corresponds to the spring constant k. The dotted li ne shows what the actual (experimental) plot of force might look like. The
pictures of spring states at the bottom of the graph corre spond to some points of the plot; the middle one is in t he relaxed state (no
force applied).
Elastic Potential Energy
If a force results in only deformation, with no thermal, sound, or kinetic energy, the work done is stored as elastic p otential energy.
Express elastic energy stored in a spring in a mathematical f orm
Elastic Potential Energy
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done. That is, a force must be exerted through a distance, whe ther you pluck a
guitar string or compress a car spring. If the only r esult is deformation and no work goes into thermal, so und, or kinetic energy,
then all the work is initially stored in the deforme d object as some form of potential energy. Elastic ene rgy is the potential
mechanical energy stored in the configuration of a material or physical system when work is performed to d istort its volume or
shape. For example, the potential energy PE stored in a s pring is
where k is the elastic constant and x is the displacement.
It is possible to calculate the work done in deformi ng a system in order to find the energy stored. This wo rk is performed by an
applied force F. The applied force is exactly opposi te to the restoring force (action-reaction), and so. A graph shows
the applied force versus deformation x for a system that can be described by Hooke’s law. Work done on th e system is force
multiplied by distance, which equals the area under th e curve, or (Method A in the figure). Another way to determine the
work is to note that the force increases linearly from 0 to, so that the average force is, the distance moved is x, and thuslearning objectives
el
app

5.8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33972
Applied force versus deformation: A graph of applied force versus distance for the defor mation of a system that can be described
by Hooke’s law is displayed. The work done on the system equa ls the area under the graph or the area of the triangle, wh ich is half
its base multiplied by its height, or.
(Method B in the figure).
Elastic energy of or within a substance is static ener gy of configuration. It corresponds to energy stored p rincipally by changing the
inter-atomic distances between nuclei. Thermal energy is the randomized distribution of kinetic energy withi n the material,
resulting in statistical fluctuations of the materi al about the equilibrium configuration. There is som e interaction, however. For
example, for some solid objects, twisting, bending, and other distortions may generate thermal energy, c ausing the material’s
temperature to rise. This energy can also produce m acroscopic vibrations sufficiently lacking in randomi zation to lead to
oscillations that are merely the exchange between (e lastic) potential energy within the object and the k inetic energy of motion of
the object as a whole.
Key Points
Mathematically, Hooke’s Law can be written as.
Many materials obey this law as long as the load does not ex ceed the material’s elastic limit.
The rate or spring constant, k, relates the force to the e xtension in SI units: N/m or kg/s2.
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done.
The potential energy stored in a spring is given by, where k is the spring constant and x is the displacement.
Deformation can also be converted into thermal energy or cause an object to begin oscillating.
Key Terms
elasticity: The property by virtue of which a material deformed und er the load can regain its original dimensions when
unloaded
deformation: A transformation; change of shape.
kinetic energy: The energy possessed by an object because of its moti on, equal to one half the mass of the body times the
square of its velocity.
oscillating: Moving in a repeated back-and-forth motion.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Hooke's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hooke's_law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, Mechanical Properti es of Matter: Deformation of Materials. September 17, 2013.
Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39533/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
elasticity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elasticity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

5.8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33972HookesLawForSpring-English.png. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/f/f0/HookesLawForSpring -English.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dinamometro. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dinamometro.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Springs and Hooke's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MhaPzGxfV8. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Elastic potential energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Elastic_potential_energy. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
deformation. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deformation. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
oscillating. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillating. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
kinetic energy. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/kinetic%20energy. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
HookesLawForSpring-English.png. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/f/f0/HookesLawForSpring -English.png. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dinamometro. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dinamometro.jpg. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Springs and Hooke's Law. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MhaPzGxfV8. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.8.2: Hooke’s Law is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
15.2: Hooke’s Law by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339735.8.3: Periodic Motion
Practice converting between frequency and period
Period and Frequency
The usual physics terminology for motion that repea ts itself over and over is periodic motion, and the time required for one
repetition is called the period, often expressed as the letter T. (The symbol P is not used because of the possible confusion with
momentum.) One complete repetition of the motion is called a cycle. The frequency is defined as the numbe r of cycles per unit
time. Frequency is usually denoted by a Latin letter f or by a Greek letter ν (nu). Note that period and frequency are reciprocals of
each other.
Sinusoidal Waves of Varying Frequencies: Sinusoidal waves of various frequencies; the bottom waves have higher frequencies
than those above. The horizontal axis represents time.
For example, if a newborn baby’s heart beats at a freq uency of 120 times a minute, its period (the interval between beats) is half a
second. If you calibrate your intuition so that you expect large frequencies to be paired with short periods, and vice versa, you may
avoid some embarrassing mistakes on physics exams.
Units
Locomotive Wheels: The locomotive’s wheels spin at a frequency of f cycles per second, which can also be described as ω radians
per second. The mechanical linkages allow the linear vibra tion of the steam engine’s pistons, at frequency f, to dr ive the wheels.
In SI units, the unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), named after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz: 1 Hz indicates that an event
repeats once per second. A traditional unit of measur e used with rotating mechanical devices is revolutio ns per minute, abbreviated
RPM. 60 RPM equals one hertz (i.e., one revolution per second, o r a period of one second). The SI unit for period is the second.
Angular Frequency
Often periodic motion is best expressed in terms of a ngular frequency, represented by the Greek letter ω (o mega). Angular
frequency refers to the angular displacement per uni t time (e.g., in rotation) or the rate of change of t he phase of a sinusoidal
waveform (e.g., in oscillations and waves), or as the rate of c hange of the argument of the sine function.
Angular frequency is often represented in units of radians per second (recall there are 2π radians in a circle).learning objectives

5.8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Period of a Mass on a Spring
The period of a mass m on a spring of spring constant k can be calculated as.
Identify parameters necessary to calculate the period and frequency of an oscillating mass on the end of an ideal spring
Understanding the Restoring Force
Newton’s first law implies that an object oscillating b ack and forth is experiencing forces. Without force, the object would move in
a straight line at a constant speed rather than osci llate. It is important to understand how the force on the object depends on the
object’s position. If an object is vibrating to the ri ght and left, then it must have a leftward force on i t when it is on the right side,
and a rightward force when it is on the left side. In on e dimension, we can represent the direction of the for ce using a positive or
negative sign, and since the force changes from posi tive to negative there must be a point in the middle where the force is zero.
This is the equilibrium point, where the object would s tay at rest if it was released at rest. It is common c onvention to define the
origin of our coordinate system so that x equals zero at equilibrium.
Oscillating Ruler: When displaced from its vertical equilibrium position, this plastic ruler oscillates back and forth because of th e
restoring force opposing displacement. When the ruler i s on the left, there is a force to the right, and vice ve rsa.
Consider, for example, plucking a plastic ruler shown in the first figure. The deformation of the ruler cr eates a force in the opposite
direction, known as a restoring force. Once released, the restoring force causes the ruler to move back toward its stable equilibrium
position, where the net force on it is zero. However, b y the time the ruler gets there, it gains momentum an d continues to move to
the right, producing the opposite deformation. It is then forced to the left, back through equilibrium, a nd the process is repeated
until dissipative forces (e.g., friction) dampen the mo tion. These forces remove mechanical energy from the system, gradually
reducing the motion until the ruler comes to rest.
learning objectives

5.8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Restoring force, momentum, and equilibrium: (a) The plastic ruler has been released, and the restoring force is returning the
ruler to its equilibrium position. (b) The net force is zer o at the equilibrium position, but the ruler has momentu m and continues to
move to the right. (c) The restoring force is in the opp osite direction. It stops the ruler and moves it back toward equilibrium again.
(d) Now the ruler has momentum to the left. (e) In the absen ce of damping (caused by frictional forces), the ruler re aches its
original position. From there, the motion will repeat itse lf.
Hooke’s Law
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring fo rce is directly proportional to displacement. The na me that was given to this
relationship between force and displacement is Hooke’s law:
Here, F is the restoring force, x is the displacement f rom equilibrium or deformation, and k is a constant related to the difficulty in
deforming the system (often called the spring consta nt or force constant). Remember that the minus sign indicates the restoring
force is in the direction opposite to the displaceme nt. The force constant k is related to the rigidity (o r stiffness) of a system—the
larger the force constant, the greater the restoring force, and the stiffer the system. The units of k are newtons per meter (N/m). For
example, k is directly related to Young’s modulus when we stretch a string. A typical physics laboratory exe rcise is to measure
restoring forces created by springs, determine if the y follow Hooke’s law, and calculate their force constants if they do.
Mass on a Spring
A common example of an objecting oscillating back an d forth according to a restoring force directly prop ortional to the
displacement from equilibrium (i.e., following Hooke’s Law) is the case of a mass on the end of an ideal sp ring, where “ideal”
means that no messy real-world variables interfere with th e imagined outcome.
The motion of a mass on a spring can be described as Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM), the name given to oscillato ry motion for a
system where the net force can be described by Hooke’s law. We can now determine how to calculate the period and frequency of
an oscillating mass on the end of an ideal spring. T he period T can be calculated knowing only the mass, m, and the force constant,
k:
When dealing with, the frequency is given by:
We can understand the dependence of these equations on m and k intuitively. If one were to increase the mass on an oscillating
spring system with a given k, the increased mass will pro vide more inertia, causing the acceleration due to the restoring force F to
decrease (recall Newton’s Second Law:). This will lengthe n the oscillation period and decrease the frequency. In contrast,
increasing the force constant k will increase the re storing force according to Hooke’s Law, in turn causi ng the acceleration at each
displacement point to also increase. This reduces the period and increases the frequency. The maximum di splacement from
equilibrium is known as the amplitude X.

5.8.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973
Motion of a mass on an ideal spring: An object attached to a spring sliding on a frictionles s surface is an uncomplicated simple
harmonic oscillator. When displaced from equilibrium, th e object performs simple harmonic motion that has an amplitu de X and a
period T. The object’s maximum speed occurs as it passes through equilibrium. The stiffer the spring is, the small er the period T.
The greater the mass of the object is, the greater the peri od T. (a) The mass has achieved its greatest displacement X to the right and
now the restoring force to the left is at its maximum magni tude. (b) The restoring force has moved the mass back to it s equilibrium
point and is now equal to zero, but the leftward velocity i s at its maximum. (c) The mass’s momentum has carried it to its
maximum displacement to the right. The restoring forc e is now to the right, equal in magnitude and opposite in dir ection compared
to (a). (d) The equilibrium point is reach again, this time with momentum to the right. (e) The cycle repeats.
Simple Harmonic Motion
Simple harmonic motion is a type of periodic motion where the restoring force is directly proportional to the displa cement.
Relate the restoring force and the displacement during the simple harmonic motion
Simple Harmonic Motion
Simple harmonic motion is a type of periodic motion where the restoring force is directly proportional t o the displacement (i.e., it
follows Hooke’s Law). It can serve as a mathematical mo del of a variety of motions, such as the oscillation of a spring. In addition,
other phenomena can be approximated by simple harmo nic motion, such as the motion of a simple pendulum, or molecular
vibration.
AP Phy sics C - Simple Harmonic MotionAP Phy sics C - Simple Harmonic Motionlearning objectives

5.8.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Simple Harmonic Motion: A brief introduction to simple harmonic motion for ca lculus-based physics students.
Simple harmonic motion is typified by the motion of a mass on a spring when it is subject to the linear el astic restoring force given
by Hooke’s Law. A system that follows simple harmonic motio n is known as a simple harmonic oscillator.
Dynamics of Simple Harmonic Oscillation
For one-dimensional simple harmonic motion, the equat ion of motion (which is a second-order linear ordinar y differential equation
with constant coefficients) can be obtained by means of Newton’s second law and Hooke’s law.
where m is the mass of the oscillating body, x is its displacement from the equilibrium position, and k is the spring constant.
Therefore:
Solving the differential equation above, a solution which is a sinusoidal function is obtained.
where
In the solution, c and c are two constants determine d by the initial conditions, and the origin is set to be the equilibrium position.
Each of these constants carries a physical meaning of the motion: A is the amplitude (maximum displacemen t from the equilibrium
position), is the angular frequency, and φ is the phase.
We can use differential calculus and find the velocity and a cceleration as a function of time:
Acceleration can also be expressed as a function of displa cement:
1 2

5.8.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Then since,
Recalling that,
Using Newton’s Second Law, Hooke’s Law, and some differential Calculus, we were able to derive the period and freque ncy of the
mass oscillating on a spring that we encountered in the last section! Note that the period and frequency are completely independent
of the amplitude.
The below figure shows the simple harmonic motion of a n object on a spring and presents graphs of x(t),v(t), and a(t) versus time.
You should learn to create mental connections betwee n the above equations, the different positions of the object on a spring in the
cartoon, and the associated positions in the graphs of x(t), v(t), and a(t).
Visualizing Simple Harmonic Motion: Graphs of x(t),v(t), and a(t) versus t for the motion of a n object on a spring. The net force
on the object can be described by Hooke’s law, and so the obj ect undergoes simple harmonic motion. Note that the init ial position
has the vertical displacement at its maximum value X; v i s initially zero and then negative as the object moves down; and the initial
acceleration is negative, back toward the equilibrium p osition and becoming zero at that point.

5.8.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Simple Harmonic Motion and Uniform Circular Motion
Simple harmonic motion is produced by the projection of uniform circular motion onto one of the axes in the x-y plane.
Describe relationship between the simple harmonic motion and uniform circular motion
Uniform Circular Motion
Uniform circular motion describes the motion of a bod y traversing a circular path at constant speed. The di stance of the body from
the center of the circle remains constant at all tim es. Though the body’s speed is constant, its velocity i s not constant: velocity (a
vector quantity) depends on both the body’s speed a nd its direction of travel. Since the body is constan tly changing direction as it
travels around the circle, the velocity is changing also. This varying velocity indicates the presence o f an acceleration called the
centripetal acceleration. Centripetal acceleration is of constant magnitude and directed at all times t owards the center of the circle.
This acceleration is, in turn, produced by a centripetal f orce —a force in constant magnitude, and directed toward s the center.
Velocity
The above figure illustrates velocity and accelerat ion vectors for uniform motion at four different po ints in the orbit. Since velocity
v is tangent to the circular path, no two velocities p oint in the same direction. Although the object has a constant speed, its direction
is always changing. This change in velocity is due to an acceleration, a, whose magnitude is (like that of the velocity) held
constant, but whose direction also is always changing. Th e acceleration points radially inwards (centripetally) and is perpendicular
to the velocity. This acceleration is known as centripeta l acceleration.
Uniform Circular Motion (at Four Different Point in the Orbit): Velocity v and acceleration a in uniform circular moti on at
angular rate ω; the speed is constant, but the velocity is always tangent to the orbit; the acceleration has const ant magnitude, but
always points toward the center of rotation
Displacement around a circular path is often given i n terms of an angle θ. This angle is the angle between a straight line drawn
from the center of the circle to the objects starti ng position on the edge and a straight line drawn fro m the objects ending position
on the edge to center of the circle. See for a visua l representation of the angle where the point p start ed on the x- axis and moved to
its present position. The angle θ describes how far it moved.learning objectives

5.8.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973
Projection of Uniform Circular Motion: A point P moving on a circular path with a constan t angular velocity ω is undergoing
uniform circular motion. Its projection on the x-axi s undergoes simple harmonic motion. Also shown is the vel ocity of this point
around the circle, v−max, and its projection, which is v. Note that these velocities form a similar trian gle to the displacement
triangle.
For a path around a circle of radius r, when an angle θ(measured in radians) is swept out, the distance trave led on the edge of the
circle is s = rθ. You can prove this yourself by remembering that t he circumference of a circle is, so if the object t raveled
around the whole circle (one circumference) it will h ave gone through an angle of radians and traveled a distance of.
Therefore, the speed of travel around the orbit is:
where the angular rate of rotation is ω. (Note that.) Thus, v is a constant, and the velocity vector v also rotates with constant
magnitude v, at the same angular rate ω.
Acceleration
The acceleration in uniform circular motion is always di rected inward and is given by:
This acceleration acts to change the direction of v, but not the speed.
Simple Harmonic Motion from Uniform Circular Motion
There is an easy way to produce simple harmonic motio n by using uniform circular motion. The figure below demonstrates one
way of using this method. A ball is attached to a uni formly rotating vertical turntable, and its shadow is projected onto the floor as
shown. The shadow undergoes simple harmonic motion.

5.8.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973
Shadow of a Ball Undergoing Simple Harmonic Motion: The shadow of a ball rotating at constant angular velo city ω on a
turntable goes back and forth in precise simple harmonic mot ion.
The next figure shows the basic relationship between u niform circular motion and simple harmonic motion. T he point P travels
around the circle at constant angular velocity ω. The point P is analogous to the ball on a turntable in the figur e above. The
projection of the position of P onto a fixed axis undergoes simple harmonic motion and is analogous to the shadow of the object. At
a point in time assumed in the figure, the projectio n has position x and moves to the left with velocity v. The velocity of the point P
around the circle equals |v |. The projection of |v | on the x-axis is the velocity v of the simple harmonic motion along the xaxis.
To see that the projection undergoes simple harmonic mot ion, note that its position x is given by:
where θ=ωt, ω is the constant angular velocity, and X is the radius of the circular path. Thus,
The angular velocity ω is in radians per unit time; in this case 2π radians is the time for one revoluti on T. That is,.
Substituting this expression for ω, we see that the positio n x is given by:
Note: This equation should look familiar from our earli er discussion of simple harmonic motion.
The Simple Pendulum
A simple pendulum acts like a harmonic oscillator with a p eriod dependent only on L and g for sufficiently small amplitudes.max max

5.8.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Identify parameters that affect the period of a simple p endulum
The Simple Pendulum
A pendulum is a weight suspended from a pivot so that it can swing freely. When a pendulum is displaced si deways from its resting
equilibrium position, it is subject to a restoring fo rce; after it reaches its highest point in its swing, gravity will accelerate it back
toward the equilibrium position. When released, the res toring force combined with the pendulum’s mass causes it to oscillate about
the equilibrium position, swinging back and forth.
Simple Pendulum: A simple pendulum has a small-diameter bob and a string that has a very small mass but is strong enough not to
stretch appreciably. The linear displacement from equili brium is s, the length of the arc. Also shown are the forces on t he bob,
which result in a net force of −mgsinθ toward the equilibri um position—that is, a restoring force.
For small displacements, a pendulum is a simple harmo nic oscillator. A simple pendulum is defined to have an object that has a
small mass, also known as the pendulum bob, which is sus pended from a wire or string of negligible mass, such as shown in the
illustrating figure. Exploring the simple pendulum a bit further, we can discover the conditions under whi ch it performs simple
harmonic motion, and we can derive an interesting expressi on for its period.
AP Phy sics C - PendulumsAP Phy sics C - Pendulumslearning objectives

5.8.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Pendulums: A brief introduction to pendulums (both ideal and physical) for calculus-based physics students from the standpoint of
simple harmonic motion.
We begin by defining the displacement to be the arc length s. We see from the figure that the net force on the bob is tangent to the
arc and equals − mgsinθ. (The weight mg has components mgcosθ along the string and mgsinθ tangent to the arc.) Tension in the
string exactly cancels the component mgcosθ parallel to the string. This leaves a net restoring force drawing the pendulum back
toward the equilibrium position at θ = 0.
Now, if we can show that the restoring force is directl y proportional to the displacement, then we have a si mple harmonic oscillator.
In trying to determine if we have a simple harmonic oscillator, we should note that for small angles (less than about 15º), sin θ≈θ
(sinθ and θ differ by about 1% or less at smaller angles). Thus, for angles less than about 15º, the restoring force F is
The displacement s is directly proportional to θ. When θ is expressed in radians, the arc length in a circle is related to its radius (L
in this instance) by:
s=Lθs=Lθ
so that
For small angles, then, the expression for the restoring fo rce is:
This expression is of the form of Hooke’s Law:
where the force constant is given by k=mg/L and the displacement is given by x=s. For angles less than about 15º, the restoring
force is directly proportional to the displacement, and th e simple pendulum is a simple harmonic oscillator.
Using this equation, we can find the period of a pendulum for amplitudes less than about 15º. For the simple pendulum:
Thus,

5.8.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973or the period of a simple pendulum. This result is i nteresting because of its simplicity. The only things that affect the period of a
simple pendulum are its length and the acceleration due to gravity. The period is completely independent of other factors, such as
mass. Even simple pendulum clocks can be finely adjuste d and accurate. Note the dependence of T on g. If the length of a
pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used t o measure the acceleration due to gravity. If θ is less than about 15º, the
period T for a pendulum is nearly independent of amplitude, as with simple harmonic oscillators. In this case, the m otion of a
pendulum as a function of time can be modeled as:
For amplitudes larger than 15º, the period increases gr adually with amplitude so it is longer than given by the simple equation for T
above. For example, at an amplitude of θ = 23° it is 1% larger. The period increases asympto tically (to infinity) as θapproaches
180°, because the value θ = 180° is an unstable equilibrium point for the pendul um.
The Physical Pendulum
The period of a physical pendulum depends upon its mo ment of inertia about its pivot point and the dista nce from its center of
mass.
Identify parameters that affect the period of a physica l pendulum
The Physical Pendulum
Recall that a simple pendulum consists of a mass susp ended from a massless string or rod on a frictionless pivot. In that case, we
are able to neglect any effect from the string or ro d itself. In contrast, a physical pendulum (sometimes called a compound
pendulum) may be suspended by a rod that is not massl ess or, more generally, may be an arbitrarily-shaped, rigid body swinging by
a pivot (see). In this case, the pendulum’s period depe nds on its moment of inertia around the pivot point.
AP Phy sics C - PendulumsAP Phy sics C - Pendulums0 0
learning objectives

5.8.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Pendulums – Physical Pendulum: A brief introduction to pendulums (both ideal and physical) for calculus-based physics students
from the standpoint of simple harmonic motion.
A Physical Pendulum: An example showing how forces act through center of mass. We can calculate the period of this pendulum
by determining the moment of inertia of the object aro und the pivot point.
Gravity acts through the center of mass of the rigid body. Hence, the length of the pendulum used in equati ons is equal to the linear
distance between the pivot and the center of mass (h).
The equation of torque gives:
where α is the angular acceleration, τ is the torque, and I is the moment of inertia.
The torque is generated by gravity so:
where h is the distance from the center of mass to the pivot point and θ is the angle from the vertical.
Hence, under the small-angle approximation sin\theta \ap prox \theta,
This is of the same form as the conventional simple pendulu m and this gives a period of:
And a frequency of:
\[\mathrm{f=\dfrac{1]{T}=\dfrac{1}{2π}\sqrt{\dfrac{ mgh}{I}}.}\]

5.8.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973In case we know the moment of inertia of the rigid bo dy, we can evaluate the above expression of the period for the physical
pendulum. For illustration, let us consider a uniform rigid rod, pivoted from a frame as shown (see). Clear ly, the center of mass is
at a distance L/2 from the point of suspension:
Uniform Rigid Rod: A rigid rod with uniform mass distribution hangs from a pi vot point. This is another example of a physical
pendulum.
The moment of inertia of the rigid rod about its center is:
However, we need to evaluate the moment of inertia abou t the pivot point, not the center of mass, so we appl y the parallel axis
theorem:
Plugging this result into the equation for period, we have:
The important thing to note about this relation is t hat the period is still independent of the mass of th e rigid body. However, it is not
independent of the mass distribution of the rigid body. A change in shape, size, or mass d istribution will change the moment of
inertia. This, in turn, will change the period.
As with a simple pendulum, a physical pendulum can be used to measure g.
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator
The total energy in a simple harmonic oscillator is th e constant sum of the potential and kinetic energies.
Explain why the total energy of the harmonic oscillator is constant
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator
To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator, we first consider all the forms of energy it can ha ve. Recall that the potential
energy (PE), stored in a spring that follows Hooke’s Law is:
where PE is the potential energy, k is the spring constant, and x is the magnitude of the displacement or deformation. Because a
simple harmonic oscillator has no dissipative forces, the other important form of energy is kinetic ener gy (KE). Conservation oflearning objectives

5.8.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973energy for these two forms is:
which can be written as:
This statement of conservation of energy is valid fo r all simple harmonic oscillators, including ones where the gravitational force
plays a role. For example, for a simple pendulum we repl ace the velocity with v=Lω, the spring constant with k=mg/L, and the
displacement term with x=Lθ. Thus:
In the case of undamped, simple harmonic motion, the e nergy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and p otential, going
completely from one to the other as the system oscill ates. So for the simple example of an object on a frict ionless surface attached
to a spring, as shown again (see), the motion starts with all of the energy stored in the spring. As the obj ect starts to move, the
elastic potential energy is converted to kinetic en ergy, becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equil ibrium position. It is then
converted back into elastic potential energy by the spring, the velocity becomes zero when the ki netic energy is completely
converted, and so on. This concept provides extra in sight here and in later applications of simple harmo nic motion, such as
alternating current circuits.
Energy in a Simple Harmonic Oscillator: The transformation of energy in simple harmonic moti on is illustrated for an object
attached to a spring on a frictionless surface. (a) Th e mass has achieved maximum displacement from equilibrium. All energy is
potential energy. (b) As the mass passes through the equilib rium point with maximum speed all energy in the system i s in kinetic
energy. (c) Once again, all energy is in the potential form, stored in the compression of the spring (in the first panel the energy was
stored in the extension of the spring). (d) Passing through e quilibrium again all energy is kinetic. (e) The mass has completed an
entire cycle.
The conservation of energy principle can be used to derive an expression for velocity v. If we start our s imple harmonic motion
with zero velocity and maximum displacement (x=X), then the total energy is:
This total energy is constant and is shifted back an d forth between kinetic energy and potential energy, at most times being shared
by each. The conservation of energy for this system in equa tion form is thus:
Solving this equation for v yields:

5.8.3.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Manipulating this expression algebraically gives:
and so:
where:
From this expression, we see that the velocity is a max imum (v) at x=0. Notice that the maximum velocity depends on three
factors. It is directly proportional to amplitude. As you might guess, the greater the maximum displacement, the greater the
maximum velocity. It is also greater for stiffer sys tems because they exert greater force for the same dis placement. This observation
is seen in the expression for v; it is proportional to the square root of the force constant k. Finally, the maximum velocity is
smaller for objects that have larger masses, becaus e the maximum velocity is inversely proportional to the square root of m. For a
given force, objects that have large masses accelerat e more slowly.
A similar calculation for the simple pendulum produce s a similar result, namely:
Joy Phy sics- exp #13 Spring-mass oscJoy Phy sics- exp #13 Spring-mass oscmax
max

5.8.3.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator: A known mass is hung from a spring of known spring constant a nd allowed to
oscillate. The time for one oscillation (period) is measu red. This value is compared to a predicted value, based on the mass and
spring constant.
Sinusoidal Nature of Simple Harmonic Motion
The solutions to the equations of motion of simple harmo nic oscillators are always sinusoidal, i.e., sines and cosines.
Review factors responsible for the sinusoidal behavior of uniform circular motion
Sinusoidal Nature of Simple Harmonic Motion
Why are sine waves so common?
If the mass -on-a-spring system discussed in previous sections were to be constructed and its motion were m easured accurately, its
x–t graph would be a near-perfect sine-wave shape, as shown in. It is called a “sine wave” or “sinusoidal” even if it is a cosine, or a
sine or cosine shifted by some arbitrary horizontal a mount. It may not be surprising that it is a wiggle of t his general sort, but why
is it a specific mathematically perfect shape? Why is it not a sawtooth shape, like in (2); or some other sha pe, like in (3)? It is
notable that a vast number of apparently unrelated vibrating systems show the same mathematical feature. A tuning fork, a sapling
pulled to one side and released, a car bouncing on its shock absorbers, all these systems will exhibit sine -wave motion under one
condition: the amplitude of the motion must be small.
Sinusoidal and Non-Sinusoidal Vibrations: Only the top graph is sinusoidal. The others vary with const ant amplitude and period,
but do no describe simple harmonic motion.
learning objectives

5.8.3.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Hooke’s Law and Sine Wave Generation
The key to understanding how an object vibrates is to know how the force on the object depends on the objec t’s position. If a
system follows Hooke’s Law, the restoring force is propo rtional to the displacement. As touched on in previo us sections, there
exists a second order differential equation that relates acc eleration and displacement.
When this general equation is solved for the position, v elocity and acceleration as a function of time:
These are all sinusoidal solutions. Consider a mass on a spring that has a small pen inside running across a moving strip of paper as
it bounces, recording its movements.
Mass on Spring Producing Sine Wave: The vertical position of an object bouncing on a spring is recorded on a strip of moving
paper, leaving a sine wave.
The above equations can be rewritten in a form applicable to the variables for the mass on spring system in the figur e.
Recall that the projection of uniform circular moti on can be described in terms of a simple harmonic osc illator. Uniform circular
motion is therefore also sinusoidal, as you can see from.

5.8.3.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973
Sinusoidal Nature of Uniform Circular Motion: The position of the projection of uniform circular mo tion performs simple
harmonic motion, as this wavelike graph of x versus t in dicates.
Instantaneous Energy of Simple Harmonic Motion
The equations discussed for the components of the to tal energy of simple harmonic oscillators may be co mbined with the
sinusoidal solutions for x(t), v(t), and a(t) to model the changes in kinetic and potential energy in sim ple harmonic motion.
The kinetic energy K of the system at time t is:
The potential energy U is:
Summing K(t) and U(t) produces the total mechanical energy seen before:
Key Points
Motion that repeats itself regularly is called periodic m otion. One complete repetition of the motion is called a cy cle. The
duration of each cycle is the period.
The frequency refers to the number of cycles completed in an interval of time. It is the reciprocal of the period a nd can be
calculated with the equation f=1/T.
Some motion is best characterized by the angular frequency (ω). The angular frequency refers to the angular displac ement per
unit time and is calculated from the frequency with the equation.
If an object is vibrating to the right and left, then it must have a leftward force on it when it is on the right side, an d a rightward
force when it is on the left side.
The restoring force causes an oscillating object to move back toward its stable equilibrium position, where the net force on it is
zero.
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring forc e is directly proportional to displacement. In this case the force can be
calculated as, where F is the restoring force, k is the force constant, and x is the displacement.

5.8.3.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973The motion of a mass on a spring can be described as Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM): oscillatory motion that follows Hooke’s
Law.
The period of a mass on a spring is given by the equation
Simple harmonic motion is often modeled with the example of a mass on a spring, where the restoring force obey’s Hooke’ s
Law and is directly proportional to the displacement of a n object from its equilibrium position.
Any system that obeys simple harmonic motion is known as a simple harmonic oscillator.
The equation of motion that describes simple harmonic m otion can be obtained by combining Newton’s Second Law and
Hooke’s Law into a second-order linear ordinary diffe rential equation:
Uniform circular motion describes the movement of an objec t traveling a circular path with constant speed. The onedimensional projection of this motion can be described as simple harmonic motion.
In uniform circular motion, the velocity vector v is al ways tangent to the circular path and constant in magnitude. The
acceleration is constant in magnitude and points to the cen ter of the circular path, perpendicular to the velocity vector at every
instant.
If an object moves with angular velocity ω around a circ le of radius r centered at the origin of the x-y plane, th en its motion
along each coordinate is simple harmonic motion with ampl itude r and angular frequency ω.
A simple pendulum is defined as an object that has a small mas s, also known as the pendulum bob, which is suspended from a
wire or string of negligible mass.
When displaced, a pendulum will oscillate around its equi librium point due to momentum in balance with the res toring force of
gravity.
When the swings (amplitudes) are small, less than about 15 º, the pendulum acts as a simple harmonic oscillator with p eriod
, where L is the length of the string and g is the accelerati on due to gravity.
A physical pendulum is the generalized case of the simple pendulum. It consists of any rigid body that oscillates abo ut a pivot
point.
For small amplitudes, the period of a physical pendulum o nly depends on the moment of inertia of the body around t he pivot
point and the distance from the pivot to the body’s c enter of mass. It is calculated as:.
The period is still independent of the total mass of the rigid body. However, it is not independent of the mass dist ribution of the
rigid body. A change in shape, size, or mass distribution wil l change the moment of inertia and thus, the period.
The sum of the kinetic and potential energies in a simple harmonic oscillator is a constant, i.e.,. The energy
oscillates back and forth between kinetic and potential, going completely from one to the other as the system os cillates.
In a spring system, the conservation equation is written as:, where X is the maximum
displacement.
The maximum velocity depends on three factors: amplitud e, the stiffness factor, and mass:.
For simple harmonic oscillators, the equation of motion i s always a second order differential equation that relates th e
acceleration and the displacement. The relevant variabl es are x, the displacement, and k, the spring constant.
Solving the differential equation above always produces s olutions that are sinusoidal in nature. For example,
and all have sinusoidal solutions for simple harmon ic motion.
Uniform circular motion is also sinusoidal because the projection of this motion behaves like a simple harmonic oscillator.
Key Terms
period: The duration of one cycle in a repeating event.
angular frequency: The angular displacement per unit time.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs: f = n / t.
Restoring force: A variable force that gives rise to an equilibrium in a physical system. If the system is perturbed away from
the equilibrium, the restoring force will tend to bring the system back toward equilibrium. The restoring forc e is a function only
of position of the mass or particle. It is always directed b ack toward the equilibrium position of the system
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
simple harmonic oscillator: A device that implements Hooke’s law, such as a mass t hat is attached to a spring, with the other
end of the spring being connected to a rigid support, suc h as a wall.
oscillator: A pattern that returns to its original state, in the same orientation and position, after a finite number of gen erations.

5.8.3.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973centripetal acceleration: Acceleration that makes a body follow a curved path: it is always perpendicular to the velocity of a
body and directed towards the center of curvature of th e path.
uniform circular motion: Movement around a circular path with constant speed.
simple pendulum: A hypothetical pendulum consisting of a weight suspen ded by a weightless string.
physical pendulum: A pendulum where the rod or string is not massless, and may have extended size; that is, an arbitrarilyshaped, rigid body swinging by a pivot. In this case, the pe ndulum’s period depends on its moment of inertia aroun d the pivot
point.
mass distribution: Describes the spatial distribution, and defines the cente r, of mass in an object.
elastic potential energy: The energy stored in a deformable object, such as a s pring.
dissipative forces: Forces that cause energy to be lost in a system undergoing motion.
sinusoidal: In the form of a wave, especially one whose amplitude varie s in proportion to the sine of some variable (such as
time).
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Period (physics). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Period_(physics). License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
period. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/period. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
angular frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/angular%20frequency. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Mass_on_a_spring. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Restoring force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Restoring%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.8.3.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Mass_on_a_spring. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
simple harmonic oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple+harmonic+oscillator.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion%23Uniform_circular_mo tion. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/uniform-circularmotion. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/centripetal-acceleration.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.8.3.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
simple pendulum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physical pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_pendulum%23Compound_pendulum. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
mass distribution. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/mass%20distribution. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
physical pendulum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/physical%20pendulum. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

5.8.3.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/elastic-potential-energy.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/dissipative-forces.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.8.3.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuv24zcc5kI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Harmonic oscillator. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonic_oscillator. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
sinusoidal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinusoidal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/figs/locomotive-l inkages.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 6, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42240/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Simple Harmonic Motion. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCIQSJn63LQ. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 7, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.8.3.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33973Uniform circular motion. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_circular_motion.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42243/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Pendulums. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Pendulums - Physical Pendulum. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk4KrcKIQ50. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sunil Kumar Singh, Simple and Physical Pendulum. October 8, 201 2. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15585/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Experience with a simple harmonic oscillator. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuv24zcc5kI. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42244/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vibrations. Provided by: Light and Matter. Located at: http://lightandmatter.com/html_books/me/ch16/ch16.html. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42245/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. October 8, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42242/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.8.3: Periodic Motion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
15.3: Periodic Motion by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339745.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Describe the time evolution of the motion of the damped harmonic oscillator
The Physical Situation
The simple harmonic oscillator describes many physica l systems throughout the world, but early studies of p hysics usually only
consider ideal situations that do not involve fricti on. In the real world, however, frictional forces – suc h as air resistance – will
slow, or dampen, the motion of an object. Sometimes, the se dampening forces are strong enough to return an o bject to equilibrium
over time.
Damped Harmonic Motion: Illustrating the position against time of our object mov ing in simple harmonic motion. We see that for
small damping, the amplitude of our motion slowly decrease s over time.
The simplest and most commonly seen case occurs when the frictional force is proportional to an object’ s velocity. Note that other
cases exist which may lead to nonlinear equations which go be yond the scope of this example.
Consider an object of mass m attached to a spring of constant k. Let the damping force be proportional to the mass’ v elocity by a
proportionality constant, b, called the vicious damping coefficient. We can describe this situation using Newton’s second law, which
leads to a second order, linear, homogeneous, ordinary differential equation. We simply add a term descri bing the damping force to
our already familiar equation describing a simple harm onic oscillator to describe the general case of damped harm onic motion.
This notation uses, the acceleration of our object,, the velocity of our object,, undamped angular freq uency of oscillation,
and ɣ, which we can call the damping ratio.
Solving the Differential Equation; Interpreting Results
We solve this differential equation for our equation of motion of the system, x(t). We assume a solution i n the form of an
exponential, where a is a constant value which we will solve fo r.
Plugging this into the differential equation we find that there are three results for a, which will dictate the motion of our system. We
can solve for a by using the quadratic equation.learning objectives

5.8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33974The physical situation has three possible results dep ending on the value of a, which depends on the value o f what is under our
radical. This expression can be positive, negative, or equal to zero which will result in overdamping, underd amping, and critical
damping, respectively.
is the Over Damped case. In this case, the system returns to equilibrium by exponentially decaying towards zero. The
system will not pass the equilibrium position more than o nce.
is the Under Damped case. In this case, the system oscillates as it slowly returns to equilibrium and the amplitude
decreases over time. Figure 1 depicts an underdamped case.
is the Critically Damped case. In this case, the system returns to equilibriu m very quickly without oscillating and without
passing the equilibrium position at all.
Driven Oscillations and Resonance
Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators further affected by an externally applied force.
Describe a driven harmonic oscillator as a type of dam ped oscillator
In classical mechanics, a harmonic oscillator is a syst em that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring
force, F, proportional to the displacement, where k is a positive constant. If a frictional force (dampi ng) proportional
to the velocity is also present, the harmonic oscillator is d escribed as a damped oscillator.
Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators fu rther affected by an externally applied force F(t). Ne wton’s second law takes
the form. It is usually rewritten into the form. T his equation can be solved
exactly for any driving force, using the solutions z (t) which satisfy the unforced equation:, and which ca n
be expressed as damped sinusoidal oscillations in the c ase where. The amplitude A and
phase φ determine the behavior needed to match the i nitial conditions. In the case and a unit step inp ut with the
solution is: with phase φ given by. The time an osci llator needs to adapt to changed external
conditions is of the order \(\mathrm{τ =\frac{1}{(ζ_)}}\). In physics, the adaptation is called relaxat ion, and τ is called the
relaxation time.
In the case of a sinusoidal driving force:, where is the driving amplitude and ωω is the driving
frequency for a sinusoidal driving mechanism. This t ype of system appears in AC driven RLC circuits (resi stor-inductor-capacitor)
and driven spring systems having internal mechanical resistance or external air resistance. The general sol ution is a sum of a
transient solution that depends on initial condition s, and a steady state that is independent of initial conditions and depends only on
the driving amplitude, driving frequency ωω, undampe d angular frequency, and the damping ratio. For a particular driving
frequency called the resonance, or resonant frequenc y, the amplitude (for a given) is maximum. This reson ance
effect only occurs when, i.e. for significantly und erdamped systems. For strongly underdamped systems the value of the
amplitude can become quite large near the resonance freque ncy (see).learning objectives

5.8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33974
Resonance: Steady state variation of amplitude with frequency and damping of a driven simple harmonic oscillator.
Key Points
To describe a damped harmonic oscillator, add a velocity dependent term, bx, where b is the vicious dampingcoefficient.
Solve the differential equation for the equation of moti on, x(t).
Depending on the values of the damping coefficient and u ndamped angular frequency, the results will be one of three cases: an
under damped system, an over damped system, or a critically damped system.
Newton’s second law takes the form for driven harmonic osci llators.
The resonance effect occurs only in the underdamped sys tems.
For strongly underdamped systems the value of the amplitud e can become quite large near the resonance frequency.
Key Terms
Under Damped: “The condition in which damping of an oscillator caus es it to return to equilibrium with the amplitude
gradually decreasing to zero; system returns to equilib rium faster but overshoots and crosses the equilibrium po sition one or
more times. “
Critically Damped: “The condition in which the damping of an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as possible to its
equilibrium position without oscillating back and forth abo ut this position. “
Over Damped: “The condition in which damping of an oscillator caus es it to return to equilibrium without oscillating;
oscillator moves more slowly toward equilibrium than in the critically damped system. “
oscillator: A pattern that returns to its original state, in the same orientation and position, after a finite number of gen erations.
equilibrium: The state of a body at rest or in uniform motion, the r esultant of all forces on which is zero.
force: A physical quantity that denotes ability to push, pu ll, twist or accelerate a body which is measured in a unit dim ensioned
in mass × distance/time² (ML/T²): SI: newton (N); CGS: dyne (d yn)
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/under-damped. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/over-damped. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/critically-damped.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33974OpenStax College, Damped Harmonic Motion. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42246/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Driven oscillations. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Driven_oscillations%23Driven_harmonic_oscill ators. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
equilibrium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/equilibrium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
oscillator. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillator. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
force. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/force. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Damped Harmonic Motion. November 3, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42246/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/Resonance.PNG/80 0px-Resonance.PNG. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
15.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339755.8.5: Waves
Describe process of energy and mass transfer during wave mot ion
Vibrations and waves are extremely important phenome na in physics. In nature, oscillations are found everywh ere. From the
jiggling of atoms to the large oscillations of sea waves, we find examples of vibrations in almost every ph ysical system. In physics
a wave can be thought of as a disturbance or oscillati on that travels through space-time, accompanied by a transfer of energy. Wave
motion transfers energy from one point to another, of ten with no permanent displacement of the particles of the medium —that is,
with little or no associated mass transport. They consist, i nstead, of oscillations or vibrations around almost fixe d locations.
The emphasis of the last point highlights an importan t misconception of waves. Waves transfer energy not mass. An easy way to
see this is to imagine a floating ball a few yards o ut to sea. As the waves propagate (i.e., travel) towards the shore, the ball will not
come towards the shore. It may come to shore eventuall y due to the tides, current or wind, but the waves the mselves will not carry
the ball with them. A wave only moves mass perpendicu lar to the direction of propagation—in this case up a nd down, as illustrated
in the figure below:
Wave motion: The point along the axis is analogous to the floati ng ball at sea. We notice that while it moves up and down it does
not move in the direction of the wave’s propagation.
A wave can be transverse or longitudinal depending o n the direction of its oscillation. Transverse waves o ccur when a disturbance
causes oscillations perpendicular (at right angles) t o the propagation (the direction of energy transfer). Longitudinal waves occur
when the oscillations are parallel to the direction o f propagation. While mechanical waves can be both tra nsverse and longitudinal,
all electromagnetic waves are transverse. Sound, for exampl e, is a longitudinal wave.
The description of waves is closely related to their physical origin for each specific instance of a wave process. For example,
acoustics is distinguished from optics in that sound waves are related to a mechanical rather than an el ectromagnetic (light) wave
transfer caused by vibration. Therefore, concepts such as mass, momentum, inertia or elasticity become crucia l in describing
acoustic (as distinct from optic) wave processes. Thi s difference in origin introduces certain wave chara cteristics particular to the
properties of the medium involved. In this chapter we will closely examine the difference between longitudi nal and transverse
waves along with some of the properties they possess. We will also learn how waves are fundamental in describ ing motion of many
applicable physical systems.
High School Phy sics - The Wave EquationHigh School Phy sics - The Wave Equationlearning objectives

5.8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975The Wave Equation: A brief introduction to the wave equation, discussin g wave velocity, frequency, wavelength, and period.
Transverse Waves
Transverse waves propagate through media with a speed →vwv→w orthogonally to the direction of energy transfer.
Describe properties of the transverse wave
A transverse wave is a moving wave that consists of osci llations occurring perpendicular (or right angled) t o the direction of energy
transfer. If a transverse wave is moving in the positive x-direction, its oscillations are in up and down dire ctions that lie in the y–z
plane. Light is an example of a transverse wave. For tr ansverse waves in matter, the displacement of the me dium is perpendicular
to the direction of propagation of the wave. A ripple on a pond and a wave on a string are easily visualized tra nsverse waves.
Transverse waves are waves that are oscillating perpendi cularly to the direction of propagation. If you anch or one end of a ribbon
or string and hold the other end in your hand, you ca n create transverse waves by moving your hand up and down. Notice though,
that you can also launch waves by moving your hand si de-to-side. This is an important point. There are two i ndependent directions
in which wave motion can occur. In this case, these are the y and z directions mentioned above. depicts the motion of a transverse
wave. Here we observe that the wave is moving in t and oscillating in the x-y plane. A wave can be thought as comprising many
particles (as seen in the figure) which oscillate up and down. In the figure we observe this motion to be in x-y plane (denoted by the
red line in the figure). As time passes the oscillatio ns are separated by units of time. The result of thi s separation is the sine curve
we expect when we plot position versus time.
Sine Wave: The direction of propagation of this wave is along the t axis.
learning objectives

5.8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975When a wave travels through a medium–i.e., air, water, etc., or the standard reference medium (vacuum)–it d oes so at a given
speed: this is called the speed of propagation. The speed at which the wave propagates is denoted and can be found using the
following formula:
where v is the speed of the wave, f is the frequency, and is the wavelength. The wavelength spans crest to crest while the amplitude
is 1/2 the total distance from crest to trough. Tran sverse waves have their applications in many areas o f physics. Examples of
transverse waves include seismic S (secondary) waves, and the motion of the electric (E) and magnetic (M) fiel ds in an
electromagnetic plane waves, which both oscillate per pendicularly to each other as well as to the directio n of energy transfer.
Therefore an electromagnetic wave consists of two transver se waves, visible light being an example of an electromag netic wave.
Wavelength and Amplitude: The wavelength is the distance between adjacent crests. The amplitude is the 1/2 the distance from
crest to trough.
Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves | Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | T w o T y pes of Waves |

5.8.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse: Even ocean waves!
Longitudinal Waves
Longitudinal waves, sometimes called compression waves, oscil late in the direction of propagation.
Give properties and provide examples of the longitudina l wave
Longitudinal Waves
Longitudinal waves have the same direction of vibrati on as their direction of travel. This means that the movement of the medium
is in the same direction as the motion of the wave. Som e longitudinal waves are also called compressional wav es or compression
waves. An easy experiment for observing longitudinal wa ves involves taking a Slinky and holding both ends. Aft er compressing
and releasing one end of the Slinky (while still holding o nto the end), a pulse of more concentrated coils will trave l to the end of the
Slinky.
Longitudinal Waves: A compressed Slinky is an example of a longitudinal wave. The wve propagates in the same direction of
oscillation.
Like transverse waves, longitudinal waves do not displace mass. The difference is that each particle which mak es up the medium
through which a longitudinal wave propagates oscillate s along the axis of propagation. In the example of th e Slinky, each coil will
oscillate at a point but will not travel the length of the Slinky. It is important to remember that energ y, in this case in the form of a
pulse, is being transmitted and not the displaced mass.
Longitudinal waves can sometimes also be conceptualize d as pressure waves. The most common pressure wave is th e sound wave.
Sound waves are created by the compression of a medium, usually air. Longitudinal sound waves are waves of a lternating pressure
deviations from the equilibrium pressure, causing loc al regions of compression and rarefaction. Matter in t he medium is
periodically displaced by a sound wave, and thus oscil lates. When people make a sound, whether it is through speaking or hitting
something, they are compressing the air particles to some significant amount. By doing so, they create tra nsverse waves. When
people hear sounds, their ears are sensitive to the pressure differences and interpret the waves as different tones.
learning objectives

5.8.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975
Doc Sch u ste r
Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | Two T ypes of Waves
Longitudinal vs. T ransverse | Two T ypes of Waves
Watch on
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse: Even ocean waves!
Water Waves
Water waves can be commonly observed in daily life, and co mprise both transverse and longitudinal wave motion.
Describe particle movement in water waves
Water waves, which can be commonly observed in our dai ly lives, are of specific interest to physicists. Descri bing detailed fluid
dynamics in water waves is beyond the scope of introd uctory physics courses. Although we often observe water wave propagating
in 2D, in this atom we will limit our discussion to 1D propagatio n.
learning objectives

5.8.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975Water waves: Surface waves in water
The uniqueness of water waves is found in the observat ion that they comprise both transverse and longitud inal wave motion. As a
result, the particles composing the wave move in clo ckwise circular motion, as seen in. Oscillatory motion is highest at the surface
and diminishes exponentially with depth. Waves are gen erated by wind passing over the surface of the sea. As l ong as the waves
propagate slower than the wind speed just above the wa ves, there is an energy transfer from the wind to the waves. Both air
pressure differences between the upwind and the lee sid e of a wave crest, as well as friction on the water surface by the wind
(making the water to go into the shear stress), contribute to th e growth of the waves.
In the case of monochromatic linear plane waves in d eep water, particles near the surface move in circula r paths, creating a
combination of longitudinal (back and forth) and tr ansverse (up and down) wave motions. When waves propag ate in shallow water
(where the depth is less than half the wavelength), th e particle trajectories are compressed into ellipses. As the wave amplitude
(height) increases, the particle paths no longer fo rm closed orbits; rather, after the passage of each crest, particles are displaced
slightly from their previous positions, a phenomenon known a s Stokes drift.
Plane wave: We see a wave propagating in the direction of the phase v elocity. The wave can be thought to be made up of planes
orthogonal to the direction of the phase velocity.
Since water waves transport energy, attempts to generat e power from them have been made by utilizing the ph ysical motion of such
waves. Although larger waves are more powerful, wave power is also determined by wave speed, wavelength, and wate r density.
Deep water corresponds with a water depth larger than h alf the wavelength, as is a common case in the sea and ocean. In deep
water, longer-period waves propagate faster and transp ort their energy faster. The deep-water group velocit y is half the phase
velocity. In shallow water for wavelengths larger than about twenty times the water depth (as often found ne ar the coast), the group
velocity is equal to the phase velocity. These metho ds have proven viable in some cases but do not provide a fully sustainable form
of renewable energy to date.
Water waves: The motion water waves causes particles to follow clock wise circular motion. This is a result of the wave having
both transverse and longitudinal properties.
Wavelength, Freqency in Relation to Speed
Waves are defined by its frequency, wavelength, and a mplitude among others. They also have two kinds of ve locity: phase and
group velocity.

5.8.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975Identify major characteristic properties of waves
Characteristics of Waves
Waves have certain characteristic properties which ar e observable at first notice. The first property to n ote is the amplitude. The
amplitude is half of the distance measured from cre st to trough. We also observe the wavelength, which is t he spatial period of the
wave (e.g. from crest to crest or trough to trough). We denot e the wavelength by the Greek letter λλ.
The frequency of a wave is the number of cycles per unit time — one can think of it as the number of cr ests which pass a fixed
point per unit time. Mathematically, we make the observa tion that,
Frequencies of different sine waves.: The red wave has a low frequency sine there is very lit tle repetition of cycles. Conversely
we say that the purple wave has a high frequency. Note that t ime increases along the horizontal.
where T is the period of oscillation. Frequency and wavele ngth can also be related-* with respects to a “speed” of a wa ve. In fact,
\[\mathrm{v=fλ}]
where v is called the wave speed, or more commonly,the phase velocity, the rate at which the phase of the wa ve propagates in
space. This is the velocity at which the phase of an y one frequency component of the wave travels. For su ch a component, any
given phase of the wave (for example, the crest) will appea r to travel at the phase velocity.
Finally, the group velocity of a wave is the velocity with which the overall shape of the waves’ amplitudes — known as the
modulation or envelope of the wave — propagates thro ugh space. In, one may see that the overall shape (o r “envelope”) propagates
to the right, while the phase velocity is negative.
Fig 2: This shows a wave with the group velocity and phase ve locity going in different directions. (The group ve locity is positive
and the phase velocity is negative.)
Energy Transportation
Waves transfer energy which can be used to do work.
Relate direction of energy and wave transportation
Energy transportion is essential to waves. It is a co mmon misconception that waves move mass. Waves carry ener gy along an axis
defined to be the direction of propagation. One easy example is to imagine that you are standing in the su rf and you are hit by alearning objectives
learning objectives

5.8.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975significantly large wave, and once you are hit you ar e displaced (unless you hold firmly to your ground!). In this sense the wave
has done work (it applied a force over a distance). Since work is done over time, the energy carried by a wave can be used to
generate power.
Water Wave: Waves that are more massive or have a greater velocity tr ansport more energy.
Similarly we find that electromagnetic waves carry ener gy. Electromagnetic radiation (EMR) carries energy—som etimes called
radiant energy—through space continuously away from the source (this is not true of the near-field part of the EM field).
Electromagnetic waves can be imagined as a self-propag ating transverse oscillating wave of electric and ma gnetic fields. EMR also
carries both momentum and angular momentum. These p roperties may all be imparted to matter with which it interacts (through
work). EMR is produced from other types of energy when created, and it is converted to other types of energ y when it is destroyed.
The photon is the quantum of the electromagnetic in teraction, and is the basic “unit” or constituent of all forms of EMR. The
quantum nature of light becomes more apparent at hi gh frequencies (or high photon energy). Such photons b ehave more like
particles than lower-frequency photons do.
Electromagnetic Wave: Electromagnetic waves can be imagined as a self-propagat ing transverse oscillating wave of electric and
magnetic fields. This 3D diagram shows a plane linearly pola rized wave propagating from left to right.
In general, there is a relation of waves which states that the velocity () of a wave is proportional to th e frequency () times the
wavelength ():
We also know that classical momentum pp is given by p=mv p=mv which relates to force via Newton’s second law:
EM waves with higher frequencies carry more energy. Thi s is a direct result of the equations above. Since we find that higher
frequencies imply greater velocity. If velocity is in creased then we have greater momentum which implies a greater force (it gets a
little bit tricky when we talk about particles moving close to the speed of light, but this observation ho lds in the classical sense).
Since energy is the ability of an object to do work, we find that for a greater force correlates to more e nergy transfer.
Again, this is an easy phenomenon to experience empirically; just stand in front of a faster wave and feel the differ ence!
Key Points
A wave can be thought of as a disturbance or oscillation that travels through space-time, accompanied by a tran sfer of energy.
The direction a wave propagates is perpendicular to the d irection it oscillates for transverse waves.

5.8.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975A wave does not move mass in the direction of propagati on; it transfers energy.
Transverse waves oscillate in the z-y plane but travel alon g the x axis.
A transverse wave has a speed of propagation given by the e quation.
The direction of energy transfer is perpendicular to the motion of the wave.
While longitudinal waves oscillate in the direction of pr opagation, they do not displace mass since the oscillati ons are small and
involve an equilibrium position.
The longitudinal ‘waves’ can be conceptualized as pulse s that transfer energy along the axis of propagation.
Longitudinal waves can be conceptualized as pressure wave s characterized by compression and rarefaction.
The particles which make up a water wave move in circula r paths.
If the waves move slower than the wind above them, energy is transfered from the wind to the waves.
The oscillations are greatest on the surface of the wav e and become weaker deeper in the fluid.
The wavelength is the spatial period of the wave.
The frequency of a wave refers to the number of cycles per unit time and is not to be confused with angular frequenc y.
The phase velocity can be expressed as the product of wave length and frequency.
Waves which are more massive transfer more energy.
Waves with greater velocities transfer more energy.
Energy of a wave is transported in the direction of the waves transportation.
Key Terms
medium: The material or empty space through which signals, wav es or forces pass.
direction of propagation: The axis along which the wave travels.
wave: A moving disturbance in the energy level of a field.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
trough: A long, narrow depression between waves or ridges.
speed of propagation: The speed at which a wave moves through a medium.
crest: The ridge or top of a wave.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
rarefaction: a reduction in the density of a material, especially th at of a fluid
Longitudinal: Running in the direction of the long axis of a body.
compression: to increase in density; the act of compressing, or the st ate of being compressed; compaction
phase velocity: The velocity of propagation of a pure sine wave of infi nite extent and infinitesimal amplitude.
group velocity: The propagation velocity of the envelope of a modulat ed travelling wave, which is considered as the
propagation velocity of information or energy contained in it.
plane wave: A constant-frequency wave whose wavefronts (surfaces of con stant phase) are infinite parallel planes of constant
peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velocity ve ctor.
wave speed: The absolute value of the velocity at which the phase of any one frequency component of the wave travels.
wavelength: The length of a single cycle of a wave, as measured by the distance between one peak or trough of a wave and the
next; it is often designated in physics as λ, and corresp onds to the velocity of the wave divided by its frequency.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
energy: A quantity that denotes the ability to do work and is me asured in a unit dimensioned in mass × distance²/time² (ML ²/T²)
or the equivalent.
power: A measure of the rate of doing work or transferring ene rgy.
work: A measure of energy expended in moving an object; most commonly, force times displacement. No work is done if the
object does not move.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.8.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
direction of propagation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/direction%20of%20propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
medium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
crest. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/crest. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transverse wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/speed-of-propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
direction of propagation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/direction%20of%20propagation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
trough. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/trough. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Longitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Longitudinal_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_waves%23Longitudinal_and_transverse_waves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Longitudinal. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Longitudinal. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
compression. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/compression. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

5.8.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975rarefaction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rarefaction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wind wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Wave power. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_power. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
plane wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/plane%20wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
phase velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phase_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
group velocity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/group_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

5.8.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripples.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Phase velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
wave speed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave%20speed. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripples.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Electromagnetic radiation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_radiation.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
energy. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/energy. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
work. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/work. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/power. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.8.5.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33975Simple harmonic motion animation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_harmonic_motion_animation.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
The Wave Equation. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEEPp0mBCdg. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://simple.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wave.png. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
ComplexSinInATimeAxe. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:ComplexSinInATimeAxe.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
funwaves - 5.nLongitudinal wave. Provided by: Wikispaces. Located at:
http://funwaves.wikispaces.com/5.+Longitudinal+wave. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Two Types of Waves: Longitudinal vs. Transverse. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PxB8-BVO82g. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Plane Wave Oblique View. Provided by: Wikimedia. Located at:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_Oblique_View.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Elliptical trajectory on ripples. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elliptical_trajectory_on_ripple s.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Group velocity. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sine waves different frequencies. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sine_waves_different_frequencies.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Waves in pacifica 1. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Waves_in_pacifica_1.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Electromagneticwave3Dfromside. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Electromagneticwave3Dfromside.gif. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.8.5: Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
15.5: Waves by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339765.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
Distinguish transmission and reflection phenomena
When the medium through which a wave travels suddenly changes, the wave often experiences partial transmiss ion and partial
refection at the interface. Reflection is a wave phen omenon that changes the direction of a wavefront at a n interface between two
different media so that the wavefront returns into t he medium from which it originated. Transmission permits the passage of wave,
with some or none of the incident wave being absorbed. Refl ection and transmission often occur at the same time.
Partial Transmittance and Partial Reflectance: A wave experiences partial transmittance and partial re flectance when the
medium through which it travels suddenly changes.
Consider a long string made by connecting two sub-str ings with different density. When the string is driv en by an external
force, partial reflection and transmission occur as i n the figure above. For the incoming, reflected, and transmitted waves, we can
try a solution of the following forms:
Two Strings With Different Density: Two strings with different density are connected and driv en by an external driving force.
k and k are determined by the speed of the wave in e ach medium. We choose our coordinates such that the junction of two substrings is located at x=0. In choosing a trial solutio n for the waves, we assumed that the incident and transmi tted waves travel to the
right, while the reflected waves travel to the left. (This is why the ‘+’ sign is chosen before ωtωt in the reflected wave. On the left
side of the junction, we have
On the right side, we have
We will impose additional restriction on the waves by applying “boundary conditions” at x=0. At the boundary x=0, the wave must
be continuous and there should be no kinks in it. Thus we must have
From the first equation, we get. From the second equation, we get.
Thus, we get the following result.learning objectives
1 2

5.8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976We can define the transmission (t) and reflection (r) coefficients as
Superposition and Interference
A wave may have a complicated shape that can result fro m superposition and interference of several waves.
Distinguish destructive and constructive interference and identify conditions that are required for the super position of
waves
Most waves do not look very simple. They look are often more complex than the simple water waves often consid ered in
textbooks. Simple waves may be created by a simple ha rmonic oscillation, and thus have a sinusoidal shape. Complex waves are
more interesting, even beautiful, but they look for midable. Most waves appear complex because they resul t from several simple
waves adding together. Luckily, the rules for adding waves ar e quite simple.
Complex Pattern of Waves: These waves result from the superposition of several waves f rom different sources, producing a
complex pattern.
Superposition
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they s uperimpose themselves on one another. More specifical ly, the disturbances
of waves are superimposed when they come together—a p henomenon called superposition. Each disturbance co rresponds to a
force, and forces add. If the disturbances are alon g the same line, then the resulting wave is a simple a ddition of the disturbances of
the individual waves—that is, their amplitudes add.
Interference
As a result of superposition of waves, interference can be o bserved. Interference is an effect caused by two or more waves.learning objectives

5.8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976
High School Phy sics - Wave InterferenceHigh School Phy sics - Wave Interference
Wave Interference: A brief introduction to constructive and destructive wave interference and the principle of superposition.
When two identical waves arrive at the same point exa ctly in phase the crests of the two waves are precisel y aligned, as are the
troughs. This superposition produces pure constructiv e interference. Because the disturbances add, constru ctive interference may
produce a wave that has twice the amplitude of the indivi dual waves, but has the same wavelength.

5.8.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976Constructive Interference: Pure constructive interference of two identical waves prod uces one with twice the amplitude, but the
same wavelength.
If two identical waves that arrive exactly out of pha se—that is, precisely aligned crest to trough—they ma y produce pure
destructive interference. Because the disturbances are in the opposite direction for this superposition, the resulting amplitude may
be zero for destructive interference, and the waves comple tely cancel.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interf erence do occur, they require precisely aligned ident ical waves. The
superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can v ary from place to place
and time to time. Here again, the disturbances add and subtra ct, producing a more complicated looking wave.
Superposition of Non-Identical Waves: Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constr uctive and destructive
interference.
Standing Waves and Resonance
A standing wave is one in which two waves superimpose to produ ce a wave that varies in amplitude but does not propagate.
Describe properties of a standing wave
Standing Wave
Sometimes waves do not seem to move, but rather they jus t vibrate in place. These waves are formed by the supe rposition of two or
more moving waves for two identical waves moving in opp osite directions. The waves move through each other with their
disturbances adding as they go by. If the two waves hav e the same amplitude and wavelength then they alterna te between
constructive and destructive interference. The resu ltant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called a st anding wave.
Standing Wave: A standing wave (black) depicted as the sum of two propa gating waves traveling in opposite directions (red and
blue).
Standing waves are found on the strings of musical instr uments and are due to reflections of waves from the en ds of the string.
shows seven standing waves that can be created on a st ring that is fixed at both ends. Nodes are the points wh ere the string does not
move; more generally, nodes are where the wave disturban ce is zero in a standing wave. The fixed ends of stri ngs must be nodes,learning objectives

5.8.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976too, because the string cannot move there. The word a ntinode is used to denote the location of maximum am plitude in standing
waves. Standing waves on strings have a frequency that is related to the propagation speed v of the disturba nce on the string. The
wavelength λ is determined by the distance between the poi nts where the string is fixed in place.
Standing Waves: Standing waves in a string, the fundamental mode and the f irst six overtones.
The lowest frequency, called the fundamental frequenc y, is thus for the longest wavelength, twice the lengt h of the string. The
overtones or harmonics are multiples of the fundamental frequency. shows the fundamental mode along with six overto nes.
Resonance
A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for conditions appropriate for resonance: standing waves, and constructive and
destructive interference. A building may be vibrated for several seconds with a driving frequency matchin g that of the natural
frequency of the vibration of the building—producin g a resonance resulting in one building collapsing wh ile neighboring buildings
do not. Often buildings of a certain height are devas tated while other taller buildings remain intact. The building height matches the
condition for setting up a standing wave for that par ticular height. As the earthquake waves travel along t he surface of Earth and
reflect off denser rocks, constructive interference occurs at certain points. Often areas closer to the e picenter are not damaged while
areas farther away are damaged.w

5.8.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976
High School Phy sics - ResonanceHigh School Phy sics - Resonance
Resonance: A brief overview of resonance, targeted toward introd uctory physics students.
Harmonic Wave Functions
When vibrations in the string are simple harmonic motion, wa ves are described by harmonic wave functions.
Express relationship between the wave number and the waveleng th, and frequency and period, of the harmonic wave
function
In this Atom we shall consider wave motion resulting fro m harmonic vibrations and discuss harmonic transvers e wave in the
context of a string. We assume there is no loss of energy during transmission of wave along the string. This can be approximated
when the string is light and taught. In such condition, if we oscillate the free end in harmonic manner, the n the vibrations in the
string are simple harmonic motion (SHM), perpendicular to the direction of wave motion. The amplitude of wave form remains
intact through its passage along the string.
We know that a traveling wave function representing moti on in x-direction has the form:
learning objectives

5.8.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976(Read our Atom on “Mathematical Representation of a T raveling Wave. “) For the case of harmonic vibration, we represent
harmonic wave motion in terms of either harmonic sine or co sine function:
Harmonic Oscillatory Properties
Each particle (or a small segment of string) vibrate s in SHM. The particle attains the greatest speed at th e mean position and
reduces to zero at extreme positions. On the other h and, acceleration of the particle is greatest at ex treme positions and zero at the
mean position. The vibration of particle is represented b y a harmonic sine or cosine function. For x=0:
Harmonic Waves: Harmonic waves are described by sinusoidal functions. The wa velength is equal to linear distance between
repetitions of transverse disturbance or phase.
Clearly, the displacement in y-direction is described by the bounded sine or cosine function. The importa nt point here is to realize
that oscillatory attributes (like time period, angula r and linear frequency) of wave motion is same as that of vibration of a particle in
transverse direction.
We know that time period in SHM is equal to time taken by the particle to complete one oscillation. It mean s that displacement of
the particle from the mean position at a given position su ch as x=0 has same value after time period “T” for:
. Therefore,.
Similarly, displacement of the particle from the mea n position at a given time such as t=0 has same valu e by change the position by
“, where. k is called wavenumber.
We can determine speed of the wave by noting that wav e travels a linear distance ” in one period (T). Th us, speed of wave is given
by:
Refraction
Refraction is a surface phenomenon that occurs as the change in direction of a wave due to a change in its medium.
Formulate the law of conservation of energy and momentum as it is applied to refraction
Refraction is the change in direction of a wave due to a change in its medium. Essentially, it is a surfac e phenomenon—mainly in
governance to the law of conservation of energy and m omentum. Due to change of medium, the phase velocity o f the wave is
changed but its frequency remains constant (most com monly observed when a wave passes from one medium to another at any
angle other than 90° or 0°). Refraction of light is the most commonly observed phenomenon, but any type o f wave can refract when
it interacts with a medium (e.g., when sound waves pass from one medium into another or when water waves move i nto water of a
different depth). Refraction is described by Snell’s law, which states that for a given pair of media and a wave with a single
frequency, the ratio of the sines of the angle of in cidence θ1 and angle of refraction θ2 is equivalent to the ratio of phase velocities
(v /v) in the two media, or equivalently, to the opposite ratio of the indices of refraction (n /n):learning objectives
1 2 2 1

5.8.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976In optics, refraction is a phenomenon that often occ urs when waves travel from a medium with a given refrac tive index to a
medium with another at an oblique angle. For example, a light ray will refract as it enters and leaves glass, assuming there is a
change in refractive index. A ray traveling along th e normal (perpendicular to the boundary) will change speed, but not direction.
Refraction still occurs in this case. Understanding of ref raction led to the invention of lenses and the refracting telescope.
Refraction can be seen when looking into a bowl of wat er, as illustrated in. Air has a refractive index of ab out 1.0003, and water
has a refractive index of about 1.33. If a person lo oks at a straight object, such as a pencil or straw, pl aced partially in the water at a
slant, the object appears to bend at the water’s sur face. This is due to the bending of light rays as they move from the water to the
air. Once the rays reach the eye, the eye traces them back as straight lines (lines of sight). The lines o f sight (shown as dashed lines)
intersect at a higher position than where the actual rays originated (causing the pencil to appear highe r and the water to appear
shallower than they actually are).
Refraction in Water: An object (in this case a pencil) partially immersed in wat er looks bent due to refraction: the light waves
from X change direction and so seem to originate at Y. (More a ccurately, for any angle of view, Y should be vertically a bove X, and
the pencil should appear shorter, not longer as shown.)
Diffraction
Diffraction refers to various phenomena such as the b ending of waves around obstacles and the spreading ou t of waves past small
openings.
Describe the phenomenon of diffraction, according to c lassical physics
Diffraction refers to various phenomena which occur whe n a wave encounters an obstacle. In classical physics, t he diffraction
phenomenon is described as the apparent bending of wa ves around small obstacles and the spreading out of waves past small
openings. Similar effects occur when a light wave travels through a medium with a varying refractive index, or a sound wave
travels through one with varying acoustic impedance.
Diffraction occurs with all waves, including sound waves, water waves, and electromagnetic waves such as visible light, X-rays
and radio waves. As physical objects have wave-like prop erties (at the atomic level), diffraction also occur s with matter and can be
studied according to the principles of quantum mechan ics.
Diffraction effects are generally most pronounced for waves whose wavelengths are roughly similar to the dime nsions of the
diffracting objects. If the obstructing object provi des multiple, closely-spaced openings, a complex patt ern of varying intensity can
result. This is due to the superposition, or interfe rence, of different parts of a wave that travel to t he observer by different paths. A
good example would be diffraction gratings.learning objectives

5.8.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976
Intensity Pattern: Intensity pattern formed on a screen by diffraction fro m a square aperture.
The effects of diffraction are often seen in everyd ay life. The most striking examples of diffraction a re those involving light. For
example, the closely spaced tracks on a CD or DVD act as a diffraction grating to form the familiar rainbow pat tern seen when
looking at a disk. This principle can be extended t o engineer a grating with a structure such that it wil l produce any diffraction
pattern desired, like the hologram on a credit card. Diffraction in the atmosphere by small particles ca n cause a bright ring to be
visible around a bright light source like the sun or the moon. A shadow of a solid object, using light from a compact source, shows
small fringes near its edges. The speckle pattern wh ich is observed when laser light falls on an optical ly rough surface is also a
diffraction phenomenon. All these effects are a consequ ence of the fact that light propagates as a wave.
Mathematical Represenation of a Traveling Wave
The most general solution of the wave equation is gi ven as, where f and g are arbitrary
functions.
Formulate solution of the wave equation for a traveling wav e
In general, one dimensional waves satisfy the 1D wave equation:
For example, a sinusoidal form
is a solution of the wave equation for. In this atom, we will obtain a general mathematical form of a traveling wa ve.
Solving the Wave Equation
First, we notice that any function u(x,t) satisfying
is a solution to the wave equation. To show this, note that
In the middle, we used the equation 1 along with the fact tha t partial derivatives are interchangeable.
To solve the equation 1, let’s introduce new variables: Fr om the chain rules,learning objectives

5.8.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976With the change of variables, the equation 1 become s for the equation with the “+” sign and for the “-” sign.
Therefore, we see that
where f and g are arbitrary functions. Converting back to the original variables of x and t, we conclude tha t the solution of the
original wave equation is
f(x+ct) represents a left-going traveling wave, while g (x-ct) represents a right-going traveling wave. In oth er words, solutions of the
1D wave equation are sums of a left traveling functio n f and a right traveling function g. “Traveling” m eans that the shape of these
individual arbitrary functions with respect to x stays constant, however the functions are translated left and right with time at the
speed c. This solution was derived by Jean le Rond d’Alembe rt.
Boundary Condition
Any function that contains “x+ct” or “x-ct” can be a solution of the wave equation. The wave function is fur ther determined by
taking additional information, usually given as bou ndary conditions and some others. For example, in the case of a string in a
guitar, we know that the wave has zero amplitude at bot h ends: u(x=0)=u(x=L)=0. Also, the shape of the funct ion at an instance can
be provided to determine the function.
Wave Equation in Two Dimensions: A solution of the wave equation in two dimensions with a zero-displacement boundary
condition along the entire outer edge.
Energy, Intensity, Frequency, and Amplitude
The energy in a wave is proportional to its amplitude sq uared and the intensity of a wave is defined as power per unit area.
Describe relationship between the energy and the amplitu de, and energy and intensity, of a wave
All waves carry energy. This is seen in practical applicatio ns (e.g., in medicine), as well as effects in nature. Some ex amples of are:
ultrasound used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strain s
a laser beam to burn away malignant tissue
water waves that erode beaches
earthquakes that topple cities
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its ampli tude. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce large grou nd displacements, as
seen in. Loud sounds have higher pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source vibrations tha n soft sounds. Large
ocean breakers erode the shore more than small ones. More quantitatively, a wave is a displacement that is resisted by a restoring
force. The larger the displacement x, the larger th e force F=-kx needed to create it. Because work W is re lated to force multiplied
by distance (Fx) and energy is put into the wave by th e work done to create it, the energy in a wave is rela ted to amplitude. In fact,
a wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplit ude squared because:learning objectives

5.8.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976
Earthquake Destruction: The destructive effect of an earthquake is palpable e vidence of the energy carried in these waves. The
Richter scale rating of earthquakes is related to both t heir amplitude and the energy they carry.
The energy effects of a wave depend on time as well as amplitude. For example, the longer deep-heat ultrasoun d is applied, the
more energy it transfers. Therefore, power is more appr opriate than energy to describe the “intensity” of a wave. Waves can also be
concentrated or spread out. Sunlight, for example, can be focused to burn wood. Earthquakes “spread out” so th ey do less damage
the farther they spread from their source. In both cas es, changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All these pertinent
factors are included in the definition of intensity I as power (P) per unit area:
where P is the power carried by the wave through area A.
Energy vs. Frequency
In classic wave theory, energy of a wave doesn’t depend on the frequency of the wave. However, this is not the case in the
microscopic world, as shown in experiments on photoele ctric effects (see our Atom on “Photoelectric Effect”). As Einstein
postulated to explain photoelectric effects, a quantu m of light (photon) carries a specific amount of ene rgy proportional to the
frequency of light. Although you can increase the num ber of photons by increasing the intensity of a beam, the energy of individual
photons in the beam is determined by the frequency of the beam.
Key Points
Reflection is a wave phenomenon that changes the directi on of a wavefront at an interface between two different me dia so that
the wavefront returns into the medium from which it origi nated.
At the boundary, a wave must be continuous and there should be n o kinks in it.
By imposing boundary conditions, we can solve wave equat ion and get the form of the waves. Reflection and transm ission
coefficients are defined as ratio of reflected/transmitt ed amplitudes and the incoming amplitude.
The disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come tog ether—a phenomenon called superposition.
As a result of superposition of waves, inteference can be ob served. Interference is an effect caused by two or more waves.
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively.
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can var y from place
to place and time to time.
If two waves with the same amplitude and wavelength travel in opposite directions they alternate between construc tive and
destructive interference. The resultant looks like a wav e standing in place and, thus, is called a standing wave.
Nodes are points of no motion in standing waves. An antinod e is the location of maximum amplitude of a standing wave.
During an earthquake, buildings with a certain height ma y collapse more easily. This occurs when the building hei ght matches
the condition for setting up a standing wave for that partic ular height.
We represent harmonic wave motion in terms of either harmo nic sine or cosine function:.
k and ω in the harmonic wave functinon are related to wavelen gth and period as follows:
The speed of a harmonic wave is given by ω/k.

5.8.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976Refraction is mainly in governance to the law of conserva tion of energy and momentum. Due to change of medium, the p hase
velocity of the wave is changed but its frequency remains co nstant.
Refraction is described by Snell’s law, which states that fo r a given pair of media and a wave with a single frequency,
An object partially immersed in water looks bent due to refraction.
Diffraction is a wave phenomenon. It occurs with all waves, in cluding sound waves, water waves, and electromagnetic waves
such as visible light, X-rays and radio waves.
Diffraction effects are generally most pronounced for waves whose wavelengths are roughly similar to the dimensio ns of the
diffracting objects.
The effects of diffraction are often seen in everyday life. All these effects are a consequence of the fact that light propagates as a
wave.
Any function u(x,t) satisfying is a solution the wave e quation. To solve this new equation, we introduced new
variables.
The solutions of the 1D wave equation are sums of a left trav eling function and a right traveling function.
The wave function is further determined by taking addit ional information, usually given as boundary conditions a nd some
others.
The energy effects of a wave depend on the amplitude and duration (time) of the wave. Waves can also be concentrat ed or
spread out. Considering all these factors, intensity is d efined as power per unit area.
In the classical wave theory, energy of a wave doesn’t depe nd on the frequency of the wave. However, the energy of indivi dual
photons in a beam is determined by the frequency of the b eam.
Wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplitude squared.
Key Terms
boundary condition: A set of restraints at the boundaries, used to solve a differential equation.
superposition: The summing of two or more field contributions occupy ing the same space.
interference: An effect caused by the superposition of two systems of wave s, such as a distortion on a broadcast signal due to
atmospheric or other effects.
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
resonance: The increase in the amplitude of an oscillation of a sy stem under the influence of a periodic force whose frequency
is close to that of the system’s natural frequency.
simple harmonic motion: (SHM) — Oscillating motion (as of a pendulum) in which the acc eleration of the oscillator has an
equal magnitude but opposite direction to the displacement of it from the equilibrium position.
Snell’s law: A formula used to describe the relationship between the an gles of incidence and refraction.
refractive index: The ratio of the speed of light in air or vacuum to that in another medium.
wave equation: An important second-order linear partial differentia l equation for the description of waves such as sound waves,
light waves, and water waves.
Restoring force: If the system is perturbed away from the equilibrium, the re storing force will tend to bring the system back
toward equilibrium. The restoring force is a function onl y of position of the mass or particle. It is always direct ed back toward
the equilibrium position of the system.An example is the acti on of a spring. An idealized spring exerts a force that is
proportional to the amount of deformation of the spring f rom its equilibrium length, exerted in a direction to oppo se the
deformation. Pulling the spring to a greater length causes i t to exert a force that brings the spring back toward its equilibrium
length. The amount of force can be determined by multipl ying the spring constant of the spring by the amount o f stretch.
ultrasound: Sound with a frequency greater than the upper limit of h uman hearing; approximately 20 kilohertz.
photoelectric effects: In photoelectric effects, electrons are emitted from ma tter (metals and non-metallic solids, liquids or
gases) as a consequence of their absorption of energy fro m electromagnetic radiation.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS

5.8.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
boundary condition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/boundary%20condition. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
resonance. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resonance. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.8.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. September 17, 20 13. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
simple harmonic motion. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/simple_harmonic_motion. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Snell's law. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Snell's%20law. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
refractive index. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/refractive_index. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.8.6.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
interference. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interference. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
boundary condition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/boundary%20condition. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/wave%20equation. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license

5.8.6.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33976Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42250/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
Restoring force. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Restoring%20force. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
photoelectric effects. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photoelectric%20effects. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//biology/definition/ultrasound. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Transmission (wave propagation). Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_(wave_propagation). License: CC BY: Attribution
Paul Padley, Reflection and Transmission of Mechanical Wave s. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12794/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave Interference. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tsmwLFgibT4. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave. License: CC BY: Attribution
Resonance. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYlpePXdiCg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright.
License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Sunil Kumar Singh, Transverse Harmonic Waves. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m15992/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Refraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Refraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Diffraction. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction. License: CC BY: Attribution
Wave equation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_equation. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, College Physics. February 7, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42250/latest/?collection=col11406/1.7. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
15.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.8.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339775.8.7: Waves on Strings
Calculate the speed of a wave on a string
When studying waves, it is helpful to use a string to o bserve the physical properties of waves visually. Imag ine you are holding one
end of a string, and the other end is secured and th e string is pulled tight. Now, if you were to flick the string either up and down.
The wave that occurs due to this motion is called a transverse wave. A transverse wave is defined as a wave whe re the movement of
the particles of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of the wave. Figure 1 sh ows this in a diagram. In
this case, the medium through which the waves propagate is the rope. The wave traveled from one end to the ot her, while the rope
moved up and down.
Figure 1: In transverse waves, the media the wave is traveling in move s perpendicular to the direction of the wave.
Wave Properties
Transverse waves have what are called peaks and troughs. The peak is the crest, or top point of the wave and the trough is the
valley or bottom point of the wave. Refer to Figure 2 f or a visual representation of these terms.The ampli tude is the maximum
displacement of a particle from its equilibrium posi tion.Wavelength, usually denoted with a lambda (λ) an d measured in meters, is
the distance from either one peak to the next peak, or one trough to the next trough.Period, usually deno ted as T and measured in
seconds, is the time it takes for two successive peaks, or one wavelength, to pass through a fixed point.Fre quency, f, is the number
of wavelengths that pass through a given point in 1 second. Fr equency is measured by taking the reciprocal of a perio d:
Figure 2: Peaks are the top most points of the waves and troughs are the bottom, or valleys of the waves.
Speed of a Wave on a String
Velocity is found by dividing the distance traveled by the time it took to travel that distance. In wave s, this is found by dividing the
wavelength by the period: v=λTv=λTWe can take the inverse proportionality to period and frequency and apply it to this situation:
Speed of a Wave on a Vibrating String
Another example of waves on strings are of the waves on vibrating strings, such as in musical instruments. Pi anos and guitars both
use vibrating strings to produce music. In these cas es, the frequency is what characterizes the pitch an d therefore the note. The
speed of a wave on this kind of string is proportiona l to the square root of the tension in the string an d inversely proportional to the
square root of the linear density of the string:
Reflections
When transverse waves in strings meet one end, they a re reflected, and when the incident wave meets the refl ected wave,
interference occurs.learning objectives

5.8.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33977Explain when a standing wave occurs
Overview
Imagine you are holding one end of a string, and the other end is secured and the string is pulled tight. Now, if you were to flick the
string either up and down. The wave that occurs due t o this motion is called a transverse wave. A transverse wave is defined as a
wave where the movement of the particles of the mediu m is perpendicular to the direction of the propagat ion of the wave. shows
this in a diagram. In this case, the medium through wh ich the waves propagate is the rope. The wave traveled from one end to the
other, while the rope moved up and down.
Transverse Wave: Diagram of a transverse wave. The wave motion moves perpendic ular to the medium it is traveling in.
Properties of Waves
Transverse waves have what are called peaks and troughs. Th e peak is the crest, or top point of the wave and the tro ugh is the
valley or bottom point of the wave.
The amplitude is the maximum displacement of a particle from its equilibrium position.
Wavelength, usually denoted with a lambda (λ) and measured in meters, is the distance from either one peak to the next p eak, or
one trough to the next trough.
Period, usually denoted as T and measured in seconds, is t he time it takes for two successive peaks, or one wavelength, to pass
through a fixed point.
Frequency, f, is the number of wavelengths that pass throug h a given point in 1 second. Frequency is measured by takin g the
reciprocal of a period:
Transverse waves can occur while being fixed at the end poi nt or while being free at the end point.
Reflections of Transverse Waves
The way in which a transverse wave reflects depends on whether or not it is fixed at both ends. First we will l ook at waves that are
fixed at both ends:
shows an image of a transverse wave that is reflected fr om a fixed end. When a transverse wave meets a fixed e nd, the wave is
reflected, but inverted. This swaps the peaks with the t roughs and the troughs with the peaks.
Transverse Wave With a Fixed End Point: A transverse wave that is fixed at the end point. The refle cted wave is inverted.
is an image of a transverse wave on a string that meet s a free end. The wave is reflected, but unlike a tr ansverse wave with a fixed
end, it is not inverted.
Transverse Wave With a Free End: When a transverse wave meets a free end, it is reflected.learning objectives

5.8.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33977Standing Waves
When either of the two scenarios of wave reflection o ccurs, the incident wave meets the reflected wave. The se waves move past
each other in opposite directions, causing interferenc e. When these two waves have the same frequency, the p roduct of this is called
the standing waves. Standing waves appear to be standing still, hence the name. To understand how standing waves occur, we can
analyze them further: When the incident wave and ref lected wave first meet, both waves have an amplitude is zero. As the waves
continue to move past each other, they continue to inter fere with each other either constructively of destructive ly.
As you may remember from previous atoms, when waves are completely in phase and interfere with each other co nstructively, they
are amplified, and when they are completely out of p hase and interfere destructively they cancel out. As t he waves continue to
move past each other, and are reflected from the oppo site end, they continue to interfere both ways, and a standing wave is
produced.
Every point in the medium containing a standing wave oscillates up and down and the amplitude of the oscil lations depends on the
location of the point. When we observe standing waves on strings, it looks like the wave is not moving and standing still. The
principle of standing waves is the basis of resonance a nd how many musical instruments get their sound. The p oints in a standing
wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. The points which reach the maximum osc illation height are
called antinodes.
Key Points
The type of wave that occurs in a string is called a tran sverse wave. In a transverse wave, the wave direction is per pendicular
the the direction that the string oscillates in.
The period of a wave is indirectly proportional to the freq uency of the wave:.
The speed of a wave is proportional to the wavelength and ind irectly proportional to the period of the wave:.
This equation can be simplified by using the relationship b etween frequency and period:.
When a transverse wave on a string is fixed at the end point, the reflected wave is inverted from the incident wave. When a
transverse wave on a string is free at the end point, the r eflected wave is not inverted from the incident wave.
A standing wave occurs when an incident wave meets a reflec ted wave on a string.
The points in a standing wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. The points which reach the
maximum oscillation height are called antinodes.
Every point in the medium containing a standing wave osc illates up and down and the amplitude of the oscillations depends on
the location of the point.
A standing wave has some points that remain flat due to de structive interference. These are called antinodes.
The points on a standing wave that have reached maximum oscillation do so from constructive interference, and ar e called
nodes.
Key Terms
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
oscillate: To swing back and forth, especially if with a regular rhythm.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
standing wave: A wave form which occurs in a limited, fixed medium in s uch a way that the reflected wave coincides with the
produced wave. A common example is the vibration of the strings on a musical stringed instrument.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution

5.8.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33977Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave%23Waves_on_strings. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
oscillate. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oscillate. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
standing wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/standing_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
January 24, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
5.8.7: Waves on Strings is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
15.7: Waves on Strings has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6013-electromagnetics-and-applications-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.9: Sound
This page titled 5.9: Sound is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.5.9.1: Introduction
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
5.9.5: Further TopicsTopic hierarchy

5.9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339795.9.1: Introduction
Explain how humans can characterize sound
Before delving too far into the physics of calculati ng sound waves (studying things like the Doppler Effect, for example), lets
address some basics of sound. Sound is a wave—a longitud inal wave of pressure that travels through compressibl e medias (i.e.,
solid, liquid, gaseous, or made of plasma). There is no sound in a vacuum; by definition, a vacuum is a spac e free of any particles
or matter. Thus there in a vacuum, there is no media t hrough which sound waves can travel. Following are some ch aracteristics of
sound:
Sound travels in longitudinal waves. When drawn these are als o called sinusoidal waves, a visual example of which is shown in
(we will cover this in more detail in a different section).
Sound waves have frequency; that is, the pitch of sounds goes u p or down.
The amplitude of a sound determines its volume (loudn ess).
Tone is a measure of the quality of a sound wave.
Sound travels faster in a hot meduim, or in a solid. It also travels faster at sea level (where air pressure is higher).
Sound intensity is the energy transmitted over a certain area. Intensity is a measure of the sound’s frequency.
Ultrasound uses sound waves with high frequencies to see thin gs normally hard to detect, like tumors. Animals, like bats an d
dolphins, use ultrasound (echolocation) to navigate and locate things. Ships also use a similar technique (known as SONAR) to
locate things underwater. (This point will be discussed f urther in a more advanced Atom.)
Sound Perception
Every sound wave has properties that define its frequenc y, such as wavelength, amplitude and intensity. Calculati ng these
properties is outside the scope of this atom and will be addressed later. For now, it is important to know t he basics of sound. As
with light waves, sound frequencies have a range. Each living creature has a different level of sound per ception. For example,
consider the following examples of sound ranges (in Hz, He rtz):
Humans 20 – 20,000 Hz
Dogs 50 – 45,000 Hz
Bats 20 – 120,000 Hz
By this comparison, humans have a relatively low sound p erception.
Sound Speed
Breaking the Sound Barrier: This familiar image is of a plane that is moving faster than the speed of sound.
As mentioned previously, the speed at which sound trave ls depends on the media through which the sound is tra veling. It is much
faster in a solid than in a liquid or gas. The general for mula for calculating the speed of sound is given as:
where K is the coefficient of stiffness of the materia l (also called the Bulk modulus) and p is the densit y of the material. We will
examine this further in another section. Generally, t he expression ‘faster than the speed of sound’ refe rs to 344 m/s. is an image
demonstrating a plane moving faster than the speed o f sound. This general measurement is taken at sea le vel—at a temperature of
21 degrees Celsius under normal atmospheric conditions.learning objectives

5.9.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979Frequency of Sound Waves
Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating even t per unit of time. The perception of frequency is called pitch.
Relate frequency with the wavelength and speed of sound
Sound waves, like all other waves, have a property calle d frequency. Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event
per unit of time. The perception of frequency is called pitch.
Frequency is dependent on wavelength and the speed of sound. It is calculated with the following equation:
This figure,, shows how the frequency is connected to wavelen gth.
Frequency: A sound wave emanates from a source vibrating at a fre quency f, propagates at v, and has a wavelength λ.
Alternatively, you can use the frequency and the wavel ength to find the speed of sound in a specific mediu m. Remember that sound
travels at different speeds in different mediums; so und moves fastest through a solid. The following equat ion is used to find the
specific speed of sound, and is often easier to use than t he standard speed of sound equation: vs=f∗λv_s=f*\lambda
A period is the duration of one cycle of a repeating event, and is the reciprocal or inverse of the frequ ency. The following animation
shows different frequencies and their periods, from lowes t to highest.
Frequency Animation: Three flashing lights, from lowest frequency (top) t o highest frequency (bottom). f is the frequency in hertz
(Hz); or the number of cycles per second. T is the period in seconds (s); or the number of seconds per cycle. T and f are reciprocals.learning objectives

5.9.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979Hertz
The SI unit of frequency is called a Hertz, denoted Hz. A hertz is defined as the number of cycles per secon d. For example, 100 Hz
signifies 100 cycles per second.
Different species can hear different frequency range s. Humans can only hear from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz, while dog s can hear up to
60,000 Hz. Bats can hear the highest ranges, up to 1 20,000 Hz. Bats use this super hearing, or ultrasound, t o locate objects and
prey. By bouncing sound waves off of another object and hearing how long it takes for the sound to echo back to them, they are
able to approximate the distance between themselves and the object. This is called echolocation.
Sound Production: Vibrating String and Air Columns
Sound can be produced by many different devices. A vib rating string or air column can both create music a nd have unique
properties.
Calculate the frequency of the sound wave produced by the string and a column of air
Sound can be produced in many ways, by many different instruments and devices. A vibrating string or air colu mn can both make
interesting music and it is good to understand the physic s behind both.
Vibrating Strings
There are many instruments that produce sound based on strings. Guitars, cellos, pianos and many other exam ples. These sounds
are produced by standing waves in the strings. These wav es and their frequencies are constant, and therefor th e sound and pitch
produced by them is constant. This figure shows a vis ual of a standing wave in a string: The speed of the wave is proportional to
the root of the string tension, and inversely proport ional to the root of the string density, shown by the following equation
Pitch, and the way the sound is perceived depends on t he frequency of the sound wave. Using the wave velocity, you can find the
frequency using this equation:, where L is the length of t he string.
Standing Waves in a String: Vibration, standing waves in a string. The fundamental and the first 6 overtones form a harmonic
series.
Air Columns
Many instruments make music by causing a vibration t o a column of air in a resonator. These are usually c alled wind instruments.
Examples of these are flutes, recorders, and saxophones. They are either open at both ends, or closed at one end and open at thelearning objectives

5.9.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979other. The pitch of the sound is a function of the frequency. There are many factors that go into findi ng the frequency. Lets start
with the tubes that are closed at one end and open at the other.
Closed Air Tubes:The maximum displacement of the air occurs at the open end of the tube, and is called the antinode. The air
movement is constrained at the closed end, and there is no displacement, and this is called the node. The distance from the node to
the antinode is 1/4 the length of one wavelength, and equal to the length of the tube, as shown in this equa tion: This can also
be seen in this figure: The frequency is equal to the speed of sound in the air divided by the wavelength, or:, where v
is the speed of sound in the air, which we learned how to fin d in a previous atom.
An Air column in a tube closed at one end: The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube cl osed at one end. All have
maximum air displacements at the open end and none at the closed end.
Open Air tubes:Air tubes can also be open at both ends. They are very similar to the ones we talked about abov e, but there is an
antinode at both ends, since they are both open, as sho wn in this figure: Since there is an antinode at both ends, we can see that the
length of a wavelength is found by this equation: And the frequency can be found in the following equation:
Quality of Sound
Sound quality is an assessment of accuracy or enjoyabilit y of how a sound is perceived.
Identify factors that influence the sound quality of a repr oduction of music
Sound quality is an assessment of accuracy or enjoyabi lity of how a sound is perceived. It can be measured o bjectively or
subjectively. What is the difference? Objective measu rement is taken when tools are used to gauge accurac y. Subjective
measurement is more of an opinion. When human listen ers hear a sound and compare it to another sound th ey have heard, and
decide which one they enjoy more, this is a subjective meas urement of sound quality.
Music Sound Quality
The quality of sound of live music is referred to as its tone. What makes this tone? Why does the same not e being played on a piano
sound different from that note played on a flute, o r a guitar? When you hear a note, you mostly hear th e fundamental frequency.
But there are other harmonics present. You hear these, but they are much, much fainter than the fundamenta l, or main frequency.
These are called overtones.
Each instrument has a different mix of these overton es, and this is why the sounds of similar notes sound di fferent. The quality of
this sound depends on these overtones to not take over what you are hearing. The overtones and fundamental frequency combine to
make a unique frequency that you hear, which is illustrat ed in.w
Skills to Develop

5.9.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979
Sound Frequencies: The quality of a tone depends on its mixture of harmon ics.
Reproduced Sound Quality
The sound quality of a reproduction of music depends o n many factors. These include:
Recording equipment
Processing and mastering
Reproduction equipment
Listening environment
When you listen to a recording of music, you are hear ing not only the music itself, but also any interfere nce that may have been
mistakenly recorded as well. The simplest form of digital ly-stored audio is PCM.
As samples are placed closer together in time, higher fre quencies can be reproduced. According to the sampling t heorem, any
signal with bandwidth B can be perfectly described by more than 2B samples per second. Audio must be sampled at above 4 0kHz:
44.1kHz for CD recordings and 48kHz for DVD recordings.
The amount of space required to store PCM depends on the number of bits per sample, the number of sample s per second, and the
number of channels. For CD audio, this is 44,100 samples per second, 16 bits per sample, and 2 channels for stereo audio leading
to 1,411,200 bits per second.
Speed of Sound
The speed of sound is is the distance traveled in a unit of time by a sound wave through an elastic medi um, and is usually given as
344 m/s.
Calculate the speed of sound from the properties of the me dia
Speed of Soud
The speed of sound is is the distance traveled in a uni t of time by a sound wave through an elastic medium. This medium can be a
solid, liquid, gas or even plasma. The speed of sound is dependent on the properties of the media the soun d is travelling through.
The general value given for the speed of sound is the speed of a sound wave in air, at sea level, at norma l atmospheric pressure; that
number is 344 m/s. However, this number is not constant. Sound travels faster in a solid than in a liquid, and faster in a liquid that
in a gas.
Types of Sound Waves: Compression and Shear
There are two different kinds of sound waves: compression waves and shear waves. Compression waves can travel through any
media, but shear waves can only travel through solids. The speed of a compression wave is determined by th e media’s compression
capacity, shear modulus, and density, while the speed of the shear wave is only determined by the shear modul us and density. TheSkills to Develop

5.9.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979shear modulus is a measurement of the elasticity or rigidity of a material. Calculating this is outside o f the scope of this atom, but
there are tables which tell you its value for materials.
Calculating the Speed of Sound
The speed of sound is usually denoted by cc, and a gen eral equation can be used to calculate it. This is c alled the Newton-Laplace
equation:c=√Kρc=KρK is the coefficient of stiffness, and p is the density of the media. From this equation, it is easy to see that the
speed of sound will increase with stiffness and decrea se with density. This is a very general equation, the re are more specific
derivations, for example:
The speed of sound in air at sea level is given by the follo wing equation: T is the temperature in Kelvin.
Mach Number
You may have heard the term Mach number in relation to speed of space craft or jets before. This is a ratio of an object’s speed in
relation to the speed of sound. The Mach number is gi ven by the following, dimensionless equation: – Mach numberv –
Velocity of object a – Speed of sound in medium. If s omething is travelling at the speed of sound, that wou ld make the equation
equal to 1, and can be denoted as Mach 1. shows a jet that is travelling at the speed of sound or faster. The vapor cone is made just
before it reaches the speed of sound and is caused by a sudd en drop in air pressure.
Faster than the Speed of Sound: This is a jet that is just about to break the sound barrie r.
Key Points
Sound travels in longitudinal sinusoidal waves.
Humans can characterize sound by frequency, amplitude and tone.
The speed at which sound travels depends on the media thr ough which the sound is traveling. It can be calculated using:
, where K is the coefficient of stiffness of the material (als o called the Bulk modulus) and p is the density of the
material.
Frequency is dependent on wavelength and the speed of sound. It is calculated with the following equation:
A period is the duration of one cycle of a repeating eve nt, and is the reciprocal or inverse of the frequency.
The SI unit of frequency is called a Hertz, denoted Hz. A h ertz is defined as the number of cycles per second. For exa mple, 100
Hz signifies 100 cycles per second.
The frequency, and therefore the pitch of a string in strument depends on the velocity of the sound wave and th e length of the
string. The frequency is found by:
Sound in a tube of air that is closed at one end is found b y the following equation:.
Sound in a tube of air that is open at one end is found by the following equation:.
Objective measurement is taken when tools are used to gauge accuracy. Subjective measurement is more of an opinion. When
human listeners hear a sound and compare it to another so und they have heard, and decide which one they enjoy mor e, this is a
subjective measurement of sound quality.
The quality of sound of live music is referred to as its tone. When you hear a note, you mostly hear the fundament al frequency.
But there are other harmonics present. You hear these, bu t they are much, much fainter than the fundamental, or main frequency.
These are called overtones.
The sound quality of a reproduction of music depends o n many factors. These include: recording equipment, proc essing and
mastering,reproduction equipment, and even listening envi ronment.
Sound can travel through any compressible material. Thes e media can be solid, liquid, gas, or even plasma.

5.9.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979The speed of sound is dependent on the properties of the material it travels through. It will travel faster throug h a solid than a
liquid, and faster through a liquid than a gas.
The general number given for the speed of sound is calc ulated at sea level, in air, at normal atmospheric pressure. T hat value is
344 m/s.
Key Terms
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
Hertz: Measurement of sound frequency.
media: General term for different types of materials.
period: The duration of one cycle in a repeating event.
node: Point on a wave where there is no displacement.
antinode: A region of maximum amplitude situated between adjacen t nodes of a vibrating body, such as a string
Subjective measurement: Based on a comparison to a previous experience, opini on.
Objective measurement: Taken by tools to gauge accuracy.
elasticity: The property by virtue of which a material deformed und er the load can regain its original dimensions when
unloaded
kelvin: in the International System of Units, the base unit of thermo dynamic temperature; 1/273.16 of the thermodynamic
temperature of the triple point of water; symbolized as K
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
media. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/media. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Vacuum. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vacuum. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/hertz--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Frequency. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Hertz. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Hertz. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. Se ptember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
period. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/period. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/hertz--2. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public

5.9.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Wind instrument. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_instrument. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/node. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
antinode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/antinode. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound quality. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_quality. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. September 17, 2013. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/subjectivemeasurement. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/objective-measurement.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. December 23, 2012. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.9.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33979Speed of sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_sound. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
elasticity. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/elasticity. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Shear modulus. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shear_modulus. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Mach number. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mach_number. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. Se ptember 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
kelvin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kelvin. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength. De cember 23, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located
at: http://cnx.org/content/m42256/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FrequencyAnimation. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FrequencyAnimation.gif. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Harmonic partials on strings. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Harmonic_partials_on_strings.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. December 23, 2012. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, The Physics of Musics: Resonance and Sound Quality. December 23, 2012. Provided
by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m39050/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
FA-18 Hornet breaking sound barrier (7 July 1999) - filter ed. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FA-18_Hornet_breaking_sound_barrier_(7_Jul y_1999)_-_filtered.jpg. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.9.1: Introduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
16.1: Introduction by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339805.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
Calculate sound intensity from power
Overview of Intensity
Sound Intensity is the power per unit area carried by a wav e. Power is the rate that energy is transferred by a wave.
Sound Intensity and Decibels Distinctly De ned, DuSound Intensity and Decibels Distinctly De ned, Du
Sound Intensity and Decibels
The equation used to calculate this intensity, I, is:I W here P is the power going through the area, A. The SI un it for intensity is
watts per meter squared or,Wm2Wm2. This is the general intensi ty formula, but lets look at it from a sound perspective.
Sound Intensity
Sound intensity can be found from the following equati on:. Δp – change in pressure, or amplitudeρ – densi ty of the
material the sound is traveling throughv – speed of observed sound.Now we have a way to calculate the sound intensity, so lets
talk about observed intensity. The pressure variati on, amplitude, is proportional to the intensity, So it is safe to say that the larger
your sound wave oscillation, the more intense your sound wi ll be. This figure shows this concept.learning objectives
w

5.9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33980
Sound Intensity: Graphs of the gauge pressures in two sound waves of differen t intensities. The more intense sound is produced by
a source that has larger-amplitude oscillations and has gr eater pressure maxima and minima. Because pressures are hi gher in the
greater-intensity sound, it can exert larger forces on the objects it encounters
Although the units for sound intensity are technical ly watts per meter squared, it is much more common for it to be referred to as
decibels, dB. A decibel is a ratio of the observed amp litude, or intensity level to a reference, which is 0 dB. The equation for this is:
\(\mathrm{β=10 \log _{10} \frac{I}{I_0} β}\) – decibel levelI – Observed intensityI – Reference inte nsity.For more on decibels,
please refer to the Decibel Atom.
For a reference point on intensity levels, below are a list of a few different intensities:
0 dB, I = 1×10 –> Threshold of human hearing
10 dB, I = 1×10 –> Rustle of leaves
60 dB, I = 1×10 –> Normal conversation
100 dB, I = 1×10 –> Loud siren
160 dB, I = 1×10 –> You just burst your eardrums
Human Perception of Sound
The study of human perception of sound is called psycho acoustics.
Explain how frequency is perceived by humans
The study of the human perception of sound is calle d psychoacoustics. Many factors go into hearing, inclu ding wave properties,
sensory and brain processes. First, the wave has to be made, and it has a specific wavelength and frequency. Then the sound wave
reaches the human ear, and is processed through many areas. Finally, the sound wave makes it through the ea r and to the human
brain, where even more action happens. You might thin k that when something makes a noise that you hear it i nstantaneously but, in
reality, it goes through many steps first.
Wave Properties
We are not going to go into too much detail about t he wave’s physical properties, since it is out of the sco pe of this atom, but
remember:
Frequency is perceived by humans as pitch;
The sound intensity is the amplitude;
Humans can only hear a specific range of sound, usually from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz;
The factors that go into a sound are its intensity, frequenc y and overtones (which are like interference, or background no ises).0
-12
-11
-6
-2
Skills to Develop

5.9.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33980The Human Ear
The human ear is made up of three main sections, as shown i n:
The Human Ear: A detailed diagram of the human ear.
1. The outer ear
2. The middle ear
3. The inner ear
We are going to start where a sound wave would start a nd follow it on its journey from outside your ear al l the way to your brain.
When you look at someone’s ear, you are really only se eing the pinna, the outer most portion of the ear. I t collects and focuses the
sound wave. The wave then goes through your ear canal to the eardrum. The sound waves cause the eardrum to v ibrate. Then we
are in the middle ear, which has three very, very sma ll bones: the malleus, incus and stapes. These can also be referred to as the
hammer, anvil and stirrup, respectively. These three bo nes transmit the signal to the elliptical window. Thi s is the beginning of the
inner ear. The sound waves are then transmitted from the elliptical window through the inner ear’s semicircu lar canals, the cochlea,
and the audio nerve, which is filled with fluid. This fluid is what allows the body to detect movements an d maintain balance. Your
cochlea is shaped like a snail, and is full of teeny tiny hairs. These hairs vibrate differently depending on the frequencies. These
vibrations release electrical impulses to the audito ry nerve and are then sent to your brain, where they are understood as sound. So
while this seems to happen very quickly, sound waves have t o travel a long way before you ever hear anything!
Decibels
The decibel is a logarithmic unit used to quantify sound levels, by comparing a physical quantity to a reference le vel.
Identify how decibel is quantified in acoustics
The decibel, dB, is commonly used to quantify sound levels, although it is not a unit of sound, but a un it of pressure. The decibel is
a logarithmic unit that indicates the ratio if a phy sical quantity to a reference level. It is one tenth of a Bel, which was named after
the inventor of the telephone, Alexander Graham Bell. The word decibell comes from the prefix, deci, that is 1/10 of the word it
precedes For more information on how to convert units, refer to the unit conversion atom. Although the decib el can be used to talk
about a number of different subjects, in this atom we are going to cover its use in acoustics and sound level.
In acoustics, the decibel is quantified relative to a reference which has been set at a sound pressure le vel of 20 micropascals, and is
called a 0 dB. This reference level is a typical th reshold of human hearing perception. The following eq uation is used to calculate
the sound pressure level, or amplitude: s is the refe rence pressure which is 20 micropascals or 0 dB, and
s is the observed sound pressure.The human ear has a st andard sound threshold of 120 dB, which expressed loga rithmically is
around 10. This is a standard threshold, but it also depends on frequency. Loudness is a measure of soun d intensity takingSkills to Develop
o

5.9.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33980frequency into account, and is called a A-weighted dec ibel, dB(A), or a phon. This figure shows The Fletcher Mu nson Chart, which
demonstrates the different sound frequencies and decibe ls that the human ear perceives as the same.
The Fletcher Munson Chart: The Fletcher-Munson equal-loudness contours. Phons are l abelled in blue
Key Points
Sound intensity can be found from the following equation:. Δ p – change in pressure, or amplitude ρ – density of t he
material the sound is traveling through v – speed of obse rved sound.
The larger your sound wave oscillation, the more intense your sound will be.
Although the units for sound intensity are technically watts p er meter squared, it is much more common for it to be referr ed to
as decibels, dB.
Frequency is perceived by humans as pitch. The sound inte nsity is what humans can hear, and is generally only a specifi c range
of sound, usually from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. The factors tha t go into a sound are its intensity, frequency and overtones (which
are like interference or background noises).
Your ear is made up of three major sections: the inner, mi ddle and outer ear.
Your cochlea, which is in your inner ear, not only transm its sound waves to your brain, but also contains a liquid th at helps
humans maintain their balance.
In acoustics, the decibel is quantified relative to a r eference which has been set at a sound pressure level of 20 micropascals,
and is called a 0 dB.
The following equation is used to calculate the sound pres sure level, or amplitude:. is the
reference pressure which is 20 micropascals or 0 dB, and s is the observed sound pressure.
The human ear has a standard sound threshold of 120 dB, which expressed logarithmically is around 1012. This is a standard
threshold, but it also depends on frequency. Loudness is a me asure of sound intensity taking frequency into account, and is
called a A-weighted decibel, dB(A), or a phon.
Key Terms
decibel: A common measure of sound intensity that is one tenth of a b el on the logarithmic intensity scale. It is defined a s
, where and are the relative powers of the sound.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
eardrum: A thin membrane that separates the outer ear from the middle ear and transmits sound from the air to the mall eus.
cochlea: The complex, spirally coiled, tapered cavity of the i nner ear in which sound vibrations are converted into nerve
impulses.
phon: A unit of apparent loudness, equal in number to the intensity in decibels of a 1,000-hertz tone judged to be as loud as the
sound being measured.
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikew

5.9.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33980CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
decibel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decibel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. September 18,
2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Psychoacoustics. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychoacoustics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
cochlea. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cochlea. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
eardrum. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/eardrum. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. December 24,
2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physics Study Guide/Sound. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_Study_Guide/Sound.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Decibels. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Decibels. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
phon. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phon. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
decibel. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decibel. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Sound Intensity and Sound Level. December 24, 2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42257/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Sound Intensity and Decibels. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5rkg8mTRBI. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Mark Horner, an d Heather Williams, Sound - Grade 11. December 24,
2012. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32834/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Physics Study Guide/Sound. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at: en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Physics_Study_Guide/Sound.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
16.2: Sound Intensity and Level by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339815.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
Identify parameters required to calculate the frequency perceived by the observer moving towards the sound sour ce
In this atom, we are going to cover the Doppler effect, bu t specifically when the observer is the one in motion.
Sound and the Doppler Effect, Sound Lesson 2 of 2Sound and the Doppler Effect, Sound Lesson 2 of 2
Sound and the Doppler Effect: This video introduces sound waves. The first video describ es the basics of sound while the second
video looks at the Doppler Effect.learning objectives

5.9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same frequ ency
as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
When the observer moves toward an sound source, each successive wave is encountered sooner than the previou s wave. Thus, it
will take just a little less time for the observer to hear the next one. Since the time between waves is redu ced, the frequency is
increased. Similarly if the observer is moving away from the sound source, the frequency, and therefor pitch, is decreased. While
the frequency will change whether the observer or sou nd source is moving, it is easier to show with the soun d source as the one
moving. This figure demonstrated the sound source mov ing:
Unless the observer is moving directly towards the sou nd source, this angle needs to be taken into account wh en calculating the
newly perceived frequency. Before we can start this calc ulation, we must know:
The original sound wave frequency, f
The velocity of the observer, v
The speed of sound in the air, or medium, c
The angle of the line of sight from the observer to t he sound source, θθ
Although the sound waves are being emitted from the so und source at a uniform frequency, the observer is p erceiving them
differently. The equation for the perceived wave fre quency is as follows: And the equation for v, is:
If the observer is moving towards the sound source, yo u are going to use a plus sign in front of the observ ers velocity. If the
observer is moving away from sound source, you are going t o use a negative sign in front of the observers velocity.
Moving Source
The Doppler effect is the apparent change in frequen cy of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to
each other.
Identify parameters required to calculate the perceived f requency of the sound source moving towards an observe r
The Doppler Effect —When the Sound Source is in Motion
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same fr equency0
r
r
learning objectives

5.9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
When the sound source moves toward an observer, each s uccessive wave is emitted closer to the observer than the previous wave
and takes just a little less time to reach the observ er than the previous one. Since the time between waves i s reduced, the frequency
is increased. Similarly, if the sound source is moving away from the observer, the frequency (and therefore pitch) is decreased.
While the frequency will change whether the observer or sound source is moving, the effect is more easily demonstrated by the
sound source. This Doppler Effect is illustrated in.
Unless the observer is moving directly towards the sound source, this angle must be considered when calculat ing the newly
perceived frequency. Before attempting this calculati on, we must know:
The original sound wave frequency, f
The velocity of the observer, v
The speed of sound in the air, or medium, c
The angle of the line of sight from the observer to t he sound source,
Although the sound waves are being emitted from the so und source at a uniform frequency, the observer is p erceiving them
differently. The equation for the perceived wave frequenc y is as follows: And the equation for v, is:
If the sound source is moving towards the observer, a plus sign is used in front of the sound source’s v elocity. If the sound source is
moving away from the observer, then a negative sign is used in front of the sound source’s velocity.
General Case
The Doppler effect is the apparent change in frequen cy of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to
each other.
Compare change in the frequency due to the doppler effect when the object in motion moves towards or away from the
other object
Have you ever wondered why as a firetruck speeds by, th e sound of the siren seems to change? Or where the ver y distinguishable
sound at a race track comes from as the cars whisk by you? Well believe it or not, this is science! The nam e of this is called the
Doppler effect, named for the scientist who discovered it. His name was Christian Doppler, and he discovered i t around 1840 in
Prague. He preformed the experiment in two segments. In th e first experiment, he had a band play music while ab oard a moving
train, and would have observers listen to the music in a stationary location while the train went by. In the second experiment, he
had a group of observers sit aboard a moving train, wh ile the band played in a stationary location. In bo th cases, observers noticed
the phenomenon. The change in sound perception can be e xplained through relativity.
When the sound source moves toward an observer, each successive wave is emitted closer to the observer tha n the previous wave.
Thus, it will take just a little less time to reach th e observer than the previous one. Since the time bet ween waves is reduced, the
frequency is increased. Similarly if the sound source is moving away from the observer, the frequency, and ther efor pitch, is
decreased. If the observer is moving away from the sou nd source, the frequency will be lowered, and if the o bserver moves closer
to the sound source, the frequency is increased. Whil e the frequency will change whether the observer or so und source is moving, it
is easier to show with the sound source as the one moving. Thi s figure demonstrated the sound source moving:0
r
s
learning objectives

5.9.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981
The Doppler Effect: The same sound source is radiating sound waves at a con stant frequency in the same medium. However, now
the sound source is moving to the right with a speed υs = 0.7 c (Mach 0.7). The wave-fronts are produced with the same frequ ency
as before. However, since the source is moving, the centre of each new wavefront is now slightly displaced to the right. As a result,
the wave-fronts begin to bunch up on the right side (in front of) and spread further apart on the left side (behind) of the source.
In classical physics, where the speeds of source and th e receiver relative to the medium are lower than the velocity of waves in the
medium, the relationship between observed frequency (f) and emitted frequency (f) is given by: where c – velocity
of the sound waves in the medium, v – velocity of the observer or reciever, v – velocity of the sound source, and f – original
frequency of the sound waves.
The above formula assumes that the source is either di rectly approaching or receding from the observer. If the source approaches
the observer at an angle (but still with a constant v elocity), the observed frequency that is first heard is higher than the object’s
emitted frequency. Thereafter, there is a monotonic de crease in the observed frequency as it gets closer to the observer, through
equality when it is closest to the observer, and a con tinued monotonic decrease as it recedes from the obse rver. When the observer
is very close to the path of the object, the transi tion from high to low frequency is very abrupt. When the observer is far from the
path of the object, the transition from high to low frequ ency is gradual.
If the speeds and are small compared to the speed of the wave, the relationship between observed frequency and emitted frequency
is approximately
Observed frequency:
Change in frequency:
where is the velocity of the receiver relative to t he source: it is positive when the source and the rec eiver are moving towards
each other.
Sonic Booms
A sonic boom is the sound associated with the shock wav es created by an object traveling through the air fa ster than the speed of
sound.
Identify conditions that lead to a sonic boom and discus s its properties
Sonic Booms
A sonic boom is a sound associated with the shock waves c reated by an object traveling through the air faste r than the speed of
sound. It can be viewed as a Doppler effect on steroi ds; sonic booms generate an enormous amount of energ y and sound like
explosions. The first man-made object to ever create th is phenomenon was a bullwhip. The ‘crack’ of the whip i s a result of this
sonic boom. This version of a Doppler effect is demonstr ated by.o
r s 0
learning objectives

5.9.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981
Sonic Boom Gif: The sound source has now broken through the sound speed b arrier, and is traveling at 1.4 times the speed of
sound, (Mach 1.4). Since the source is moving faster (with a speed) than the sound waves it creates, it actually leads the advancing
wavefront. The sound source will pass by a stationary observe r (with a speed) before the observer actually hears the so und it
creates.
When the sound source passes through the air, it creat es a series of pressure waves. These waves are travellin g at the speed of
sound, and as the speed of the sound source increas es, the waves, not being able to get out of each other ’s way, are forced together.
They eventually merge into a single shock wave travel ing at the speed of sound. This is a critical speed, known as Mach. The shock
waves radiate out from the sound source, and create a “Mach cone’. The half-angle, αα, can be found using the equatio n
Sonic Boom: A sonic boom produced by an aircraft moving at M=2.9 2, calculated from the cone angle of 20 degrees. An observer
hears the boom when the shock wave, on the edges of the cone, crosses his or her location
From previous atoms, we know that is the sound source’s Mach number.
At the front of the sound source, there is a sudden rise in pressure, while at the end of the source there is a decreasing pressure. This
‘overpressure profile’ is known as an N-wave. There is a big boom when there is a sudden change in pressure, an d since the
pressure changes twice, this is a double boom.
Key Points
When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened. Therefore the pitch is higher.
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened. Therefor the pitch is lowered.
Unless the objects are in each other’s direct path, you need to account for the angle they are at relative to eac h other. The
following equation needs to be substituted for the ‘movers’ velocity. The angle used needs to be the angle from the line of sight
of the observer to the sound source. vradial=v ∗cosθvradial=v ∗cosθ.

5.9.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened (therefore the pitch is higher).
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened (therefore the pitch is lowered).
Unless the objects are in each other’s direct path, you need to account for their angle relative to each other. T he following
equation must be substituted for the ‘movers’ velocity. The angle used must be the angle from the line of sight of t he observer to
the sound source.
When the object in motion moves towards the other, the frequency is increased because the time between successiv e sound
waves is shortened. Therefore the pitch is higher.
When the object in motion moves away from the other, the frequency is decreased because the time between succe ssive sound
waves is lengthened. Therefor the pitch is lowered.
If the speeds and are small compared to the speed of the wa ve, the relationship between observed frequency and emitte d
frequency is approximately: where is the velocity o f the receiver relative to the source: it is positive when the
source and the receiver are moving towards each other.
A sonic boom happens when a sound source passes an obser ver at a speed either very close to, or faster than th e speed of sound.
Sonic booms generate an enormous amount of energy, and so und like explosions.
The half angle of the cone of sound waves produced by the sonic boom can be found by taking the inverse sine of the o bject’s
Mach number.
Key Terms
Doppler's effect: Apparent change in frequency of a wave when the observer and the source of the wave move relative to each
other.
classical physics: All aspects of physics developed before the rise of quan tum mechanics.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time t in which it occurs:.
Mach number: The ratio of the velocity of a body to that of sound in the surrounding medium.
sonic boom: The audible effect of a shock wave in the air, especially one caused by an aircraft flying faster than the speed of
sound
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.9.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/the-doppler-effect.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms. September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42712/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect%23General. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams, Free High School Science Texts Project, Kosma von Malti tz, and Heather Williams, Doppler Effect. September
18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m30847/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Doppler effect. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
classical physics. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/classical_physics. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/doppler-effect--2.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mach number. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Mach_number. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
sonic boom. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sonic_boom. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Sound and the Doppler Effect. Located at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJpLDCfyDj4. License: Public Domain: No
Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube license
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0.7. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dopplereffectsourcemovingrightatmach0. 7.gif. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

5.9.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33981Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_boom. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Sonic boom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sonic_boom.svg. License: Public Domain:
No Known Copyright
This page titled 5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
16.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339825.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
Identify conditions required for the superposition of two waves
Waves are most commonly described by variations in s ome parameter through space and time—height in a wate r wave, pressure in
a sound wave, or the electromagnetic field in a light wave. The value of this parameter is called the ampl itude of the wave; the
wave itself is a function specifying the amplitude at each po int.
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they superimpose themselves onto one another. More specifica lly, the
disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come together (a phenomenon called superposition). Each di sturbance
corresponds to a force, or amplitude (and the forces add). If the disturbances are along the same line, th e resulting wave is a simple
addition of the disturbances of the individual waves. That is, their amplitudes add.
Superposition: Superposition is when two waves add together. In this figure, the two waves add together and cancel out leaving no
wave. This is destructive interference.
Superposition of waves leads to what is known as interfe rence, which manifests in two types: constructive and des tructive.
Constructive interference occurs when two waves add tog ether in superposition, creating a wave with cumulati vely higher
amplitude, as shown in. In destructive interference, the two waves add together but cancel out (like adding a positive and negative
number). Destructive interference is shown in.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interf erence do occur, they require precisely aligned ident ical waves. The
superposition of most waves produces a combination o f constructive and destructive interference, and can vary from place to place
and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot but quiet in another. Varyin g loudness means the sound
waves add partially constructively and partially dest ructively at different locations. A stereo has at l east two speakers creating
sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All thes e waves superimpose. An example of sounds that vary ove r time from
constructive to destructive is found in the combined whine of airplane jets heard by a stationary passeng er. The combined sound
can fluctuate up and down in volume as the sound from th e two engines varies in time from constructive to destruct ive.
These examples are of waves that are similar. illustr ates that when non-identical waves superimpose, the ou tcome is a mixture of
constructive and destructive interference.learning objectives

5.9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982
Superposition of Non-Identical Waves: Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constr uctive and destructive
interference.
Interference
Interference occurs when multiple waves interact with each other, and is a change in amplitude caused by several wav es meeting.
Contrast constructive and destructive interference
Unlike solid objects, two waves can share a point in sp ace. In physics, interference is a phenomenon in whic h two waves (passing
through the same point) superimpose to form a resul tant wave of greater or lower amplitude. Interference usually refers to the
interaction of waves that are correlated or coherent with each other (i.e, “interfere” with each other), either because they come from
the same source or because they have the same or nearly the same frequency.
The effects of interference can be observed with all types of waves, for example, light, radio, acoustic and surface water waves.
The idea that interference is caused by superposition means that when two waves meet their two amplitudes (the ir maximum
absolute value) combine together.
Interference: Two overlapping waves exhibit interference.
Interference can be constructive or destructive. In constructive interference, the two amplitudes of the waves add together and
result in a higher displacement than would have been the case if there were only one wave. An example of const ructive interference
may be seen in.learning objectives

5.9.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982
Constructive Interference: Pure constructive interference of two identical waves prod uces one with twice the amplitude, but the
same wavelength.
Destructive interference is when two waves add together and the result is a smaller displacement than would h ave been the case. An
example of destructive interference can be seen in. When the waves have opposite amplitudes at the point they meet they can
destructively interfere, resulting in no amplitude a t that point. For example, this is how noise cancelli ng headphones work. By
playing a sound with the opposite amplitude as the in coming sound, the two sound waves destructively interfere and this cancel
each other out.
Beats
The superposition of two waves of similar but not identi cal frequencies produces a pulsing known as a beat.
Identify superposition conditions that lead to beat
Striking two adjacent keys on a piano produces a warbli ng combination (usually considered unpleasant to the e ar). The culprit is
the superposition of two waves of similar but not iden tical frequencies. When two waves of similar frequency arrive at the same
point and superimpose, they alternately constructively and destructively interfere. This alternating is kn own as a beat because it
produces an unpleasant pulsing sound.
Another example is often noticeable in a taxiing jet aircraft (particularly the two-engine variety). The loudness of the combined
sound of the engines increases and decreases. This va rying loudness occurs because the sound waves have sim ilar but not identical
frequencies. The discordant warbling of the piano and the fluctuating loudness of the jet engine noise are both due to alternately
constructive and destructive interference as the two wav es go in and out of phase. illustrates this phenomenon g raphically.
Beat Frequency: Beats are produced by the superposition of two waves of slightly different frequencies but identical
amplitudes.The waves alternate in time between constructi ve interference and destructive interference, giving th e resulting wave a
time-varying amplitude.
The wave resulting from the superposition of two simila r-frequency waves has a frequency that is the average of the two. This
wave fluctuates in amplitude, or beats, with a frequenc y called the beat frequency. We can determine the b eat frequency
mathematically by adding two waves together.
One can also measure the beat frequency directly. Wh en you hear a beat coming from two discordant sounds (say, two notes on a
piano) you can count the number of beats per second. The number of beats per second, or the beat frequ ency, shows the difference
in frequency between the two notes. Musicians often u se this phenomena to ensure that two notes are in tun e (if they are in tune
then there are no beats).learning objectives

5.9.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982The Ear
The ear is the sensory organ that picks up sound waves fro m the air and turns them into nerve impulses that can be sent to the brain.
Describe how sound waves are collected and transformed i nto nerve impulses
Sound waves are vibrations in the air. The ear is the sensory organ that picks up sound waves from the surrou nding air and turns
them into nerve impulses, which are then sent to the brain. The sound waves carry a lot of information — language, music, and
noise — all mixed together. The task of the ear is t o turn the signals in these waves of bouncing air mol ecules into electrical nerve
signals while keeping as much of the information in th e signal as possible. (It’s the brain’s job to then sort the signals and make
sense of them.) It’s not easy to turn one kind of sig nal into another without losing information, but the ear is well designed for the
task.
Anatomy of the Human Ear: Anatomy of the human ear; the length of the auditory can al is exaggerated for viewing purposes
Air surrounds the head and fills the ear canal and m iddle ear. Therefore, when the outer part of the ear c ollects sound and the
middle ear amplifies this sound pressure, these proc esses occur in the medium of air. However, the hollow c hannels of the inner ear
(which is embedded in the temporal bone, the densest b one of the body) are filled with liquid. So as the sou nd travels into the inner
ear, it passes from the medium of air into a liquid m edium. These inner-ear channels contain a sensory e pithelium that is studded
with hair cells. The microscopic “hairs” are structur al protein filaments that project out into the flui d. The hair cells release a
chemical neurotransmitter when stimulated. Sound waves moving through fluid push the filaments; if the fil aments bend over
enough, the hair cells fire chemical signals. In this way sound waves are transformed into nerve impulses. The n erve impulses
travel from the left and right ears through the eig hth cranial nerve to both sides of the brain stem an d up to the part of the cerebral
cortex dedicated to sound (auditory cortex, located in t he temporal lobe).
Applications: Ultrasound, Sonar, and Medical Imaging
Sound waves reflect off different materials differentl y (when the reflections are collected, they can provid e information and
images).
Discuss application of sound waves in medicine and navigati on
The controlled use of sound waves has many applicatio ns in science. Controlled reflection of such waves all ows images to be
received.learning objectives
learning objectives

5.9.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982Ultrasound
Ultrasound is sound with a frequency higher than 20 kHz. This is above the human range of hearing. The most common use of
ultrasound, creating images, has industrial and medica l applications. The use of ultrasound to create imag es is based on the
reflection and transmission of a wave at a boundary. When an ultrasound wave travels inside an object that is made up of different
materials (such as the human body), each time it enco unters a boundary (e.g., between bone and muscle, or mus cle and fat), part of
the wave is reflected and part of it is transmitted. Th e reflected rays are detected and used to construct an imag e of the object.
Sonar
illustrates how a ship on the ocean utilizes the ref lecting properties of sound waves to determine the d epth of the ocean. A sound
wave is transmitted and bounces off the seabed. Because the speed of sound is known and the time lapse between sending and
receiving the sound can be measured, the distance fr om the ship to the bottom of the ocean can be deter mined. This technique is
called sonar (originally an acronym for SOund Navigation And Ranging).
Sonar: Ships on the ocean make use of the reflecting properties of sound waves to determine the depth of the ocean. A sou nd wave
is transmitted and bounces off the seabed. Because the spee d of sound is known and the time lapse between sending a nd receiving
the sound can be measured, the distance from the ship to t he bottom of the ocean can be determined.
Just as ships on the ocean, certain animals, like dolphin s and bats, make use of sounds waves (sonar) to navigate or find their way.
Ultrasound waves are sent out then reflected off the ob jects around the animal. Bats or dolphins then use th e reflected sounds to
form a “picture” of their surroundings (this is known as ec holocation).
Key Points
When two waves occupy the same point, superposition occurs. Supe rposition results in adding the two waves together.
Constructive interference is when two waves superimpose an d the resulting wave has a higher amplitude than the pr evious
waves.
Destructive interference is when two waves superimpose and c ancel each other out, leading to a lower amplitude.
Most wave superpositions involve a mixture of constructi ve and destructive interference since the waves are not perfectly
identical.
Interference is a phenomenon of wave interactions. When t wo waves meet at a point, they interfere with each other.
There are two types of interference, constructive and de structive.
In constructive interference, the amplitudes of the two wa ves add together resulting in a higher wave at the point the y meet.
In destructive interference, the two waves cancel out resul ting in a lower amplitude at the point they meet.
When two waves of similar frequencies interfere, the result i s a beat frequency.
A beat frequency is a pulsing sound that goes up and down in loudness.
As the two waves go in and out of phase, the varying construc tive and destructive interference makes the wave grow and shrink
in amplitude. For sound waves this produces a beating sound.
The task of the ear is to turn the signals in the waves of bouncing air molecules into electrical nerve signals whi le keeping as
much of the information in the signals as possible.

5.9.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982Sound is collected in the outer part of the ear; sound pressu re is amplified through the middle part of the ear an d is passed from
the medium of air into a liquid medium.
That sound pressure is amplified through the middle porti on of the ear and passed from the medium of air into a liquid medium.
Sound waves moving through the fluid in the inner ear stimul ate hair cells, making them release chemical neurotransmi tters. In
this way sound waves are transformed into nerve impulses.
When waves encounter a boundary between two materials, part o f the wave is reflected and part is transmitted.
By using high frequency sound waves, doctors can create i mages of parts of the body normally not visible.
By transmitting sound waves and measuring the time betwee n the transmission and receiving the reflection, ships can use sound
waves to navigate. This is called sonar.
Key Terms
superimpose: To place an object over another object.
displacement: A vector quantity that denotes distance with a direct ional component.
amplitude: The maximum absolute value of some quantity that varie s.
coherent: Of waves having the same direction, wavelength and phase, as light in a laser.
frequency: The quotient of the number of times n a periodic pheno menon occurs over the time tt in which it occurs: \
(\mathrm{f=n/t\).
interfere: (of waves) To be correlated with each other when overlappe d or superposed.
superposition: The summing of two or more field contributions occupy ing the same space.
epithelium: a membranous tissue composed of one or more layers of cel ls that forms the covering of most internal and external
surfaces of the body and its organs (internally, the lining of vessels and other small cavities; externally, the sk in)
nerve impulse: the signal transmitted along a nerve fiber, either in r esponse to a stimulus (such as touch, pain, or heat), or a s an
instruction (such as causing a muscle to contract)
neurotransmitter: any substance, such as acetylcholine or dopamine, respons ible for sending nerve signals across a synapse
between two neurons
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Superposition principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition_principle%23Application_to_waves. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
superimpose. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superimpose. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Superposition. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
amplitude. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/amplitude. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
coherent. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coherent. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike

5.9.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982displacement. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/displacement. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
interfere. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/interfere. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/superposition. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Catherine Schmidt-Jones, Sound and Ears. September 17, 201 3. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m12365/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
epithelium. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/epithelium. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
neurotransmitter. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/neurotransmitter. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
nerve impulse. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nerve_impulse. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Anatomy of the Human Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anatomy_of_the_Human_Ear.svg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. September 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution

5.9.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33982frequency. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frequency. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. January 1 6, 2015. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Interference. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Interference. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 6, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Superposition and Interference. February 9, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42249/latest/Figure_17_10_08a.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Anatomy of the Human Ear. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anatomy_of_the_Human_Ear.svg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Free High School Science Texts Project, Sound: Applications. February 8, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m38800/latest/PG11C5_005.png. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Boundless.
16.4: Interactions with Sound Waves by Boundless has no license indicated.

5.9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/339835.9.5: Further Topics
Identify sources of spherical and plane wave patterns
Spherical Waves
Christiaan Huygens was a Dutch scientist who developed a useful technique for determining how and where waves p ropagate. In
1678, he proposed that every point that a luminous d isturbance touches becomes itself a source of a sphe rical wave; the sum of
these secondary waves determines the form of the wave at any subsequent time. The Huygen-Fresnel Principle shows that as the
waves interact with each other, they interfere either constructively or destructively. Constructive inter ference occurs when waves
are completely in phase with each other and amplifie s the waves. Destructive interference occurs when waves are exactly out of
phase with either other, and if waves are perfectly o ut of phase with each other, the wave will be canceled out completely. Since the
waves all come from one point source, the waves happen in a spherical pattern. All the waves come from a singl e point source and
are spherical.
Spherical Wave: When waves are produced from a point source, they are sphe rical waves.
Huygen-Fresnel Principle: The Huygen-Fresnel Principle uses the law of refracti on. Each point on the wave produces waves
which interfere with each other either constructively or d estructively.
Plane Waves
A plane wave is a constant-frequency wave whose wavefron ts (surfaces of constant phase) are infinite parallel planes of constant
peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velocity vector. It is not possible in practice to have a true plane wave; only a plane
wave of infinite extent will propagate as a plane wave. However, many waves are approximately plane waves in a l ocalized region
of space. For example, a localized source such as an a ntenna produces a field that is approximately a pla ne wave far from thelearning objectives

5.9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983antenna in its far-field region. Similarly, if the l ength scales are much longer than the wave’s wavelengt h, as is often the case for
light in the field of optics, one can treat the waves as li ght rays which correspond locally to plane waves.
Plane Wave: Plane waves are an infinite number of wavefronts normal to the direction of the propogation.
Standing Waves on a String
Standing wave occurs due to the interference when trans verse waves in strings are reflected and the incident and reflected waves
meet.
Identify when a standing wave occurs
A standing wave is a wave that appears stationary, me aning it remains in a constant position. In a string, a standing wave is a type
of transverse wave—where the movement of the particles o f the medium is perpendicular to the direction of th e propagation of the
wave. A standing wave can occur when two identical waves moving i n different directions along the string interfere.
There are two scenarios of waves in strings: the string is fixed at both ends, or the string is fixed at one end and free at the other. A
transverse wave will move along the string until it rea ches the other end. It is then reflected from that e nd and starts to move back
towards the original direction; at this point interf erence occurs. shows a transverse wave that is reflec ted from a fixed end. When a
transverse wave meets a fixed end, the wave is reflected, but inverted. This swaps the peaks with the troughs an d the troughs with
the peaks. diagrams a transverse wave on a string that meets a free end. The wave is reflected, but unlike a transverse wave with a
fixed end, it is not inverted.
Free End Reflection: The wave is reflected, but unlike a transverse wave with a f ixed end, it is not inverted.
Fixed End Reflection: When a transverse wave meets a fixed end, the wave is reflec ted, but inverted.
Standing Waves
When either of the two scenarios of wave reflection o ccurs, the incident wave meets the reflected wave. The se waves move past
each other in opposite directions, causing interferenc e. When these two waves have the same frequency, the p roduct of this is called
the standing waves. Standing waves appear to be standing still, hence the name. illustrates a very slow moving s tanding wave. (One
application of the principle of standing waves is in music with the concept of resonance—and how many musi cal instruments, like
guitars and pianos, get their sound.) Let us now examine how standing waves occur.
learning objectives

5.9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983Standing Wave on a String: This is what a standing wave would look like if you were t o slow it down. The wave is caused by an
incident wave on a string being reflected and then tra veling back in the direction it came from. The two waves then meet and
interfere with each other causing this phenomenon.
Constructive vs. Destructive Interference
When the incident wave and reflected wave first meet, both waves have an amplitude is zero. As the waves cont inue to move past
each other they continue to interfere with each othe r, either constructively of destructively. As discussed in previous atoms, when
waves are completely in phase and interfere with each other constructively they are amplified, and when th ey are completely out of
phase and interfere destructively they cancel out. As the waves continue to move past each other, and are reflected from the
opposite end, they continue to interfere both ways; a standing wave is produced. Every point in the medium containing a standing
wave oscillates up and down, and the amplitude of the oscillations depends on the location of the point. When we observe a
standing wave on strings, it appears the wave is not moving b ut standing still. In summary:
The points which reach the maximum oscillation height are called antinodes, and are results of complete construct ive
interference.
The points in a standing wave that appear to remain flat and do not move are called nodes. These are due to complete
destructive interference.
Standing Waves in Air Columns
Standing waves in air columns is the physical phenomenon that gives wind instruments their resonance and, therefore, sound.
Identify the type of a standing wave in an air column
Standing Waves
A standing wave is a wave that appears to be stationary, m eaning it remains in a constant position. In an air co lumn, a standing
wave can form as either a longitudinal or transverse wave. A transverse wave, you may remember, is a wave whe re the movement
of the particles of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of the wave. A longi tudinal wave, on the other
hand, is parallel to the direction of propagation. A standing wave can occur when two identical waves moving in different
directions interfere.
Air Columns
When a standing wave is formed in a tube, the standing wave has a maximum air displacement at the open end called an antinode.
Here, the motion is unconstrained. At the closed end, t here is no displacement; this is called a node, and th e air is halted. The
distance from a node to antinode is 1/4 of a wavelength, and is equal to the length of the tube.
shows that this resonance can be produced by a vibra tion introduced at or near the closed end of the tu be as well. This is considered
to be a natural vibration of the air column indepen dently of how it is induced. Given that maximum air di splacements are possible
at the open end and none at the closed end, there a re other, shorter wavelengths that can resonate in the tube. For example, a
standing wave can have three-fourths of its wavelength in the tube, or L=(3/4)λ. This can be rendered as follows:learning objectives

5.9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983
Standing Wave in Air Column: The same standing wave is created in the tube by a vibr ation introduced near its closed end.
Continuing this process reveals a whole series of shor ter-wavelength and higher-frequency sounds that reso nate in the tube. We use
specific terms for the resonances in any system. The lo west resonant frequency is called the fundamental, wh ile all higher resonant
frequencies are called overtones. All resonant freque ncies are integral multiples of the fundamental, and they are collectively called
harmonics. The fundamental is the first harmonic, the first overtone is the second harmonic, and so on. sh ows hows the
fundamental and the first three overtones (the first fo ur harmonics) in a tube closed at one end.
The First Four Harmonics: The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube cl osed at one end. All have maximum air
displacements at the open end and none at the closed end.
Now let us look for a pattern in the resonant frequenci es for a simple tube that is closed at one end. The f undamental has =4L, and
frequency is related to wavelength and the speed of soun d as given by the following:
Solving for f in this equation gives a more helpful form:
Here, f is frequency, v is speed of sound in air, λ i s wavelength, and L is the length of the air column. The first overtone has =
4L/3. From this, we can deduce the following:
Because f′ = 3f, we call the first overtone the third harmonic. Continuing this process, we see a pattern t hat can be generalized in a
single expression. The resonant frequencies of a tube c losed at one end are:
Here, f1 is the fundamental, f3 is the first overtone, and so on. It is interesting that the resonant freq uencies depend on the speed of
sound and, hence, on temperature. This dependence pos es a noticeable problem for organs in old unheated cathedrals, and it is also
the reason why musicians commonly bring their wind instrume nts to room temperature before playing them.w

5.9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983The fundamental and overtones can be present simultan eously in a variety of combinations. For example, midd le C on a
trumpet has a sound distinctively different from mid dle C on a clarinet, both instruments being modified versions of a tube
closed at one end. The fundamental frequency is the sa me (and usually the most intense), but the overtones and their mix of
intensities are different and subject to shading by t he musician. This mix is what gives various musical inst ruments (and human
voices) their distinctive characteristics, whether they have air columns, strings, sounding boxes, or drumhead s. In fact, much of
our speech is determined by shaping the cavity form ed by the throat and mouth and positioning the tong ue to adjust the
fundamental and combination of overtones. Simple reso nant cavities can be made to resonate with the sound of the vowels, for
example.
Forced Vibrations and Resonance
The phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency eq ual to its natural frequency is called resonance.
Explain the relationship between the resonance curve and d amping
Forced Vibration and Resonance
Many people have played with toys involving an object supported by an elastic band: something like the pa ddle ball suspended
from a finger in. Say a person drives the paddle ball by moving his or her finger up and down at a certain frequency. In this
example, he or she is causing a forced oscillation (or vibration). At first the finger is held steady, an d the ball bounces up and down
with a small amount of damping. If the finger is moved up and down slowly, the ball will follow along without b ouncing much on
its own.
Paddle Balls and Frequencies: The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response t o the finger supporting it. If the finger
moves with the natural frequency f0 of the ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s
oscillations increases dramatically. At higher and lower driv ing frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less effi ciently, and it
responds with lower-amplitude oscillations.
As the frequency at which the finger is moved up and d own increases, the ball will respond by oscillating with i ncreasing
amplitude. After driving the ball at its natural freq uency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as
long as it is driven. The phenomenon of driving a sys tem with a frequency equal to its natural frequency i s called resonance. As the
driving frequency gets progressively higher than the resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes
smaller until the oscillations nearly disappear and the fi nger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ba ll.
Effects of Damping
In real life, most oscillators have damping present in the system. It is interesting that the widths of th e resonance curves shown in
depend on damping: the less the damping, the narrowe r the resonance. For a driven oscillator to resonate at a very specific
frequency, there needs to be as little damping as pos sible, as is the case for piano strings and many othe r musical instruments.
Conversely, for small-amplitude oscillations, such a s in a car’s suspension system, there needs to be heav y damping. Heavy
damping reduces the amplitude, but the tradeoff is that the system responds at more frequencies.Example:
learning objectives

5.9.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983
Damping: The amplitude of a harmonic oscillator is a function o f the frequency of the driving force. The curves represen t the same
oscillator with the same natural frequency but with diff erent amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving fr equency
equals the natural frequency, and the greatest respon se is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest resp onse is also for the
least amount of damping.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply t o a huge variety of systems. When tuning a radio, fo r example, people are
adjusting the resonant frequency of the radio circui t so that it only oscillates to the desired station ’s broadcast (or driving)
frequency. The more selective the radio is in discri minating between stations, the smaller its damping. A ch ild on a swing is
driven by a parent at the swing’s natural frequency t o achieve maximum amplitude. In all of these cases, t he efficiency of
energy transfer from the driving force into the osc illator is best at resonance. On gravel roads that are corrugated, if people
travel at the ‘wrong’ speed, the bumps are very noti ceable. At other speeds, it is difficult to feel the bu mps at all. shows a
photograph of a famous example (the Tacoma Narrows Brid ge) of the destructive effects of a driven harmonic o scillation.
Unfortunately, heavy winds happened to drive the bridge at its natural frequency, leading to the collapse.
Collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge: In 1940, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington state col lapsed. Heavy cross
winds drove the bridge into oscillations at its resonant frequency. The damping decreased when support cables broke loose and
started to slip over the towers, allowing increasingly gr eater amplitudes until the structure failed. (credit: PR I’s Studio 360, via
Flickr)
Key Points
The waves either interfere with each other constructively o r destructively, which will either amplify or minimize the wav e,
respectively.
Spherical waves are emitted from a single point source i n a spherical shape.
A plane wave is a constant-frequency wave whose wavefronts (surf aces of constant phase) are infinite parallel planes of
constant peak-to-peak amplitude normal to the phase velo city vector.
Although it is not possible in practice to have a true plan e wave, many waves approximate plane wave behavior.
The reflected wave is inverted from the incident wave whe n a transverse wave on a string is fixed at the end point. Th e reflected
wave is not inverted from the incident wave when a transv erse wave on a string is free at the end point.
A standing wave occurs when an incident wave meets a reflec ted wave on a string.Example:

5.9.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983A standing wave contains nodes (points that remain flat due to the destructive interference) and antinodes (po ints with
maximum oscillation due to the constructive interferenc e).
Every point in the string oscillates up and down and t he amplitude of the oscillations depends on the location of the point.
A standing wave has some points that remain flat due to de structive interference. These are called antinodes.
The points on a standing wave that have reached maximum oscillation do so from constructive interference, and ar e called
nodes.
A standing wave in an air column is a transverse wave.
A node occurs at the closed end of an air tube where there is no wave displacement.
An antinode occurs at the open end of the air tube where t he maximum displacement occurs.
The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one end are as follows:, n=1,3,5.
Any oscillator has a natural frequency. Driven at the natura l frequency, oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation.
The widths of the resonance curves depend on damping: less damping corresponds to a narrower resonance. With less damping,
the resonance peak becomes more pronounced.
The relationship between resonance and damping applie s to a huge variety of systems. Damping is often reduced o r enhanced to
induce the desired response of an oscillator.
Key Terms
wavefront: An imaginary surface passing through points of a mediu m oscillating in phase.
destructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to trough (peak to valley) and are exactly out of
phase with each other.
constructive interference: Occurs when waves interfere with each other crest to crest an d the waves are exactly in phase with
each other.
transverse wave: Any wave in which the direction of disturbance is perpendicu lar to the direction of travel.
natural frequency: The frequency at which a system vibrates on its own. For a s pring (spring constant k) with an object of
mass m attached, the natural frequency is given as.
damping: The reduction in the magnitude of oscillations by the di ssipation of energy
LICENSES AND ATTRIBUTIONS
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SHARED PREVIOUSLY
Curation and Revision. Provided by: Boundless.com. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC LICENSED CONTENT, SPECIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Plane wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_wave. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Huygens principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Huygens_principle. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Plane waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_waves. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
wavefront. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavefront. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike

5.9.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
transverse wave. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transverse_wave. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing waves. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_waves. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Vibrating string. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibrating_string. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/constructiveinterference. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/destructive-interference.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
September 18, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. September 18, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/node. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
antinode. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/antinode. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright

5.9.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33983Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Septem ber 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at: www.boundless.com//physics/definition/natural-frequency.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
damping. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/damping. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Plane Wave 3D Animation 300x216 255Colors. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plane_Wave_3D_Animation_300x216_255Co lors.gif. License: Public Domain: No Known
Copyright
Refraction on an aperture - Huygens-Fresnel principle. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Refraction_on_an_aperture_-_Huygens-Fre snel_principle.svg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Spherical Wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Spherical_Wave.gif. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Standing wave. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Standing_wave.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
Rory Adams (Free High School Science Texts Project), Mark Ho rner, and Heather Williams, Transverse Waves - Grade 10.
February 2, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m32635/latest/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Sound Interference and Resonance: Standin g Waves in Air Columns. February 23, 2013. Provided by:
OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m42296/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Forced Oscillations and Resonance. Februa ry 23, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at:
http://cnx.org/content/m42247/latest/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.9.5: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Boundless.
16.5: Further Topics by Boundless has no license indicated.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34266Index
A
acceleration
5.1.2: Units
5.2.3: Acceleration
5.2.5: Free-Falling Objects
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
adhesion
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
Alveoli
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
amplitude
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.7: Waves on Strings
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
Aneroid Barometer
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
angular acceleration
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
angular frequency
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
angular motion
5.5.1: Introduction
angular velocity
5.5.1: Introduction
antinode
5.9.1: Introduction
5.9.5: Further Topics
application
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
approximation
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
Archimedes' Principle
5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle
atrium
5.7.4: Other Applications
B
basal metabolic rate
5.4.6: Power
Bernoulli’s equation
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
boundary condition
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
buoyancy
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
buoyant force
5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle
C
center of mass
5.5.3: Stability
5.5.7: The Center of Gravity
centripetal acceleration
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
classical physics
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
cochlea
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Levelcoherent
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
cohesion
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
compression
5.8.5: Waves
compressive stress
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
conservation
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
conservative force
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
constructive interference
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
5.9.5: Further Topics
continuity
5.6.5: Fluids in Motion
contraction
5.7.4: Other Applications
conversion
5.1.2: Units
Coulomb force
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Coulomb’s Law
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
crest
5.8.5: Waves
critically damped
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
D
damping
5.9.5: Further Topics
decibels (units)
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
deformation
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
destructive interference
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
5.9.5: Further Topics
diagram
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
dialysis
5.7.1: Overview
diastole
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
diffusion
5.7.4: Other Applications
dimension
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
direction of propagation
5.8.5: Waves
displacement
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
dissipative force
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
5.8.3: Periodic MotionDoppler effect
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
dot product
5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
dynamics
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
E
eardrum
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
elastic
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
Elastic potential energy
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
elasticity
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
5.9.1: Introduction
electromagnetic radiation
5.4.8: Further Topics
energy
5.4.1: Introduction
5.8.5: Waves
enthalpy
5.6.1: Introduction
epithelium
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
equation
5.3.5: Problem-Solving
equilibrium
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Euclidean
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
exponent
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
F
first law of thermodynamics
5.4.8: Further Topics
fission
5.4.8: Further Topics
fluid
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
fluidity
5.6.1: Introduction
force
5.3.1: Introduction
5.3.2: Force and Mass
5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
fossil fuels
5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use
Fourier analysis
5.8.1: Introduction
frame of reference
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34266free fall
5.2.5: Free-Falling Objects
frequency
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.5: Waves
5.9.1: Introduction
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
friction
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
fusion
5.4.8: Further Topics
G
Gauge Pressure
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
gravitational acceleration
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
group velocity
5.8.5: Waves
H
hertz
5.9.1: Introduction
Hooke's Law
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Huygen's principle
5.9.5: Further Topics
hydraulic press
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
I
ideal fluid
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
ideal gas
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
incline
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
incompressible
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
5.6.5: Fluids in Motion
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
inertia
5.1.2: Units
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
Instantaneous
5.2.2: Speed and Velocity
interfere
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
interference
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
intermolecular
5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
inviscid
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
isolated system
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of EnergyJ
joint
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
K
Kelvin
5.9.1: Introduction
Kinematic
5.2.3: Acceleration
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
kinematics
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
kinetic energy
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.4.8: Further Topics
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
L
laminar
5.7.4: Other Applications
laminar flow
5.7.1: Overview
law
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
length
5.1.2: Units
leverage
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
longitudinal
5.8.5: Waves
M
Mach number
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
machines
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
mass
5.3.2: Force and Mass
mass distribution
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
matter
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
mechanical advantage
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
media
5.9.1: Introduction
medium
5.8.5: Waves
model
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
moment of inertia
5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems
momentum
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
motion
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
muscles
5.5.5: Applications of StaticsN
natural frequency
5.9.5: Further Topics
nerve impulse
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
net force
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
neurotransmitter
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
node
5.9.1: Introduction
5.9.5: Further Topics
Nonconservative Forces
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
normal
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
O
Objective measurement
5.9.1: Introduction
order of magnitude
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
oscillate
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.7: Waves on Strings
oscillator
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
osmosis
5.7.1: Overview
over damping
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
P
pendentive
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
Pendulums
5.4.8: Further Topics
period
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.9.1: Introduction
perpendicular
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
phase velocity
5.8.5: Waves
phon
5.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level
photoelectric effect
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
Physical pendulum
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
plane
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
plane waves
5.8.5: Waves
plasma
5.6.1: Introduction
Poiseuille's law
5.6.2: Density and Pressure

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34266position
5.2.3: Acceleration
potential
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
potential energy
5.4.8: Further Topics
power
5.4.6: Power
5.8.5: Waves
prefix
5.1.2: Units
pressure
5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion
R
radiation
5.1.2: Units
rarefaction
5.8.5: Waves
refractive index
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
renewable forms of energy
5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use
resonance
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
restoring force
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
resultant
5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces
Reynolds number
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
rigid
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
rotational inertia
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
S
scalar
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
scientific method
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
scientific notation
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude
shear stress
5.6.1: Introduction
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
simple harmonic motion
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
simple harmonic oscillator
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
simple pendulum
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
sinusoidal
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
Snell’s law of refraction
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
sonic boom
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
special relativity
5.6.6: Deformation of Solidsspeed of propagation
5.8.5: Waves
stable equilibrium
5.5.3: Stability
standing wave
5.8.7: Waves on Strings
static
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
static equilibrium
5.5.3: Stability
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
Strain
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture
streamlined
5.7.4: Other Applications
stress
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
stroboscopic
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics
Subjective measurement
5.9.1: Introduction
sublimation
5.6.1: Introduction
superimpose
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
superposition
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves
symmetry
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
systole
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
T
tangent
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
tensile stress
5.5.5: Applications of Statics
Theory
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics
Thoracic Cavity
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
thrust
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
torque
5.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
torques
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
torr
5.6.2: Density and Pressure
translation
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium
transverse wave
5.8.5: Waves
5.8.7: Waves on Strings
5.9.5: Further Topicstrigonometry
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems
trough
5.8.5: Waves
turbulence
5.7.4: Other Applications
turbulent
5.7.4: Other Applications
turbulent flow
5.7.1: Overview
U
ultrasound
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
underdamped
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations
Uniform Circular Motion
5.8.3: Periodic Motion
uniform motion
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws
V
vascular
5.7.1: Overview
vector
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics
5.3.2: Force and Mass
5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces
5.5.1: Introduction
vector field
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids
velocity
5.2.2: Speed and Velocity
5.2.3: Acceleration
5.3.2: Force and Mass
ventricle
5.7.4: Other Applications
vessel
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
viscosity
5.6.1: Introduction
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation
5.7.4: Other Applications
W
watt
5.4.6: Power
wave
5.8.5: Waves
wave equation
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction
wave speed
5.8.5: Waves
waveform
5.8.1: Introduction
wavefront
5.9.5: Further Topics
wavelength
5.8.5: Waves
wettability
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34266work
5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force
5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force
5.8.5: Waves

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/33985Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1 Glossary has no license indicated.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/34267Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65456Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: 5: Book- Physics (Boundless)
Webpages: 74
All licenses found:
Undeclared: 98.6% (73 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 1.4% (1 page)
By Page
5: Book- Physics (Boundless) - Undeclared
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
5.1: The Basics of Physics - Undeclared
5.1.1: The Basics of Physics - Undeclared
5.1.2: Units - Undeclared
5.1.3: Significant Figures and Order of Magnitude Undeclared
5.1.4: Solving Physics Problems - Undeclared
5.2: Kinematics - Undeclared
5.2.1: Basics of Kinematics - Undeclared
5.2.2: Speed and Velocity - Undeclared
5.2.3: Acceleration - Undeclared
5.2.4: Problem-Solving for Basic Kinematics Undeclared
5.2.5: Free-Falling Objects - Undeclared
5.3: The Laws of Motion - Undeclared
5.3.1: Introduction - Undeclared
5.3.2: Force and Mass - Undeclared
5.3.3: Newton’s Laws - Undeclared
5.3.4: Other Examples of Forces - Undeclared
5.3.5: Problem-Solving - Undeclared
5.3.6: Vector Nature of Forces - Undeclared
5.3.7: Further Applications of Newton’s Laws Undeclared
5.4: Work and Energy - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.4.1: Introduction - Undeclared
5.4.2: Work Done by a Constant Force - Undeclared
5.4.3: Work Done by a Variable Force - Undeclared
5.4.4: Work-Energy Theorem - Undeclared
5.4.5: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy Undeclared
5.4.6: Power - Undeclared5.4.7: CASE STUDY- World Energy Use Undeclared
5.4.8: Further Topics - Undeclared
5.5: Static Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Torque Undeclared
5.5.1: Introduction - Undeclared
5.5.2: Conditions for Equilibrium - Undeclared
5.5.3: Stability - Undeclared
5.5.4: Solving Statics Problems - Undeclared
5.5.5: Applications of Statics - Undeclared
5.5.6: Elasticity, Stress, Strain, and Fracture Undeclared
5.5.7: The Center of Gravity - Undeclared
5.5.8: Torque and Angular Acceleration - Undeclared
5.6: Fluids - Undeclared
5.6.1: Introduction - Undeclared
5.6.2: Density and Pressure - Undeclared
5.6.3: Archimedes’ Principle - Undeclared
5.6.4: Cohesion and Adhesion - Undeclared
5.6.5: Fluids in Motion - Undeclared
5.6.6: Deformation of Solids - Undeclared
5.7: Fluid Dynamics and Its Applications - Undeclared
5.7.1: Overview - Undeclared
5.7.2: Flow in Tubes - Undeclared
5.7.3: Bernoulli’s Equation - Undeclared
5.7.4: Other Applications - Undeclared
5.8: Waves and Vibrations - Undeclared
5.8.1: Introduction - Undeclared
5.8.2: Hooke’s Law - Undeclared
5.8.3: Periodic Motion - Undeclared
5.8.4: Damped and Driven Oscillations - Undeclared
5.8.5: Waves - Undeclared
5.8.6: Wave Behavior and Interaction - Undeclared
5.8.7: Waves on Strings - Undeclared
5.9: Sound - Undeclared
5.9.1: Introduction - Undeclared

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/654565.9.2: Sound Intensity and Level - Undeclared
5.9.3: Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms - Undeclared
5.9.4: Interactions with Sound Waves - Undeclared
5.9.5: Further Topics - Undeclared
Back Matter - UndeclaredIndex - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared