UCD: PHYSICS 9B
WAVES, SOUND,
OPTICS,
THERMODYNAMICS,
AND FLUIDS
Tom Weideman
University of California, Davis

University of California, Davis
UCD: Physics 9B Waves, Sound, Optics,
Thermodynamics, and Fluids
Tom Weideman

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/21442TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: Waves
1.1: Wave Mathematics
1.2: Wave Properties
1.3: Energy Transmission
1.4: Superposition and Interference
1.5: Standing Waves
3: Physical Optics
3.1: Light as a Wave
3.2: Double-Slit Interference
3.3: Diffraction Gratings
3.4: Single-Slit Diffraction
3.5: Thin Film Interference
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
3.7: Polarization
4: Geometrical Optics
4.1: Images
4.2: Magnification
4.3: Spherical Reflectors
4.4: Spherical Refractors
4.5: Thin Lenses
4.6: Multiple Optical Devices
4.7: Wrap-Up
5: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics
5.1: Temperature
5.2: Thermal Expansion
5.3: Heat Capacity and Phase Transitions
5.4: Modes of Heat Transfer
5.5: Thermodynamic States of Ideal Gases
5.6: Equipartition of Energy
5.7: Thermodynamic Processes
5.8: Special Processes
6: Applications of Thermodynamics
6.1: More Processes
6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency
6.3: Entropy
6.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/214427: Fluid Mechanics
7.1: Static Fluids
7.2: Buoyancy
7.3: Fluid Dynamics
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65507Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Waves
1.1: Wave Mathematics
1.2: Wave Properties
1.3: Energy Transmission
1.4: Superposition and Interference
1.5: Standing Waves
This page titled 1: Waves is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on the
LibreTexts platform.

1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18443
1.1: Wave Mathematics
Definition of a Wave
A wave is a disturbance that propagates through space at a constant speed. With one notable exception that we wi ll encounter later, this
"disturbance" consists of a fluctuation in the ambie nt condition of a medium. Waves in one dimension ma intain a consistent waveform
as they propagate (later we will see why this is not so for waves in two and three dimensions). Let's see how we can model this
mathematically. We'll start with a localized disturbance frozen in time (think of it as a snapshot) that we describe with a function:
Figure 1.1.1 – Snapshot of a Wave
This is the waveform, but to be a wave, it needs to be propagating along the -axis, which would make it a fun ction of both and. To
turn it into such a function, we first have to think a bout how a function can be shifted along the -axis. Th is is accomplished by
replacing in the argument of the function with the sum or difference of and the value of the shift. If o ne wishes to shift the function
in the direction by a distance, then the proper cha nge is to the function. Note that subtracting in the argument
shifts the function in the positive direction, and adding the constant shifts it in th e negative direction. We insist that the wave moves
at a constant speed, so we want the wave form to shift by the same distance every time the same time interval passes. We therefore have
that the general form of a wave function is:
This represents a waveform propagating in the direction wit h a speed.
There are countless functions of and that we can com e up with, but not all can be written in the form descri bed above. When faced
with an arbitrary function of and, it can be challenging to de termine whether the function represents a wave.
Example
Determine which (if any) of the functions below repre sent a traveling wave. For those that do, determine th e direction of their
propagation, and their speed. In every case the constants an d are positive numbers.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
The idea here is to do whatever algebra that is necessary to get the function into the form...
a. If we factor out of the first term, and out of the second term, we have:
We can see that this is purely a function of. In su ch problems, it might help to substitute for and show that
there are no 's or 's left over. The resulting function is in f act the waveform. For this case:
This is therefore a traveling wave moving in the direction (because of the opposite signs of and), and the speed must b e.
b. At first glance this might appear to be the functi on of a traveling wave, but we can show that in fact it cannot be written in the
correct form. Writing the difference of two squares as a produc t gives:

1.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18443
Each of the factors has the right form (once a facto r of is divided out), but if we substitute for one of them, we cannot
similarly eliminate the second factor. Put another wa y, one of the factors indicates the wave is moving in the direction, while
the other indicates it is moving the opposite way. It can't be doing both, so this is not the equation of a traveling wave.
c. Combining the exponentials gives:
Clearly this represents a wave propagating in the direct ion with a speed of.
The Wave Equation
It seems like there has to be an easier way to determi ne if a function of and represents a wave. It turns out that there is! To see this,
let's start with the basic definition above. If we defi ne, then we can write the wave function as. Now we can
write derivatives of the function with respect to and in terms of derivatives with respect to using the chain rule. Note that these
are functions of more than one variable, so we need to use partial derivatives. These work precisely like ordinary derivat ives, except
that when the derivative is taken with respect to one variab le, all the other variables are treated as constants.
Putting these together gives us a relation between second deri vatives known as the wave equation:
This second order partial differential equation holds if and only if the function behaves like a traveling wave (or a linear combination of
traveling waves) with speed.
Example
For the functions in the previous example, demonstrate whether they do or do not satisfy the wave equatio n with the proper wave
speed.
Solution
We found that the formulas for cases (a) and (c) represent waves, so we plug those into the wave equation:
(a)
From direct comparison, it is clear that these two terms are pro portional, which means they satisfy the wave equation:
The constant of proportionality for the wave equation is, so this confirms that.
(b)
These two terms are clearly not proportional, so this functio n does not satisfy the wave equation.

1.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18443
(c)
These two terms are proportional, and the constant of proportio nality gives the correct velocity once again.
Waves in Two and Three Dimensions
Consider a two-dimensional wave, such as a ripple rad iating outward from a pebble dropped into a still lake. If the distance of the wave
front from the source is, following the "wave form remain s unchanged" prescription, the functional form of the t raveling wave is
. Alternatively, we can extend the wave equation to two or three dimensions as follows:
In the one-dimensional case, we showed above that the wave form that remains unchanged as it propagates is described by a function
that satisfies the wave equation. It turns out that i n the two-dimensional case, this is no longer true. We can show this by repeating the
procedure outlined in Equation 1.1.2. A waveform that remains unchanged as it spreads radi ally outward would have the form
(we are considering an outgoing waveform, which account s for the minus sign). Defining the function, we
have for the derivative of the wave function with respect to:
Note that the variable depends upon both and, specifically:
Plugging this and in above gives:
The dependence on is the same as in the one-dimensional ca se:
Plugging this into the previous equations, and adding them t ogether gives:
Noting that, we finally get:
The second term on the right hand side of the equati on clearly makes this differential equation look dif ferent from the one-dimensional
wave equation. So the question is, which is the correct way of describing a two-dimensional wave? Does it maint ain its wave form as it
propagates outward, or does it satisfy our previous wave equation extended to two dimensions? The figures be low display the two
possibilities we are talking about.
Figure 1.1.2 – Two-Dimensional Circularly-Radiating Function with Unchanging W aveform

1.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18443
The graph shows a cross-sectional snapshot of the wave – the waveform repeats as a function of.
Figure 1.1.3 – Two-Dimensional Circularly-Radiating Function Satisfying 2-D Wave Equation
The graph shows a cross-sectional snapshot of the wave – the waveform does not repeat as a function of.
We can't answer this question purely mathematically – we have to observe what actually happens in nature. As we will see in Section
1.3, conservation of energy will require that it is in f act the extended two-dimensional wave equation that gi ves the correct answer – two
and three-dimensional waveforms do not remain fixed as they radiate outward. The wave displacements dimi nish with distance from the
source, as shown in Figure 1.1.3.
Finally, it should be mentioned that a shorthand not ation is commonly used for the sum of the three-dimen sional spatial double
derivatives, which looks like:

1.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18443The differential equation given earlier is in cartes ian coordinates, but it could just as easily be writt en in cylindrical or
spherical polar coordinates (though we won't do so h ere). This shorthand form avoids committing to a coord inate system
altogether.
This page titled 1.1: Wave Mathematics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184441.2: Wave Properties
Periodic Waves
There are qualities that are not required of genera l waves which are nonetheless common features of waves e ncountered in nature.
The most common special characteristic of a wave is wh en it continually repeats a specific waveform as it p ropagates. Such a wave
is said to be periodic. There are a couple ways to determine if a wave is pe riodic. The first is to take a snapshot of the wave, and see
if its waveform is repeated in space:
Figure 1.2.1a – Snapshot of a Periodic Wave
It should be noted that the starting point of each wa veform in the diagram above was chosen arbitrarily. T hat is, if we look at the
same snapshot of the wave as above, we could just as easily demonstrate its periodic nature with different segments:
Figure 1.2.1b – Snapshot of a Periodic Wave
The second way to determine if a wave is periodic is m athematical. The function repeats itself upon transl ation by a certain
distance in the direction. That is:
The quantity is the length of the repeating waveform, and is called the wavelength of the wave. A glance at the two diagrams
above should make it clear that the wavelength is a universal feature of that particular wave, and does not depend upon where we
choose the starting point to be.
The snapshot of the wave tells us something about its s patial features, but the wave is moving, so if we want to k now something
about its time-dependence, we need to select a specif ic point in space, and observe the displacement of the medium as the wave
goes by. The wave moves at a constant speed, and the length of each repeating waveform is the same, so the time span required for
a single waveform to go by is a constant for the ent ire wave, called the period of the wave. An alternative way of measuring the
temporal feature of the wave is the rate at which med ium displacements repeat, called frequency. Frequency is measured in units of
cycles per second, a unit known as hertz (Hz). Since 1 period is the time required for one cycle, there is a simple relationship
between these quantities:

1.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
We can make another association of periodic wave prop erties. If we pick a specific point on a waveform (ca lled a point of fixed
phase for the wave), and follow its motion, it should be cl ear that it travels a full wavelength in the time of one period. We
therefore can relate the wave speed, wavelength, and peri od (or frequency):
Wave Polarization
While the disturbance is not always a displacement of a medium, it always has a directional element to it. A wave that actually
displaces a medium has an obvious direction: that of the displacement. Other waves have directional gradien ts that signify a
direction. The direction in which the pressure is ch anging fastest (the pressure gradient direction) de fines a direction for sound
waves, and the direction of the electric field vector s defines a direction for light. This directional asp ect of waves is also given a
name: polarization. Generally the direction of medium displacement or gradient is compared to the direction of the wave's motion.
There are two special cases that we will encounter for pol arization of a wave:
transverse polarization: the medium's displacement or gradient is perpendicular to the wave’s direction of motion
Figure 1.2.2 – Transverse Wave
Note that the displacement of a single point in the m edium (depicted by the red dot) is moving only verti cally, while the wave
moves horizontally. That these two motions are perpend icular to each other is the defining characteristic of a transversely polarized
wave. Waves on strings and surface water waves are examp les of this kind of wave. As noted earlier, not all waves involve the
medium displacing (we will see some examples where this is the case later), but whatever fluctuation is occu rring has a direction
that can be compared with the direction of the wave's motio n.
longitudinal polarization: the medium's displacement or gradient is parallel to t he wave’s direction of motion.
Figure 1.2.3 – Longitudinal Wave
This time the displacement of a single point in the m edium is parallel to the direction of the motion of the wave, the defining
characteristic of a longitudinally polarized wave. No tice that like any other wave, the medium is not tra veling with the wave, it is
moving back-and forth. Physically these are waves indu ced by compressions (regions where the medium is more dense) and
rarefactions (regions where the medium is less dense). These kinds of waves can be created in springs (as depicted above), but the
most common physical example of this kind of wave is sound. Any medium (solid, liquid, or gas) will react to compression, and
will therefore exhibit this kind of wave.
Alert
Snapshot graphs of waves of both kinds of polarizatio n are sketched graphically with the displacement on the vertical axis and
the position on the horizontal axis. When this is do ne, it "looks like" a transverse wave, but it is import ant to keep in mind that
such a graph is not a picture of the wave. The vertica l axis measures the displacement of the medium from the eq uilibrium point,

1.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
which in the case of the red dot on the spring coil for the longitudinal wave in Figure 1.2.3 is the center of the horizontal dotted
red lines.
Harmonic Waves
In the category of periodic waves, the easiest to work wi th mathematically are harmonic waves. The word "harmonic" is basically
synonymous with "sinusoidal." For a one-dimensional wave, one might therefore assume that a harmonic wave function look s like:
While this comes close, it has a problem with units. The total phase of the wave function (the part in parentheses that is t he
argument of the cosine) cannot have any physical uni ts, and this function has a phase with units of lengt h. We can therefore repair
this problem by dividing the phase by a constant of t he wave that has units of length. The obvious such cons tant is the wavelength.
So now our candidate wave function is:
This gets close, but if we are using radians as the mea surement of phase, there is one more change we must ad d. If we consider a
snapshot of this wave at, we would find that the sinu soidal waveform should repeat itself every time the v alue of is
displaced by. If we are using radians as our angular measure, then this requires multiplying the phase b y. Then every change
of by will result in a change in the phase by, and the f unction repeats itself properly. So we now have:
There is one final addition to the phase that we need to make. Suppose we take a snapshot of the wave at an d look at the
origin,. This function tells us that the value of t he wave's displacement must be its maximum:. This is not a very general
wave! To account for the possibility that the wave mig ht have a different initial condition at the origin, we need to include a phase
constant,. Distributing the factor of, and using Equation 1.2.3, we get the final form of the wave function of a 1-d imensional
harmonic wave:
It is common to write this wave function in more comp act ways. The first involves the definition of the wave number, and
angular frequency:
Another definition that saves even more space is lum ping the total phase of the wave into a single funct ion variable:. It is
clearly linear in the variables and. That is:
Finally, it should be noted that although the cosine function was arbitrarily chosen here, we could have just as easily chose a sine
function. The only difference between representing the wave with these two functions is the phase constant. Tha t is, we can change
from one function to the other if we change the phase con stant by:
Wave Graphs
The important thing to take away from the harmonic wa ve function in Equation 1.2.7 is that the wave has four constants of the
motion that completely define it. Besides the wavelength, pe riod, and phase constant, there is the amplitude,. All of these remain
fixed in time, completely defining the wave that evo lves thanks to its and dependence. It is often usefu l to use these constants to
analyze a wave in parts. For example, we have already disc ussed analyzing the spatial features of the wave by ta king a "snapshot" –

1.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
a frozen moment in time. This amounts to choosing a va lue for (often zero, but not always), so that the wave function now
becomes only a function of.
We can also isolate the time variable. In this case, we pick a specific position, and graph the time de pendence of the displacement
of that point in the wave. For harmonic waves, these disp lacement-vs-time graphs represent harmonic oscillation. It should be
noted that like the spatial graph, the time graph i s a cosine (or sine) function, and this can lead to c onfusion, as it "looks like" a
wave.
What links these two graphs is the motion of the wave. The speed of the wave is related to the wavelength (whi ch can be read off
the position graph) and the period (which can be rea d off the time graph). The direction of the wave's mo tion gives us the relative
signs of the position and time variables in the wave function (recall that opposite signs means it is mov ing in the -direction).
Determining the phase constant requires understanding the meaning of "total phase," and some simple algebr a. Let's see how this
all fits together with an example.
Example
The figure below is a graph of the simple harmonic motio n of a particle of string through which an harmonic t ransverse wave is
passing (the displacement is parallel to the -axis, and t he motion is along the -axis). The position (-value) of the oscillating
particle is, as indicated on the graph.
a. One of the four position graphs given below represents a snap-shot of the wave at a given instant in time (the moment in time
for each case is indicated on the graph). Find the -vs- g raph below that belongs to this wave.
b. Find the amplitude, wavelength and period of this wave.
c. Find the speed at which this wave is traveling.
d. Find the direction () in which this wave is moving.
e. Find the phase constant in the range [0,] for the wave fun ction of this wave.
Solution

1.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
a. The one thing that both graphs have in common is the displacement of the particle of string. The harmonic mot ion graph
occurs at the position, so we can look at what displa cement the four prospective graphs give for that pos ition at a
common time. Let's start with graph A. The value of the d isplacement at the position of the particle is, and
this occurs at time. Looking back at the harmonic motion graph, we see that the displacement of the particle a t
is, so graph A cannot represent the same wave as the h armonic motion graph. Graph B has a displacement of
at time. Looking back at the harmonic motion graph, we see that at the displacement is between and
, so graph B also does not work. Graph C has a displa cement at, that matches that of the harmonic
motion graph (i.e.). It's easy to confirm using the lo gic shown above that graph D does not work, so the answ er is
graph C. It is important to note that graph C is by no means unique, it is simply the only one that works from th e four
choices given. But now that we know graph C represen ts this wave, we know significantly more about it, and we will use this
information for the remaining parts of this example.
b. The maximum displacement of the string is the amplitud e of the wave, and both graphs must agree on this. The y do, and it
is a value of 2 (units are not given). We know that graph C is a proper snapshot graph of this wave, which ma kes the
distance between peaks equal to the wavelength, so. The time interval between peaks on the harmonic motion graph
is the period of one oscillation, so.
c. With the wavelength and period, we can immediately compute the wave speed:.
d. Now things start to get a bit tricky, and a little visualization & logic are required. The one point we know about from these
two graphs is,. Now let's consider what happens t o that particle of string a short time later. On the ha rmonic
motion graph, we see that if we move to a slightly lar ger value of, the displacement becomes positive. The wav e must
therefore moving in a direction such that a short time later the displacement will rise. Looking at the snapsh ot of the wave in
graph C, we see that the direction we need to shift t he wave form such that the displacement immediately star ts going up is
the -direction. The wave must therefore be moving in th at direction. Note that if the common point between t he two graphs
happened to be a maximum or minimum of the wave, then it w ould not be possible to determine the direction of the wave
velocity, because the displacement a short time later wou ld be in the same direction no matter which way the wav e was
moving.
e. First, it should be noted that there are an infinit e number of phase constants, since one can always add or subtract to
get a new phase constant that will also work. So our task here is to find any phase constant that works, the n add or subtract
an appropriate number of units of to get a value tha t falls within the range required. To solve for a p hase constant, one
must first understand what the total phase of the wave is. Given that we are using a cosine function, we kn ow that the peak of
the wave occurs when the argument of the cosine (i.e. t he total phase) is an integer multiplied by. We will make it easy on
ourselves by just choosing zero. So we need to find a pos ition and time for which the displacement of the wave is a maximum
– any choice will work, and as an exercise, the reader should try more poin ts to prove this. For this solution, we will use the
peak on the harmonic motion graph at,. Note that we must choose the and terms to have the same sign, as
we know the wave is moving in the -direction. We will choose both to have positive signs, but both negat ive will also
work.
This phase constant doesn't fall within the desired [0,] ra nge, so we add to it and find.
Wave Velocity
Up until now, we have simply stated that waves have fix ed velocities. What we have not yet considered are the physical conditions
that determine the speed that a wave will have. Clear ly these conditions must depend only upon the type o f wave it is (string,
slinky, light, sound, etc.) and the medium through which it is passing. We will use our tools from classical me chanics to look at the
simple physical physical system of a transverse wave traveli ng through a taut string.
The wave function describes the displacement of a sing le particle of the string, so we will start with a small se gment. The wave
form curves the string, so the pulls of tension fro m each end of an infinitesimal segment of the string are not directly opposite to

1.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444each other. A free-body diagram of such a segment of length (the bend is exaggerated for the purpose o f illustration) looks like
this (note that we are ignoring gravity here):
Figure 1.2.4a – Free-Body Diagram of a Segment of String
The two forces can now be broken into horizontal and vertica l components.
Figure 1.2.4b – Free-Body Diagram of a Segment of String
Remember that this is a transverse wave, which means t hat this segment only accelerates vertically. The hori zontal components of
the forces therefore must cancel, and remain fixed – the magnitude of the horizontal components must t herefore be the constant
horizontal tension applied to the string.
Now apply Newton's 2nd law in the vertical direction. Setting u p as the positive direction, we have:
The mass of this segment of string is the linear mas s density of the string (which we will call) multiplie d by the segment's length
. The vertical acceleration is the second derivative of the position with respect to time. Putting these into t he equation gives:
The two forces and are pulling directly through th e string, so their directions are tangent to the cur ve made by the string on
each end. The slope of the curve made by the string is the first derivative of the displacement with re spect to, and this slope is
also the ratio of the vertical force to the horizontal f orce, so:

1.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
Plugging this back into Equation 1.2.12, we get:
When we require that be very small, the left-hand si de of the equation becomes a derivative. There is alr eady on derivative, so
the result is a second derivative, giving:
But this is precisely the wave equation! So we can just read-off the velocity of the wave (recall from Equation 1.1.3 that the
coefficient of the second derivative in time is):
Mechanical Wave Speeds in Other Media
Although we derived the result for the very specific c ase of a taut string, its general features applies to a ll mechanical waves – there
is always an element of the restoring force in the me dium (in the string case, the tension), and the inert ial of the medium (in the
string case, the linear density), and the square root dep endence comes out to be universal as well!
We said in Physics 9A that particles near each other (whether a solid, liq uid or gas) exert restoring forces on each other (re pel when
they get closer, attract when they separate). This forc e ultimately is what is responsible for the wave spee d for which we found the
simplest case above, described in terms of tension. I f such a wave (which, unlike a transverse string wave, i s actually a longitudinal
compression wave, and goes by the more generic name o f "sound") is traveling through a fluid (defined as either a gas or a liquid),
then the Van der Waals restoring forces between the particles are summarized in terms of a quantity calle d the bulk modulus. The
"inertia" part of the wave speed equation changes fr om the linear mass density of the (one-dimensional) string to the volume mass
density of the (three-dimensional) fluid, making the ve locity relation look like:
It turns out that this bulk modulus depends not only on the makeup of the fluid, but also its temperatur e. We won't go into any more
detail than this about this physical property of fluid s.
These compression waves can also travel through solids, and the Van der Waals restoring forces between parti cles manifest slightly
differently than for fluids (as you can imagine, th e "spring constants" between nearby particles in a so lid are significantly higher
than between particles in a fluid). In this case, the physical property that accounts for the restoring for ce between particles is
called Young’ s modulus. But the resulting wave speed formula looks the same:
We will not explore the exact nature of the bulk and Young's moduli, other than to note that they must obviously have the same
units. Simply knowing that they play the same role for f luids and solids respectively as the tension plays for a transverse wave on a
string will suffice for our purposes.
Digression: Tsunamis
When one reads above "waves in a fluid", one might be inclined to visualize transverse waves, as one sees on the surface of the
ocean. But those waves have as their restoring force s gravity and upward pressure. In fact, such surfable wa ves are known as
"gravity waves" (not to be confused with "gravitation al waves" which are themselves very different). The waves -through-fluid
for which the equation above applies are longitudin al – like a wave on a slinky that compresses and expand s the rings. Such
waves in the ocean are significantly faster than thei r gravity wave counterparts. In cases where an unde rwater earthquake
strikes, a great deal of energy can be transmitted into this type of wave, and its high rate of speed can c orrespond to quite a long

1.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
wavelength. When such a wave reaches a beach, the l ongitudinal displacement of the water can therefore b e quite large,
vacating the water just offshore for several hundre d yards, followed by an expansion onshore a similar di stance, inundating the
land near the beach. These waves are what are known a s tsunamis. These are sometimes mistakenly referred to as "t idal waves",
but gravitational effects from the sun and moon are re sponsible for the tides, and these don't play a role in this type of wave.
Also, some visualize tsunamis as very tall waves that crash on shore, but again, tsunamis are longitudinal, so thei r large
displacements are horizontal, not vertical.
Summary of Wave Attributes
To conclude this section, we will recap the wave attribu tes we have seen so far. For a wave to occur, two things are needed – a
medium through which the wave passes, and a "driver" whi ch is the initial source of the energy carried by t he wave. Let's look at
how each of the wave attributes links to these ingredien ts.
wave speed – We just showed above that the speed of the wave depends entirely upon the medium alone. There is no way to
generate the wave at its origin such that it will move fast er. While we have only shown this for transverse string wav es, it is true
in general for all waves.
amplitude – The maximum displacement of an harmonic wave depends u pon how much the driver displaces the medium at the
source of the wave. We also found that the amplitude can change (get smaller) when the wave is radiating outward fro m a point
source in 2 or 3 dimensions.
period (or frequency) – The period of the wave is determined by how long it take s the wave's generator to complete a full
cycle. The wave's frequency will exactly mimic the frequen cy at which it is driven.
wavelength – The length of a wave is determined by a combination o f its frequency and wave speed. So we cannot point to
either the driver or the medium as the direct cause of wav elength. In some sense, wavelength is a "dependent variab le," while
the independent variables that we can control from out side are wave speed and frequency.
polarization – The displacement of the medium can be perpendicular to the wave motion (transverse) or parallel to it
(longitudinal).
Example
The transverse harmonic waves carried on a taut string can be adj usted in three ways:
the tension in the string can be increased or decrease d
the maximum displacement of the driver can be made larger or smaller
the frequency of oscillation of the driver can be inc reased or decreased
After a lot of careful adjustments, a wave is created w hich has the property that the speed of the wave eq uals the maximum
speed that a tiny segment of the string has as the wave pass es through it.
a. Describe what kinds of changes to the output of the driver (if any) will maintain the equal-speed property above.
b. Find the ratio of the amplitude of the wave and its wavel ength.
Solution
a. We start with the wave function:
This describes the vertical position of a segment of s tring as a function of the horizontal position and t ime. The speed of
this segment is therefore the first derivative of this func tion with respect to time:
The maximum value of the sine function is 1, so the maxi mum speed of the string is. In terms of the frequency, this
maximum speed is. We can adjust both the frequency an d the amplitude of the driver, and this won't change the
speed of the wave (that can only be changed by alte ring the tension), so for the max speed of the string t o remain

1.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18444
unchanged (and equal to the wave speed), the amplitud e and frequency have to be changed by the same facto r, one of
them up and the other down.
b. The wavelength can be determined from the speed of t he wave and the frequency. The speed of the wave equ als the
maximum speed of the string, so:
This page titled 1.2: Wave Properties is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.
Current page by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.
1.1: Fundamentals of Sound by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0.
2.1: Forces, Fundamental and Composite by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

1.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184451.3: Energy Transmission
1-Dimensional Waves
While we will be interested in energy transmission in a ll kinds of waves, we will start with 1-dimensional har monic waves as our
model, as we are already familiar with the harmonic mo tion exhibited by the medium as such a wave passes. In particular, we have
an idea of how to deal with the energy of a single oscillating particle, so for now we will also restrict ourselves to mechanical
waves, where the particle comprising the medium are actuall y oscillating (i.e. think about a transverse wave on a str ing).
The energy of a single oscillating particle comes in two forms: kinetic and elastic potential (we'll maint ain the convention that the
particle is displacing in the direction as the wave mo ves in the direction):
Of course both the speed of the particle and its dis placement are changing with time, so it's more useful to express the energy of
this particle in terms of one of the constants of th e motion. When the particle reaches its maximum disp lacement, it stops moving,
so its kinetic energy goes to zero and all of the e nergy is potential. But we have given this maximum d isplacement a name –
amplitude. So the total energy of the oscillating parti cle is:
One might complain that there are no springs present for this kind of wave, so what are we supposed to plu g into? Well, there is a
restoring force on every particle in the string as the wave passes, and this behaves like the restoring force of a spring, but we can
write this expression more appropriately if we replace the spring constant with an equivalent expression in terms of the mass of the
particle and the frequency of oscillation. Recall that fo r simple harmonic motion we have:
Now the energy of the particle is in terms of the medium (the mass of the particle) and the wave (the amplitude and freque ncy):
We stated at the very beginning that waves carry ene rgy from one point to another. Now that we see that a s ingle particle in the
medium carries energy, it should be clear that this is tr ue. Consider a wave pulse that is harmonic for just one wavel ength:
Figure 1.3.1 – Wave Pulse Carries Energy
Clearly the region where the particles are oscillatin g changes in this case, which means that the region that contains the energy is
changed. The pulse transports energy across the expan se by having particles in the medium transfer energy to their nearestneighbors, without the particles themselves having to ma ke the trip.
Suppose we wish to know how much energy is in the whole wav e, rather than what is just in a single particle. In t his case, we treat
the wave as continuous, with an infinite number of in finitesimal particles oscillating. The mass of these particles is very small, and
can be written in terms of the mass density of the me dium (again, think of this as a wave on a string), mult plied by a small segment
along the direction:

1.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18445We can now use this mass to express the infinitesimal am ount of energy possessed by that particle, by pluggi ng this into Equation
1.3.4:
This is the energy in a single particle of the medium within the wave, so to get the full energy carried by the wave, we need only
add up all these parts by performing an integral. T he range of the single wave goes for one wavelength, so choosing the origin to be
at one end of the wave, we have:
Of course, if we have a full harmonic wave, as described by the wave function given in Equation 1.2.7, we have an infinite number
of these single wave pulses, and the amount of energy in the entire wave is infinite and uninte resting. What is finite, even in the
case of a full harmonic wave, is the rate as which energy is being transferred. To compute thi s, we simply need to divide how much
energy a single wave pulse is carrying by the time it takes to completely cross some fixed point. Well, we know that this time
interval is one period, so we have for the power of the wave:
where is the speed of the wave. We can put this entire ly in terms of the constants of motion of the wave an d the medium for our
case of a wave on a string by plugging in for the velocity in terms of the string tension and mass density (Equation 1.2.17):
This calculation is specific to harmonic waves on stri ngs, and we will not go into how this result changes fo r other types of
harmonic waves (which pass through different sorts of media, may not be mechanical in nature, etc.). However, we will note that
for a one-dimensional wave, the power is proportional to the square of the amplitude. As we will see, we will ne ed to modify this
result slightly for waves in two and three dimensions.
Multi-Dimensional Waves
In Section 1.1 we found that in order to satisfy the wave equation, wa ves that propagate out from a central source, into two or three
dimensions cannot repeat their waveform. Here we will se e why that is so, and get some idea of specifically ho w the waveform
changes. Again, we will remain within the confines of ou r harmonic wave model for simplicity. First we need to clarify an
important assumption: In our discussion we will assume that dissipative effects of the medium are negligible. That is, the particles
in the medium that oscillate do so without "friction. " This means we are assuming that all of the energy i n the wave remains within
the wave, and none of the energy is converted into thermal energy in the medium.
Consider now a wave radiating outward from a point sou rce in two dimensions (think of a circular ripple on a pond caused by a
pebble). Each position in the medium contains a parti cle oscillating harmonically (like a mass on a spring), and as the wave
propagates outward, the number of oscillating particle s increases. The particles in the medium are spaced the same everywhere, so
the number of particles encountered by the circular wave is proportional to its circumference, and there fore proportional to its
radius. This means that when the radius of the wave front doubles, it is oscillating twice as many particles in the m edium.
Figure 1.3.2 – Circular Wave Energy Conservation

1.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18445
As the wave moves out, there is no energy lost, so the whe n the circle enlarges, the energy is distributed am ongst a larger number
of oscillators. The energy in each oscillator is det ermined by its amplitude of oscillation, so for more oscillators to have the same
energy as fewer oscillators, their amplitudes must dec rease. Specifically, the energy per oscillator is prop ortional to the square of
the amplitude (Equation 1.3.2), which means that doubling the radius of the circl e reduces the amplitude by a factor of, tripling
the radius reduces the amplitude by a factor of, an d so on. The figure above shows what happens to the ampl itude of the wave
in cross-section as it goes from a radius of 1 wavelength to 3 wavelengths.
The wave doesn't change its velocity from the inner circle to the outer circle, so the rate at which ener gy passes through each circle
must be the same. What is different about two circle s is the density of the energy contained in each. For the smaller cir cle, the
energy is distributed over a smaller circumference than for the larger circle, so the energy density be comes smaller as the wave
propagates outward. We can define power density in the same manner – by dividing the power of the wave (whic h is the same for
both rings, and everywhere else) by the size of the region through which it is passing. This "power densi ty" is called intensity. For
our two-dimensional wave, this is the ratio of the power of t he wave and the circumference of the circle through whi ch it is passing:
Therefore the intensity of a two-dimensional wave radi ating outward from a central point varies in inverse proportion to the
distance from the central source. We find that the inten sity is proportional to the square of the amplitude:
It turns out that the proportionality of intensity and square amplitude was the case for one-dimension as well. For a onedimensional wave, the energy density does not change, because all of the energy is handed from one oscil lator to another
neighboring single oscillator. Therefore the power de nsity (intensity) doesn't change, which is consistent wi th what we already
know; the amplitude of a one-dimensional wave remains const ant.
Far more common in our studies are three-dimensional waves with central sources (namely sound and light), and the power density
in these cases involves dividing by a spherical sur face area, rather than a circle. In this case, the in tensity of the wave has units of
watts per square meter (whereas the intensity of the two-dimens ional wave had units of watts per meter), and we have:
Once again we find the same relationship between inten sity and amplitude. The same mechanism is at work: As the wave moves
outward from a central point, the number of oscillat ors on each spherical surface is proportional to the surface area. Doubling the

1.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18445
radius of a spherical surface quadruples the surface ar ea, so the number of oscillators grows with the square o f the radius. This
means that the energy per oscillator drops with the squa re of the radius, and the amplitude is inversely-proport ional to the radius:
The relation between intensity and amplitude is ther efore universal among waves, and one that we will keep in mind in the sections
to come.
Note that this intensity drops faster than that of the two-dimensional wave, satisfying what's known as an inverse-square law: The
intensity gets weaker in inverse proportion to the sq uare of the distance from the source. Since the power of the wave is the same
everywhere, we have the following relationship of inten sities at two distances and from the source for waves that propagate
outward from a point source:
Digression: Return to the Wave Equation
We can look to the wave equation in two and three d imensions to see if the relationship we obtain above b etween amplitude and
radius actually holds true. For subtle reasons that we won't go into, it does hold true for three dimensions, b ut is only
approximately true for two dimensions (the approximation improves as the wave gets farther from the source). If w e accept the
two-dimensional approximation, then we have a nice extensio n of the description of the wave function we gave in Section 1.1:
To demonstrate these relations, one must write the wave equation in polar coordinates for two and three dime nsions,
respectively. For the reader that may be inspired to give demonstrating this a try, here are the double spati al derivatives for
each case:

Example
At time, a plunger begins oscillating up-and-down at a steady rate for 6 full oscillations in a body of o therwise calm water.
During this time, it puts of energy into the surface waves it creates. The wavelength of the wave is measured to be,
and the wave speed is measured to be.
a. Find the power supplied by the plunger.
b. Find the intensity of the leading wavefront at time.

1.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18445
c. The amplitude of the leading wavefront at is measured to be. Find its amplitude at.
Solution
a. The power is the rate at which the energy is being transferred into the waves. We know how much energy is put into 6
oscillations, so if we divide that energy by the time span of 6 oscillations, we have the value of the powe r. The time span of 6
oscillations is 6 periods, and a single period we can calcu late from the wavelength and wave speed:
b. To get the intensity, we need to know the circumf erence of the leading wavefront. We know the speed o f the wave and how
long it has been traveling, so:
c. For the two-dimensional wave, the amplitude gets smal ler as the radius grows, by a factor of. The wave's sp eed is
unchanging, so after 8 seconds the wave has traveled twice as far from the source than after 4 seconds. Doub ling the
distance traveled therefore reduces the amplitude by a fac tor of, giving:
This page titled 1.3: Energy Transmission is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
1.4: Superposition and Interference
Combining Similar Waves
When two or more waves of the same type in the same me dium coexist in the same region of space, they combin e to create a new
wave. The way they combine is a simple process known as superposition. This consists of simply adding the displacements (o r
whatever the wave function represents) of the two or mo re waves at the same place and time. For a 1-dimensional wave, this
means:
Alert
It's important to emphasize that two waves can only su perpose if they are the same type. Many different kin ds of waves can
travel through the same medium (light, sound, and displa cement waves can all travel through water in a lake, fo r instance), but
these cannot superpose with each other.
It’s easy to show that if the two individual wave func tions satisfy the wave equation, then so does the tot al wave function. It bears
repeating with a diagram that this superposition sum i nvolves adding displacements at the same place and time. So if we took a
snapshot of two waves, we would determine the total wave by li ning them up:
Figure 1.4.1 – Superposition
The composite wave is then the combination of all of the points added thus. Of course, these are traveling waves, so over time the
superposition produces a composite wave that can vary with time in interesting ways. Here is a simple exampl e of two pulses
"colliding" (the "sum" of the top two waves yields the bott om wave).
Figure 1.4.2 – "Collision" of Pulses
Notice that even though the resultant wave looks very different from its "parents," the medium somehow "r emembers" the original
waves, and when they no longer coincide, they continue along as exactly the waves they were before the supe rposition. That is, the
waves do not affect each other, as particles would if they collided – waves don't bounce off each other, f or example. They simply

1.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446create a new wave while they occupy the same space in t he medium, and when their individual motions carry the m to different
parts of the medium, they return to being the waves they were before.
Interference – All-or-Nothing
There are some special cases involving superposition t hat are particularly interesting to examine, and thes e involve a phenomenon
known as interference. There are many degrees of interference possible, all of wh ich fall between the following two extremes:
constructive interference: The waves are perfectly aligned and timed so that their cr ests and troughs coincide, such that the total
wave has the maximum possible amplitude (equal to the sum of the amplitudes of the two constituent waves).
destructive interference: The waves are perfectly aligned and timed so that the cres ts of one wave align with the troughs of the
other such that leading to a wave that has the minimum po ssible amplitude (equal to the difference of the ampl itudes of the two
constituent waves).
The phrase total destructive interference refers to the case of destructive interference when the resultant wave has zero amplitude,
i.e. the two waves totally cancel each other. In the ca ses we will discuss, we will only talk about this extreme case of destructive
interference, so we will typically leave out the word “total,” even though we are still talking about total cancelat ion.
Interference – Intensity of Combined Wave
We will examine a great many examples of interferenc e in physical phenomena in the sections to come. We therefore need to take
some time to develop the mathematics behind this eff ect. We will do this within the same framework that we h ave been using – that
of harmonic waves. When we look at the physical attri butes of interference, what we will be examining is what happens to the
intensity of the combined wave. For example, interferen ce in sound will be exhibited in volume, and in light it will be brightness.
Both of these are measures of intensity. We need a refe rence point for intensity, and the one we will use is th at of maximal
constructive interference. So what we seek is an equati on that relates the intensity of two superposed, out-o f-phase, but otherwise
identical waves to the intensity we would see if they were in phase. That is, we want something that looks like this:
The quantity is the intensity of the wave as a func tion of the phase difference of the two (identical) p arent waves. If the two
waves happen to be in phase, then the combined wave's intensity is when the two waves are in phase. Note that this is four times
the intensity of each individual wave, since the constructive interference adds the amplit udes (which are equal – the waves are
identical) and the intensity is proportional to the squ are of the amplitude.
The function needs to have the following properties:
It has to always be non-negative, since intensity is never a negative number.
It has to vanish when the phase difference equals (modulo), since this means the waves totally destructively int erfere.
It has to equal 1 when when the phase difference is 0 (modu lo), since this means the waves constructively interfe re.
To find this function, we start with two wave functions that ar e identical except for their phases and superpose them:
We want this function to only depend upon the differe nce in the two phases, so we will write each total phas e in terms of deviation
from their average phase (which we will call simply), and the difference in phase between the two waves,:
Plug these into Equation 1.4.3 gives:
Now we can apply a trigonometric identity:

1.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
The phase difference between the two waves can be writte n in terms of the difference in position, time, and the phase constant,
using Equation 1.2.9:
As the waves propagate along, the values of and will c hange, but as the two waves are identical (traveling in the same direction
with the same speed), the differences in and don’t change for a given phase. Therefore the factor in Equation 1.4.6 that includes
the phase difference is a constant. Putting that con stant together with the gives us the amplitude of th e new conglomerate wave
(with the time-varying phase being the average of the phase s of the two waves):
The intensity is proportional to the square of the ampli tude, so the intensity of this combined wave is:
The intensity of each individual wave is proportiona l to. If the waves were in phase, the total amplitude would double, which
means that the total in-phase intensity is proportiona l to. The intensity of the (out of phase) combined wave i s therefore:
Notice that this relationship between total intensity and pha se difference exactly matches the three criteria we outline d above.
Example
Two identical harmonically-oscillating devices attach ed to a taut string are turned on simultaneously and in phase, vibrating at
a frequency of. One source is located at the origin, and the other is positioned at. Each source vibrates w ith a
maximum displacement of the string of. The string has a de nsity of, and is stretched with a tension of. The
sources are allowed to vibrate long enough for their res pective waves to superpose.
a. Find the amplitude of the combined wave.
b. Find the power of the combined wave.
c. Find the distance in the direction that the source not a t the origin must be moved for the power output to be maximi zed,
and determine this maximum power output.
Solution
a. The amplitude of the combined wave is given by Equation 1.4.8, which requires that we calculate the phase difference:
The sources start at the same moment in time and in phase, s o and. Therefore the only source of phase
difference is the separation of the sources,. We still need the wavelength, which we can get from the freque ncy and wave
speed. The latter we get from the string density and tensio n. Putting all this together gives:
Plugging this in above gives:
The amplitude of the combined wave is therefore:

1.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
Notice that the amplitude of the combined wave is actu ally smaller than that of each individual wave. This i s because the
separation is such that there is some partially destruct ive interference going on.
b. The power of the combined wave can be found directly f rom Equation 1.3.9:
c. The power of a one-dimensional wave is the same as it s intensity. From Equation 1.4.10 it is clear that the maximum
intensity occurs when the cosine function equals. This occurs when the argument is some integer multiplied by. The
argument in the case above is, so the source must be shifted enough for the total phase to change by an
additional, to give:. This phase difference is rel ated to the change in position through the
wavelength:
Notice that the position where the second source cr eates maximum constructive interference is exactly one wavelength away
from the first source:. This is because with only spa tial separation in play, the phase difference
changes by every time the spatial separation changes by.
The maximum possible intensity is, and since we know the intensity of the combined wave and the phase differe nce, we
can compute this maximum from Equation 1.4.10:
A simpler approach would be to note that the intensi ty is proportional to the square of the amplitude, and since changing the
position of the second source increases the amplitud e from to (double the individual wave amplitude), wh ich is
an increase of a factor of 3.59, the intensity increa ses by a factor of, giving the same result (except for some
rounding errors along the way).

How to Create Interference
Whenever two waves interfere, whether it is constructiv ely, destructively, or anything in-between, it's clear that the critical factor is
the phase difference between the waves,. From Equation 1.4.5 we can see several ways in which a difference in phase can
occur: The two waves can travel a different distance (), they can have been traveling for a different amo unt of time (), they
could have started out of phase (), or it could be some combi nation of these three differences.
To understand how these three differences can be physic ally manifested, it's easiest to let two of them be ze ro, and let only one
difference occur at a time. We can do this in two way s. The first is to simply construct physical situation s that assures this, and the
second consists of nothing more than a change of per spective. For the sake of studying this effect, we will o nly consider destructive
interference, but we can do the same for constructive or anything in between as well. To keep things simple, we 'll interfere
(approximately) 1-dimensional waves traveling in the same direction, which we can model with identical harm onic sound waves
coming from two speakers pointed in the same directio n. There is nothing about the result that is specif ic to sound, however; this is
a phenomenon common to all waves.
Case 1: Different Travel Distance (,,)
We start with a case where the two sound waves emanate from their respective speakers such that the leading wave front for each
sound wave is at the same phase (in the diagram belo w, if we use a cosine function to describe these waves, t hen both waves have a
phase of at their leading edge). We also start the wav es from their speakers at the same moment (in the d iagram below, both
waves have been propagating for one full oscillation plus another quarter of an oscillation, so they sta rted at the same time). But
the waves are offset in the positions where they begin by one-half wavelength, which results in the two waves oc cupying the same
medium radians out of phase:

1.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446Figure 1.4.3 – Destructive Interference Due to Travel Distance Only
Case 2: Different Time Intervals (,,)
Next we will place the speakers side-by-side, so that the travel distances of the waves at any position in the m edium is the same. As
before, the leading wave front of the waves will be in phase, but this time we will turn on one of the speake rs at a time of one-half
period before the other speaker. This lag between t he two once again throws the two waves out of phase, resu lting in destructive
interference:
Figure 1.4.4 – Destructive Interference Due to Starting Time Only
Case 3: Different Starting Phases (,,)
Now finally, we will position speakers side-by-side, and tu rn them on at the same moment, but will arrange thin gs so that the
sounds they emanate leave the speakers radians out of phase, to get the same destructive interference:
Figure 1.4.5 – Destructive Interference Due to Phase Constant Only

1.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446One More Case: Different Perspectives
While these all seem distinctly different, very ofte n the same interference effect can be described in any of the three ways, simply
by changing our perspective. To see this, let's con sider a two-dimensional harmonic wave coming from a s ingle point source. This
could be a wave caused by a pebble dropped into a po nd, for example. This wave radiates circularly-outward from the source. We
of course cannot have interference with only one wave, so we will provide a means to split it into two separat e waves: The wave
will strike a barrier with two small holes in it, throug h which the wave can pass. As we will see in a future se ction, these two holes
themselves now act like point sources of two separate wav es, with the energy of these waves coming from the ori ginal wave. It's
these two waves that we will allow to interfere.
Consider the diagram below. We will be looking at the intensity of the wave when it strikes a second barri er at a position that is
equal distances (labeled as ' ' in the diagram) from t he two holes. The original source of the wave is not the same distance from
both holes, however.
Figure 1.4.6 – Single Source Interference Setup
Suppose we find that the two split waves interfere destructiv ely at the final destination. How can we explain this result? It turns out
that we can do it in any of the three ways described above, d epending on what perspective we decide to take.
First, we can note that the two waves start at the same t ime and with the same phase, from the original point s ource. But these two
waves (which initially are part of the same starting wave) do not travel equal distances:. They travel the same dista nce
from the holes to the screen, but the distances to the hole s from the starting point are different:
Figure 1.4.7 – Single Source Interference – Distance Traveled Explana tion

1.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
We would see destructive interference if (for example), the extra distance traveled by the wave passing th rough one hole happens to
be a half wavelength farther than the distance traveled by t he wave passing through the other hole:.
Now let's change our perspective. Suppose we are watching this wave from the right of the two holes, and know n othing at all
about the single point source. As far as we are conce rned, the two waves are starting from positions that ar e the same distance from
the position where we are seeing the destructive interf erence. We would not conclude that the difference in distance traveled is the
cause of this interference. But suppose we had been watc hing since before the first wave emerged from a hole. In this case, we
would see a wave with a certain starting phase come ou t of one hole first, and a short time later, a wave wi th the same phase come
from the other hole. It comes out with the same phase be cause it comes from the same wavefront from the original po int source.
Figure 1.4.8 – Single Source Interference – Time Elapsed Explanat ion

We would see destructive interference if (for example), the time elapsed between when we see the two waves em erge differs by
one-half period:.
And finally, there is one other perspective from whic h we can view this. Once again, we will view the waves from the side of the
holes where we can't see the point source, so that we aga in measure equal travel distances. But this time, let's assume we don't start
viewing until after the wave has been passing through b oth holes for awhile. We look at our watch and note th at at time (when
we start watching), there are waves coming from both hol es that are out of phase with each other by radians. Both waves travel
the same distance and start at the same time, but start out out of phase, and therefore destructively interfere.

1.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
Example
Two speakers, both pointing in the direction, are pl aced on the y-axis, separated from each other by a dis tance of.
They emit the same tone, which has a frequency of, in p hase with each other. A microphone is placed directl y in front of
and very close to one of the speakers, and is gradua lly moved from along the -axis farther and farther from the speaker.
Assume that the fact that the microphone is a little f arther from one speaker than the other does not result in a noticeable
intensity difference between the two speakers, so th at the sound waves coming from the speakers have the same amplitude when
they reach the microphone. The speed of sound waves in air is.
a. Find the distances from the closer speaker where the micro phone detects no sound.
b. Find the distances from the closer speaker where the sound gets loudest (i.e. constructive interference).
c. Suppose the tone coming from the speakers has an adjus table frequency, and that it is gradually lowered. Find t he frequency
below which the microphone has no position on the -axis where i t measures total silence.
Solution
a. The starting phase and time are the same, so the onl y source of phase difference comes from the difference in distance
traveled. From the contribution to the phase differen ce that causes destructive interference (i.e. when t he extra distance
is an odd number of half-wavelengths), we therefore have:
The difference in distances traveled by the two wave s us found using the Pythagorean theorem, so putting this in above
gives:
Calling the value of " " and doing the algebra gives:
We are given the frequency of the sound, so we can find its w avelength:
Notice that although the value of is not restricted, when it gets too high, the value of will become nega tive. Plugging in
all of the values of that give positive values of yields five possible values:
b. Constructive interference occurs when the path d ifference is an even number of half-wavelengths (i.e. some number of full
wavelengths). We can get our answer directly from part (a) simply by taking even values of instead of odd val ues. Once

1.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18446
again, the number of values of is limited by the restriction th at sign of must be positive.
c. The value of clearly gets smaller as gets larger (th e hypotenuse gets closer and closer to equaling the value as
gets larger), so the largest possible value of is jus t the separation of the speakers. If the speakers are separated by less
than one-half wavelength, then can never get as big as a half wavelength, and no totally destructive in terference is
possible. These speakers are separated by, so the wavele ngth of the sound must be shorter than for there to b e
any instance of total destructive interference. This wa velength corresponds to a frequency of:
Frequencies lower than this create wavelengths that ar e so long that is never large enough to cause total destructive
interference.

This page titled 1.4: Superposition and Interference is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
1.5: Standing Waves
Interference Patterns
We found that interference occurs between two identic al waves, but we didn't mention what the source of two ide ntical waves
might be. We will find that most of the time the two wa ves are actually the same wave, where one part of it has been diverted
somehow, so that it behaves like a separate wave. When we witness the interference created in such a situatio n, it is often in the
form of an interference pattern. This is a recognizable pattern of intensity that r epeats itself in space or in time, or in both. We will
see lots of these patterns in the sections to come, b ut as usual we will start with a simple (but important) one-dimensional example
of an interference pattern, called a standing wave. [Actually, standing waves occur in 2 and 3 dimensions as w ell, though we will
confine our discussion to those of the 1-dimensional vari ety.]
Alert
The moniker "standing wave" puts yet another strain o n our definition of what it means to be a wave. It doe s satisfy the wave
equation (as does any superposition of waves), but al though the wave equation yields a wave velocity, th is waveform does not
propagate at all. It is better to think of standing waves a s what they are – interference patterns.
All interference patterns are formed from multiple i dentical waves, and like so many other interference patterns, this is
accomplished through multiple versions of the same wave. In the case of the standing wave, these two versions are the result of
wave reflections off two endpoints. That is, a single wave bounces back- and forth between two endpoints, and as it crosses itself
during the journey, the standing wave interference pa ttern is formed from the superposition – the two waves t hat are interfering
only differ in their directions of motion.
Wave Reflection & Transmission
Before we delve into the details of standing waves, we f irst need to look at the phenomenon that makes them possible – wave
reflection. The mathematics of wave reflection can be come quite involved and we will not delve into it her e, but the bottom line is
that waves reflect off sudden changes in the medium. We have found that the medium is best characterize d by the speed of waves
that pass through it, and in fact it is correct to sa y that a wave reflects when it encounters a region of the medium where the wave
speed changes.
At this point one might ask why the wave doesn't simply c ontinue in the direction it was going, but at a diffe rent speed. It does! But
it also reflects. That is, the wave splits into two par ts, called the reflected wave and the transmitted wave. Of course, energy is
conserved during this schism, so the energy in the or iginal wave is greater than the energies in either o f these waves. The amount of
energy that goes to each wave is determined mathemat ically by a process known as "matching boundary condi tions" at the point of
reflection, but as mentioned earlier, we will not make a close examination of this process here (this topi c is explored in courses on
quantum mechanics, such as Physics 9D).
The requirement that the speed of the wave changes at the point of reflection in the medium doesn't dist inguish between the wave is
coming from a faster medium to a slower one, or from a slower one to a faster one. It turns out that the wave will partially transmit
and partially reflect, no matter which direction it i s going. But there is an observable phenomenon that di stinguishes these two
possibilities. Suppose a pulse of a wave on a string cons ists of just a single bump (like half a sine function) that lies on the top half
of the string. If this wave reaches a point in the me dium where it speeds up (the string's linear density goe s down), then the
reflected pulse remains in the top half of the string. But if the pulse encounters a point in the medium where it slows down (the
string's linear density goes up), then the reflected pu lse flips to the bottom half of the string. The transmitte d wave never flips over.
Figure 1.5.1 – Reflection and Transmission (Slow-to-Fast Medium)

1.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
Figure 1.5.2 – Reflection and Transmission (Fast-to-Slow Medium)
It should also be noted that the reflected wave in b oth cases reflects its wave form along. This is not ob vious in the case
of a symmetric pulse, but if the wave is asymmetric, then it b ecomes apparent.
Figure 1.5.3 – Reflection of an Asymmetric Wave (Fast-to-Slow Medi um)
The leading edge of the incoming waveform is the lea ding edge of the reflected waveform. While there is s ome loss of amplitude
for the reflected wave compared to its incoming count erpart (some of the energy is taken by the transmit ted wave), the wavelength
of the reflected wave is the same as the incoming wave. This is because the velocity of the reflected wave is the same as the
incoming wave. The wavelength of the transmitted wave wi ll not match the wavelength of the incoming wave, howe ver. The time
span between the front and rear of the waveform strik ing the new medium is the same time as it takes for th e full waveform to be
transmitted, so the periods of the incoming, transmitt ed, and reflected waves are all the same, but since the velocity is different for
the reflected and transmitted waves, the result is differe nt wavelengths for these waves (will be longer in the faster medium).
Reflection without Transmission
In order to discuss standing waves, we need to completely confine the wave between two endpoints – no energy ca n be allowed to
escape via transmission. We can make such a confinem ent simply by cutting off the medium at the endpoin ts. The wave will reflect
off this sudden absence of medium, and all of the en ergy of the incoming wave returns in the reflected wav e. But does the wave flip
over or stay upright in such a case?
In fact both of these results are possible, because the edge of the medium can react in one of two ways. If the edge of the medium is
held fixed (i.e. not allowed to exhibit the displaceme nt that the wave provides every other point in the me dium), then the reflected
wave flips over. If the edge of the medium is free to displac e, then the reflected wave does not flip over.
Figure 1.5.4 – Reflection off a Fixed End

1.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
Figure 1.5.5 – Reflection off a Free End
Explaining this result is quite tricky from a persp ective of forces on the end of string, and even after figuring that out, it's hard to
extend it to other types of waves (this phenomenon ap plies to all waves, though sometimes determining what is meant by "fixed"
and "free" can be tricky). But there is a nice way to use an imaginary model to achieve this result. It goes lik e this:
Suppose we model a single wave hitting the end of the m edium with two waves, moving in opposite directions through the poin t
that is the end of the medium and passing each othe r. Clearly the second wave doesn't exist, since there is no medium beyond the
end, but its emergence from the passing point is see n as the "reflected wave," while the other wave vanishes p ast the passing point.
With this model, we first see that they must have the same basic waveform, and that the leading edge of one wave must correspond
to the leading edge of the other. But now we ask how t he imaginary wave (i.e. the second wave, before it emer ges as the reflected
wave) must be oriented for the passing point to be fi xed or free. For the passing point to remain stationa ry, the superposition of the
two waves at that point must result in total destructiv e interference. This can only happen if the second wave is inverted compared
to the first wave, so when it emerges as the reflected wave, it has been flipped over. If the passing point moves freely, the two
waves cannot interfere destructively, so the second wav e emerges upright. Note that this analysis tells us that the free end displaces
an amount equal to twice the amplitude, since the waves are identical and the interfe rence is constructive.
As often as we use harmonic waves, it is useful to put th e phenomenon of reflected waves in that context. When we flip over a sine
or cosine wave, the result is identical to shifting that wa ve by a phase of:

1.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448The inversion of a reflected wave after coming off a fixed end or a slower medium is therefore often refer red to as a phase shift of
Standing Wave Mathematics
Now we know that we can get a wave to bounce back-and-for th between two ends of a medium, and the waves going eac h way are
identical. If conditions for these waves are just right, the ir superposition results in a standing wave.
Figure 1.5.6 – Standing Wave
Let's see how this result occurs mathematically. This requires superposing two wave functions with the wave wave length (wave
number) and period (angular frequency) that are movin g in opposite directions:
Recall that this standing wave occurs because a single wave is bouncing back-and-forth between endpoints in the medium. The
endpoints must either each be free (no phase shift) or fixed (phase shift). For the sake of getting an easy-to-read result, we'll
assume that a fixed endpoint lies at position. Beca use we are talking about a position where the wave refl ects, and because
the point is fixed, the two waves must be out of phas e by radians. Mathematically this means that the diff erence in their phase
constants is:
Plugging and into the superposition of the two waves a nd setting the result equal to zero (that point rema ins fixed
by our simplifying assumption), we get:
We can solve this for, which comes out to be:. We' ll take the simplest solution of zero, which leaves us with the
following wave function:
We can now apply the following trigonometric identity to get a simplified form of the standing wave function:

1.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448All harmonic waves are collections of harmonically-os cillating points in a medium, that vary in total ph ase from one position to the
next. Traveling waves satisfy this, but the amplitude s of these oscillators are all the same in this case. Wh en interference occurs,
the amplitude can vary from one position to the next as well (e.g. p ositions of destructive interference have zero ampli tude, and
positions of constructive interference have very larg e amplitudes), and this is evident in this result f or the interference pattern we
call a standing wave. This formula can be written as a collection of harmonic oscillators all with the same a period (and therefore
the same sine function), but with different amplitudes at different positions:
It is not hard to visualize this wave – it is a sine f unction along the -axis, which remains in place ("standi ng") as its displacement
at various positions oscillates with time. That is, it is exactly like the standing wave depicted in Figure 1.5.6, with the left end being
the origin. There are several things to note about thi s standing wave:
There are fixed points that occur at specific positions on the standing wave (when the sine function of position vanis hes), called
nodes. These are separated by a distance equal to one half th e wavelength of the traveling waves. We will say that the
"wavelength" of the standing wave equals the wavelength of t he traveling waves that are forming it.
The maximum displacement of the standing wave only occ urs at specific positions, called antinodes, which are also separated
by a distance of one half wavelength.
The maximum displacement of the standing wave () occurs when the sine functions of time and position both equal 1, and it
is twice the amplitude of the traveling waves that compose it. This is referred to as the "amplitude" of the standin g wave.
The period of oscillation of the standing wave (the tim e it takes to get back to where it started) is the same as the period of the
traveling waves that compose it ().
This one-dimensional function cannot be written in the f orm, but it is a solution of the wave equation. The reason is
that the ambiguity of the sign of is washed away in the squa re of in the wave equation. We originally described a wave as a
phenomenon that transports energy from one position to an other, and a standing wave clearly does not do this, so it is pro bably
better described as a special time-varying interferenc e pattern.
Note that we could have insisted that the end of the me dium at the origin is free rather than fixed. This wo uld result in no phase
shift for the reflected wave, and it is left as an e xercise to show that this results in a standing wave fu nction with two cosine
functions replacing the two sine functions in Equation 1.5.7.
Standing Wave Harmonics
The formula for a standing wave is still rather abstra ct, in that it really only restricts the behavior of the standing wave at a single
point (the origin), and assumes that we know the wavelen gth and period. Here we will consider a different restric tion, one that is
more useful for physics applications. We will define a distance between two endpoints, and insist that a standing wave forms
between them. We also need to specify if the ends are held fixed or are free. If an end is fixed, it must b e a node of the standing
wave, and if it is free, it must be an antinode, so t his greatly restricts the standing waves that can be f ormed. In particular, it puts
very specific restrictions on the possible wavelengths a st anding wave can have.
Let's start with the longest possible wavelength that a standing wave can have if its two ends are separated by a distance. There
are three possibilities in terms of the node/antino de endpoints: Both ends can be fixed (nodes), both e nds can be free (antinodes), or
there can be one of each type at the two ends. Note tha t in the first two cases, the distance between the two end s must equal onehalf wavelength, while in the third case the distance between the ends is one-quarter wavelength (again, we are looking specifically
at the longest possible wavelengths to satisfy these conditions).
Figure 1.5.7 – Longest Wavelength Standing Wave – Both Ends Fixed

1.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
Figure 1.5.8 – Longest Wavelength Standing Wave – Both Ends Free
Figure 1.5.9 – Longest Wavelength Standing Wave – One End Free, One End Fi xed
In the Figures above, the dark curves indicate the e xtent of the medium (i.e. that which is actually vibr ating). The gray portions are
only added to show the actual wavelength of the standing wave and how it relates to the length of the medium.
These are not the only standing waves possible for the given length. An infinitude of additional standing waves are possible with
shorter wavelengths as well, but only certain wavelengths will work. We can characterize these by the number of nodes o r
antinodes present. The set of standing waves allowed f or a given length of medium are called the harmonics of the system. The
harmonic with the longest possible wavelength is called the fundamental harmonic, and the rest are numbered up from there
according to frequency.
Speaking of frequency, it must be noted that the freq uency of oscillation of a standing wave changes from o ne harmonic to the next.
As we have already seen, the wavelength of the standing wa ve equals the wavelength of the the two opposite-moving traveling
waves, and the period (or frequency) of the standing wave matches the traveling wave periods as well. If we c onsider a shorterwavelength standing wave (one with more antinodes), the n the wavelength of the traveling waves that make it mu st also be shorter.
But the medium is unchanged, so the speed of those tra veling waves must remain the same. This can only be t rue if the frequency
of the traveling wave has gone up, which means the frequenc y of the standing wave must also go up.
We define the harmonic as that harmonic with a frequency that is times as gr eat as the fundamental harmonic. Let's see what
that means for the three possible endpoint condition s. We'll start with both ends fixed. For the fundamenta l harmonic, we found that
the wavelength was double the length of the medium. Th e next shortest wavelength would include a single node between the two
endpoints, and as allowable standing waves get shorter and shorter, we simply keep adding nodes, one at a ti me (this can be
described as fitting an additional half-wavelength bet ween the endpoints each time).

1.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
Figure 1.5.10 – Harmonics, Both Ends Fixed
The pattern for this case is clear: The possible s tanding wave has a frequency of times the fundamenta l harmonic, which
means that the each time we add an antinode, we get th e next-highest harmonic, and the number of antinodes equals the order of
the harmonic. Mathematically we summarize it this way (is the speed of the traveling wave on the string):
If we look at both ends free, we find that the same p attern emerges, which should be clear from the fact that the wavelength of the
fundamental harmonic is the same when both ends are fre e or fixed. The only difference between the two cases are that we count
the number of nodes to get the harmonic in the both ends free case, not antin odes, as we did for the case of both ends fixed.
When only one end is free, we get a different result when it comes to counting harmonics. We still squeeze additional half
wavelength between the endpoints for the next possible wave, but the frequencies of the harmonics have a diff erent relationship to
the fundamental.
Figure 1.5.11 – Harmonics, One End Fixed, One End Free
Notice that in this case each time a half-wavelength i s added, the frequency jumps an amount equal to two fundamental harmonics.
So for the case of one end fixed and the other end fr ee, the allowed standing waves include no even-numbere d harmonics.
Mathematically:
Example
Two boards with nails separated by different distance s are combined with uniform strings that have differe nt lengths and
masses, to form one-string guitars.
Show that these guitars make tones of the same pitch (as determined by their fundamental harmonics) when the fo llowing
quantity is the same for both:
where is the tension in the string, is the length of the string, is the mass of the string, and is the distance separating the
nails.

1.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
Solution
The frequencies of the fundamental harmonics must be equal, which means:
With both strings exhibiting their fundamental harmonics, they both have the same relationship between their wavelengths at
the nail separations – in both cases the nail separation is half a wavelength:
The speed of the traveling waves that create the standi ng wave is determined by the tension and the string dens ity. The string
is uniform, so its density is the ratio of the string's mass and it s length. Therefore:
Plugging this in above gives:
Example
Since the time of ancient Rome, commanders of armies have known that it is prudent to have the troops break stride in their
march when crossing a wooden bridge. This is because if t he troops march in a synchronized cadence, they produc e a periodic
coordinated jolt to the bridge, which could excite one of its natural harmonic frequencies, causing a sta nding wave to develop in
the bridge.
a. If a marching army does create a standing wave in the bridge, wh at aspect of this standing wave (,,,) would be
directly responsible for causing the bridge to break apart? Explain.
b. Suppose a platoon comes upon a wood & rope bridge that is su pported only at its two ends. The commander stops the
company short of the bridge and shakes the nearest end of t he bridge, testing to see if it seems strong enough to ho ld the
troops. The bridge ripples all the way down its length, wi th the pulse reflecting off the other side and returning, for a round trip time of about. Find the frequency of the fundament al harmonic standing wave for this bridge.
c. The commander decides the bridge is sturdy, and makes the tragic d ecision to order the company to march on. Their
marching pace and spacing is such that a standing wave forms i n the bridge, and the ropes break when the center of the
bridge dips well below its usual point as two outer parts of th e bridge surge upward. Find the marching pace of the company
in steps per second.
Solution
a. The bridge breaks apart when various components are st retched and separated so far that they can no longe r hold
together. This deformation of the bridge is a direct resu lt of the amplitude of the standing wave. Put another way, the
violence with which the bridge shakes is a measure of the energy put into it, and the energy in the standi ng wave is a
function of its amplitude.
b. Call the length of the bridge and the speed of the wave. The time it takes the wave to travel two le ngths of the bridge is
given as 2.5s, and in terms of the distance traveled and sp eed of the wave, we have:
For the fundamental harmonic, the length of the bridg e (which is fixed at both ends) is one-half waveleng th, so plugging in a
half wavelength for gives:

1.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448
c. The description of the standing wave makes it clear t hat it has three antinodes, which means it is the 3rd h armonic. The
two ends of the wave are fixed, so the third harmonic o ccurs at three times the fundamental frequency, or. F or the
footfalls to excite this harmonic, they need to match this fr equency, so the marching pace is 1.2 steps per second.

Alert
If you are a musician, you likely have heard of overtones. At the simplest level (like one-dimensional standing waves with both
ends fixed or free), these are synonymous with harmonics. But in the one-dimensional case when one end is free, or in the case
of two-dimensional standing waves (like those produce d by a membrane on a drum), these definitions diverge. We will not go
into the details of these divergences, and the rare t imes we refer to the "first overtone," we will mean simply the next highest
allowable harmonic.
Energy In Standing Waves
Let’s consider the case of a second harmonic standin g wave on a string between two fixed ends. We know the following things to
be true:
Between the endpoints, there is exactly one full wave moving ri ght and an identical full wave moving left at all times.
Each of these waves contains an amount of energy that is pr oportional to the square of its amplitude.
The standing wave has an amplitude twice as great as the amp litude of each individual traveling wave.
So the question is, doesn’t doubling the amplitude mea n the standing wave has four times the energy of an individual traveling
wave? If it does mean this, where does this extra energy come from, if there are only two such waves providing energy?
This apparent paradox stems from something we discussed earlier – it is dangerous to think of a standing wave in the s ame context
as a traveling wave! This is especially true in the context of energy d istribution. Let's consider the energy of a single p article in a
medium as a harmonic wave passes through. Such a partic le is following harmonic motion, so if it happens to be at the crest or the
trough of the wave, then its kinetic energy is zero, wh ile its potential energy is a maximum. Conversely, if it is at the middle, then it
has its maximum kinetic energy and no potential energy. But no matter where it is in the phase of the wave, its ener gy is the same.
Now compare that with a particle in the medium of a st anding wave. If the particle is at a node, then it ne ver moves, and is never
displaced from equilibrium, so its energy is zero. A p article at an antinode, on the other hand, has lots o f energy. The amplitude of
its harmonic motion is twice the amplitude that a par ticle on one of the two traveling waves would have, if t he second wave wasn't
there.
The bottom line is that the standing wave, when viewed as an interference pattern, clearly just redistributes the energy of the two
traveling waves (which themselves distribute the energ y uniformly), taking energy away from some regions of the medium and
giving it to others. With some clever calculus, we can s how that this works out exactly.
If the string has a linear density of, then an infini tesimal segment of the string of length has a tiny m ass of. A
traveling wave has every such infinitesimal segment osc illating with the same amplitude, so every particle o n the string contributes
the same infinitesimal energy, and adding these contri butions for a full wavelength gives:
The density of the string, the frequency of oscillatio n, and the amplitude of oscillation are the same fo r every particle in the string,
so they do not vary with, which makes the integral simple t o perform:
The segments of the string for a standing wave behave differently. They all vibrate harmonically (with the nodes exhibiting zero
vibration), but they reach different maximum displac ements. Put another way, a standing wave is a collection of an infinite number
of harmonic oscillators, all with different amplitudes. So we need to write down the energy for each particle, and add them all up.

1.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18448The waveform of the standing wave gives us the amplit ude (which we will call) of particle oscillation as a function of position
, so from Equation 1.5.7, we have:
Recall that is the amplitude of the two traveling wave s that are interfering. The energy of this tiny piece of the string is:
Putting in and and integrating over the full waveleng th of the wave, we get:
Making the substitution leaves an integral that is easy to look up, and gives the following answer:
Comparing this with the answer for the traveling wave, we see that it is twice as much – the energy content of the standing wave
equals the sum of the energies of the two traveling wa ves that interfere to create it. If we want to write t he energy contained in a
single wavelength of a standing wave in terms of the s tanding wave's "amplitude" (the amplitude of the har monic motion located at
an antinode), we have:
This page titled 1.5: Standing Waves is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Physical Optics
3.1: Light as a Wave
3.2: Double-Slit Interference
3.3: Diffraction Gratings
3.4: Single-Slit Diffraction
3.5: Thin Film Interference
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
3.7: Polarization
This page titled 3: Physical Optics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184523.1: Light as a Wave
What is "Waving"?
The jump from mechanical waves to sound was a difficu lt one, mainly because the "displacement" of the wave c hanged from
matter that oscillates back-and-forth, to (in the c ase of sound in a gas) oscillations in pressure or de nsity. This difficulty gets greatly
magnified for the case of light. We know that light is a wave based on how it behaves – it exhibits the sam e properties of other
waves we have examined – it interferes with itself, it f ollows an inverse-square law for intensity (brightness), and so on. But we
also know that we can see light from the sun, moon, and stars, which means that light waves can travel through the vacuum of
space. Unlike every other wave we have seen, it doesn' t require any medium at all! So what do we use as the "displacement" for our
wave function?
Back in the 19th century, physicists studied extens ively the subjects of electricity (lightning, shocking your finger on a doorknob,
balloons sticking to your hair, etc.) and magnetism (compasses, sticking things to your refrigerator, etc.). It started becoming clear
that the two forces, while different, had some links. Ele ctric currents were found to affect compass needles, a nd magnets moving
near wires were found to create electric currents. It all came together with an amazing (for the time) ef fort in mathematics by a man
named James Clerk Maxwell. He showed that changing electr ic fields could induce magnetic fields, while changin g magnetic fields
could in turn induce electric fields. This is a recip e for propagation of these fields, and the equation he derived for this propagation
was exactly the wave equation! So he predicted, from r esults taken from experiments in electricity and mag netism, that an
electromagnetic wave could be produced. The wave equation included physi cal constants from both electricity and magnetism, and
extracting the wave speed from this equation resulte d in a number Maxwell was already familiar with – the s peed of light. It is
traditional to denote this speed with a lower-case 'c':
So the "displacement" of such a wave is actually the e lectric and magnetic field vectors (both types of f ields are waving
simultaneously, with each inducing the other) in the space through which the light wave is traveling. Don't worry that this doesn't
make much sense right now – it should be a bit clearer when you get to Physics 9C and study electricity & magnetism.
Okay, so for light we now have the wave speed and the "di splacement." Let's address a couple other elements of light as a wave.
First, a medium is not needed, as electric and magnetic field can exist in a vacuum. The presence of a med ium (such as air or water)
does effect the electric and magnetic fields, because me dia are made up of atoms, which are composed of positi ve and negative
electric charges. Because of this, the speed of light within a medium is different (slower) than its speed i n a vacuum. Mathematics
and experiments show that light is a transverse wave – the electric and magnetic field vectors point in dir ections that are
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the light wav e (and as it turns out, they also rare always perpendicular to each other).
Figure 3.1.1 – Electromagnetic Wave

3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18452
The red arrows in the figure above represent electri c field vectors, and blue arrows magnetic field vector s. Specifically, this is a
plane-polarized EM wave, which means the field vectors of a given type remain in a single plane. We will discuss plane
polarization soon, but it should be noted that EM waves do not have to behave this way, so long as the elec tric and magnetic field
vectors remain perpendicular to each other and to t he direction of motion. For example, a circularly polarized EM wave features
electric and magnetic field vectors that circulate their directions (while remaining perpendicular to e ach other and the direction of
motion) as the wave propagates, like the hands of an analog clock, and can do so in a clockwise or counterclockwise ma nner.
Finally, we need to say two things about light percepti on. For sound, intensity (proportional to amplitude-s quared) is perceived as
loudness, and for light it is brightness. For sound, freq uency is perceived as pitch, and for visible light i t is perceived as color. The
qualification "visible" must be appended because we can only see a very limits spectrum of light frequen cies, the rainbow of colors
often described with the acronym ROYGBIV (Red, Orange, Y ellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet). The red end of the visible
spectrum exhibit the lowest frequencies, and the viole t the highest. But of course light waves can come in f requencies much lower
and much higher, and at various arbitrary cutoffs, th ey are given names you have probably heard before. In order of increasing
frequency below the red end of the visible spectrum we have: radio waves, microwaves, and infrared; and above the violet end of
the spectrum: ultraviolet, x-rays, and gamma rays.
Huygens's Principle
When we discussed the case of a wave on a string, we said that the wave causes each particle on the string to vi brate up-and-down
in harmonic motion. It should therefore not be surpri sing that if we grab the string at a single point and force it to vibrate in
harmonic motion, that a wave will propagate away from t hat point. In fact, this gives us a way of describing how the wave
propagates: The wave causes a single point to oscill ate, which in turn causes a wave to be generated, which th en vibrates another
point, and so on. In the 17th century a Dutch scientist named Christian Huygens generalized this idea to th ree dimensions. The
principle which now bears his name can be stated this way:
Every (3-dimensional) wave propagates by having every point on a wavefront being an independent generator of a new spherical
wave, and the interference of all of those individual s pherical waves results in the overall wave observed.
When we look at a single point light source, the farth er away it is, the flatter the light wavefronts will be wh en they reach us. When
the source is very far away (e.g. the sun), then the wavefronts are essentially flat. We call waves with suc h flat wavefronts plane
waves, for obvious reasons. But now the question arises, “If Huygens’s principle is valid, how can plane waves o ccur?” After all,
each point on the plane wave behaves as a point sourc e of a spherical wave. Let's look at the spherical wave contributions of many
point sources on a plane. We'll do this gradually, s tarting with just a few points on a plane, and filling in the spaces between them
little-by-little:

3.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18452Figure 3.1.2 – Plane Wave from Huygens's Principle
One might ask why a plane wave only propagates in a sin gle direction. Suppose a plane wave propagating to the right. If each new
wavefront becomes a source for a new wave, why don't wave s come out of it in both directions? It is difficult to express in a simple
diagram like the one above the effects of superposi tion, but the short answer is that there is destructive in terference between all of
the previous wavefronts and the new one, which results in zero wa ve energy traveling "backwards."
It should also be noted that a plane wave is a one-dim ensional wave, which means that its intensity does not drop off with distance.
But the intensities of the spherical wavelets do follo w an inverse-square law. So if they get weaker with dist ance, why don't plane
waves? The reason is that the farther a wavelet trave ls, the more other wavelets it encounters. These encoun ters result in
constructive interference, bolstering the amplitude (and therefore the intensity) The rate at which the wavelets encounter other
wavelets and constructively interfere is exactly enou gh to compensate for each wavelet losing its own indiv idual intensity,
maintaining the plane wave's intensity.
Where Huygens's principle becomes particularly useful is in explaining what happens when a plane wave encount ers a barrier. A
plane wave moves straight ahead because there is dest ructive interference of the wavelets in other direct ions. But a barrier removes
a number of wavelets by either absorbing or reflectin g the part of the wavefront from which those wavelets we re going to spawn.
The result is that the wave "bends around corners," a pheno menon known as diffraction.
Figure 3.1.3 – Diffraction from Huygens's Principle

3.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18452
Like other wave phenomena, this is not unique to light. Ocean waves diffract around barriers like reefs, pe ninsulas, and docks. It's
certainly possible to hear a sound made from around a corner. It should be noted that the part of a wave t hat diffracts around a
corner is no longer a plane wave, and is subject to the reduction in intensity the farther it travels. Of co urse reflections of waves are
also responsible for their ability to change directio n in the presence of barriers, but the phenomenon of diffraction in conjunction
with interference leads to other important observable pr operties that we will deal with next.
Alert
You should be aware that diffraction is so intimately tied up with the interference effects that it causes (the subjects of the next
few sections) that many physicists use the word "dif fraction" to indicate the interference phenomena the mselves, rather than the
"going around corners" definition.
This page titled 3.1: Light as a Wave is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184533.2: Double-Slit Interference
Splitting a Light Wave into Two Waves that Interfere
We now return to the topic of static interference pa tterns created from two sources, this time for light. As with sound, we first need
to start with two light sources that are at the same f requency. In the case of light, we say that the source s are monochromatic. For
sound we were able to keep track of the starting phase s of sounds coming from separate speakers by connecti ng them to a common
source, but for light it’s a bit trickier. There sim ply isn’t a way to coordinate the phases of light waves coming from two
independent sources (like two light bulbs). Light wav es from multiple independent sources have phases that ar e essentially
distributed randomly, resulting in a variety of ligh t referred to as incoherent. In fact, even light from a single source such as a n
incandescent bulb is incoherent, because the vibrati ons of the various electrons that create the waves a re not coordinated. It turns
out (for complicated reasons we won’t go into) that af ter light travels a long distance the coherence of t he waves grows (so light
from the sun is highly coherent), but for experimen ts with light sources located here on Earth we are for ced to use lasers, which do
produce coherent light. Again, the reason that laser ligh t is coherent is complicated, and outside the scope of thi s class.
Even with the coherence available from a single lase r, we cannot coordinate the phases of two separate lase r sources, so we need to
somehow use the waves coming from a single laser source. We do this by directing the light from a single so urce through two very
narrow adjacent slits, called a double-slit apparatus. Huygens’s principle assures us that then each slit bec omes a source for a
spherical wave emanating from the position of each sl it, and since the wavefront reaches each slit at the same time, the two sources
start in phase, just like the tones coming from two speaker s attached to the same source.
Okay, so to get an idea of the interference pattern c reated by such a device, we can map the points of cons tructive and destructive
interference. We can do this by mapping what happens t o two spherical waves that start at different position s near each other, and
specifically keeping track of the crests (solid circ les) and troughs (dashed circles). [Note: The two waves shown are in different
colors to make it easier to distinguish them – the actual light from both sources is all the same frequency/wavele ngth/color.]
Figure 3.2.1 – Double-Slit Interference
A coherent plane wave comes into the double slit, and thanks to Huygens's principle, the slits filter-out on ly the point sources on
the plane wave that can pass through them, turning th e plane wave into two separate radial waves, which then interfere with each
other. Whenever a crest meets a trough there is tot al destructive interference, and whenever two crests or two troughs meet, the
interference is (maximally) constructive. We notice a number of things here:

3.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453If we watch the points of total destructive and maximall y constructive interference as the waves evolve, they foll ow
approximately straight lines, all passing through the ce nter point between the two slits.
Because of symmetry, we see that these lines are symmetric ab out the horizontal line that divides the two slits, and that the
center line itself is a line followed by a point of maxima l constructive interference.
These lines alternate in type as the angle increases – t he central line is constructive, the lines on each side wi th the next-greatest
angle trace points of destructive interference, the nex t pair of lines trace points of constructive interference, and so on.
There are a limited number of these lines possible.
How are these effects perceived? Total destructive interference means zero intensity, which is the absence of any wave – darkness.
Constructive interference is perceived as bright lig ht, so if we placed a reflecting screen in the way of these light waves, we would
see alternating regions of brightness and darkness, called fringes. It should be noted that the brightness varies conti nuously as one
observes different positions on the screen, but we a re focusing our attention on the brightest and dark est positions only. For the
figure above, the screen would exhibit a central bright fringe directly across from the center point between the sl its, then the first
dark fringes some distance off-center, then more bright fringes outside of those. It is possible for a double-slit apparatus to produce
either more or fewer fringes, depending upon the slit separation and the wavelength of the light. We will d iscuss the roles these
variables play next.
Geometry of a Double-Slit Apparatus
Since we are (for now) only considering the brightest and darkest points, we can work with lines and geometry to get some
mathematical answers. As stated above, these points o nly approximately follow straight lines from the center point, so our an alysis
will necessarily require some approximations. Whenev er this is the case in physics, it is important to mak e a note of the physical
features that go into determining the usefulness of the ap proximation as well as the tolerances we are willing to accept.
We begin by defining the slit separation () and the distance from the slits to a screen where the brightne ss interference pattern is
seen (). We also label some of the quantities related to t he position on the screen in question.
Figure 3.2.2a – Double-Slit Geometry
We are looking for those lines that define the dest ructive and constructive interference, so we want to e xpress things in terms of a
line that joins the midpoint of the two slits and th e point located at. In particular, we are looking f or the angle that this line
makes with the center line. We already know the center line traces a constructive interference, so our fina l answer should reflect
this for.
The key physical argument we make here is that the wav e that travels to from the upper slit has a shorte r trip than the wave that
gets there from the lower slit. The two waves start at the same time, and in phase, so this difference in di stance traveled ()
accounts for the phase difference in the two waves th at causes interference. So to relate the interference witnessed at to, we
need to determine how () is related to.
As a start, we will draw in the line that goes from the midpoint of the slits to, and label a bunch of angles:
Figure 3.2.2b – Double-Slit Geometry

3.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453
Now we need to do some math and apply some approximatio ns. The tangents of these angles can be written in ter ms of the sides of
the triangles they form:
We don't actually require this math to convince us that if the slit separation is very small compared to the distance to the screen (i.e.
), then these three angles are all approximately eq ual. This is a good approximation, as this phenomenon is typically observed
with slits separated by distances measured in fractions of millimeters, while distances to the screen are me asured in meters. So
henceforth we will make no mention of the angles and.
The next step is to break the lower (brown) line into two segments – one with the same length as the top (re d) line that touches
but doesn't quite reach the lower slit, and the othe r with the additional distance traveled, () that con nects the first line to the
lower slit. Then with the two equal-length segments, form an isosceles triangle:
Figure 3.2.2c – Double-Slit Geometry
Returning to our angle approximation where the top a nd bottom lines are approximately parallel, we see th at this triangle has
approximately two right angles at its base, which means there is a small right triangle formed by the base of the triangle,, and
the slit separation. Imagine rotating the triangle clockwise. The angle at the top of this small triangle closes to zero at exactly the
same moment that the blue line coincides with the center line, so this angle equals:
Figure 3.2.2d – Double-Slit Geometry

3.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453
This gives us precisely the relationship between and that we were looking for:
Now all we have to do is put this into the expression fo r total destructive and maximally-constructive interf erence. We know that
total destructive interference occurs when the diffe rence in distances traveled by the waves is an odd numb er of half-wavelengths,
and constructive interference occurs when the the differen ce is an integer number of full wavelengths, so:
Let's take a moment to examine these equations, comparin g what they require with the bulleted observations we made a bove:
The plus-or-minus values of the integer confirms that the fringes are symmetrically reflected across the cent er line.
The case of for constructive interference correspon ds to the center line.
Moving out from the center, the next fringe of any kind o ccurs when for destructive interference. Then the next occurs
for for constructive interference, and so on – the bright and dark fringes alternate.
Not all integer values of will work, because the absolute v alue of can never exceed 1. When the absolute value of gets
too high, this relation cannot possibly hold, placing a l imit on the number of fringes. This limit is determine d by the ratio of the
wavelength to the slit separation.
It is sometimes useful to convert this result into me asurements of distances from the center line on the s creen, rather than the angle
. To get this, we need the distance, which was not ne cessary for the solution above (other than assuming it is much larger than
). Calling the distance from the center line to the fringe, we use the fact that the tangent of the an gle is the rise over the run
() to get:
So long as we are careful, we can simplify this with a se cond approximation. If the angle is small, then the tangent and sine of that
angle are approximately equal. This simplifies the above re sult to:
This shows us that for small angles, fringes of the same type are equally-spaced on the screen, with a spacing of:

3.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453
Example
Below are four depictions of two point sources of l ight (not necessarily caused by two slits), using th e wave front model. These
depictions are “snap shots,” meaning they are frozen at an instant in time, but the questions below pertain to w hat happens in
real time. Solid lines represent crests, and the dotted l ines troughs. For each case, determine the following, an d provide
explanations:
a. Will these sources create a fixed interference pattern on the distant screen?
b. If there is an interference pattern, what will appear at the point A on the screen, which is directly across from t he midway
point between the two sources? That is, will it be a bri ght fringe, a dark fringe, or something in-between?
c. If there is an interference pattern, how many bright fringes will appear on the screen?
Solution
I.
a. Yes. The sources have the same wavelength (and the refore the same frequency), which means that their in terference
pattern will not have a time-dependent element to them (i.e. th ey will not provide the light equivalent of “beats”).
b. Bright fringe. The two waves start in phase, and tr avel equal distances from the sources to get to the c enter line, so they
end up in phase, resulting in constructive interference.
c. One can see by drawing lines through the crossings of crests & troughs that only 3 such lines will strike the screen
(parallel to the screen crests match with troughs, so thos e will not give bright fringes):

3.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453
We can do this mathematically by noting that these wav es start in phase, which means this is equivalent using
for bright fringes, and by noting from the diagram that the two slits are separated by a distance of. The fac t that
can never be greater than 1 puts a limit on. This is a n integer that can’t be greater than 1.5, so its maximum value is 1,
leaving us with 3 bright fringes.
II.
a. Yes. The same reasons as given above for (I.a) apply.
b. Bright fringe. Same reasoning as II.b
c. Now it is not possible (or at least exceedingly d ifficult) to draw in the lines that lead to construct ive interference, so the
mathematical method is the only practical approach. This t ime the slit separation d is clearly more than and les s than.
This means that the highest integer value of is 4. Wi th 4 bright fringes on each side of the central bright fringe, the total
number is 9.
III.
a. No! These two waves have different wavelengths, and therefore different frequencies, which means that when they
interfere, the resulting wave’ s amplitude (and therefore th e brightness) will be time-dependent.
b. N/A
c. N/A
IV.
a. Yes. Back to equal wavelengths.
b. Dark fringe. These waves start out-of-phase by radians, s o when they travel equal distances, they remain out-of-ph ase.
c. We can once again draw the lines that follow the path s of constructive interference:
The light sources are separated by as they were once before, but now the condition for constructive inter ference is
different, to make up for the starting phase differenc e. It is now:. We see that there are now two bright
spots associated with, and although there is a sol ution for, it gives, which means the light never reac hes
the screen, so the number of bright spots on the screen is 2.
Double Slit Intensity Pattern
The answers above only apply to the specific position s where there is totally destructive or maximally con structive interference.
What about the points in between? For this answer, we re turn to Equation 1.4.10, which relates any phase difference of two waves
to the intensity of the wave in comparison to its maxi mum intensity (when maximal constructive interference occurs). As noted
earlier, the only source of phase difference is the distanc e traveled by the two waves, so:

3.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18453
It's easy to see that this works correctly for the spec ific cases of total destructive and maximal constru ctive interference, as the
intensity vanishes for the destructive angles, and e quals for the constructive angles. If the angle is small, then we can
approximate this answer in terms of the distance from the ce nter line:
Activity
To see all the features of double-slit interference, check out this simulator. To simulate double slit interference for light, t ake the
following steps:
1. Select and click on the "Interference" box.
2. In the control box, click the laser icon:.
3. In the control box, click the "Screen" toggle box to see the fringes.
4. Click on the green buttons on the lasers to start propag ating the light waves.
5. In the control box, you can adjust frequency and slit separ ation to see the effects on the interference pattern.
6. You can click on the intensity toggle box in the contr ol box to see the graph of the intensity at the screen, as d escribed by
Equation 3.2.8.
7. You can even explore this phenomenon quantitatively (i.e. check the math derived above) by reading the slit separation in
the control box, dragging measuring devices from above the control box, and pausing the simulation.
This page titled 3.2: Double-Slit Interference is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454
3.3: Diffraction Gratings
Adding More Slits
After having determined the interference pattern asso ciated with two slits, it makes one wonder what would happen if many more
(equally-spaced) slits are added. We can recycle our geometrical analysis from the double slit problem to answer this question. Let's
look at the example of four slits.
We begin once again with the assumption that the dist ance to the screen is significantly larger than the se paration of adjacent slits:
). Starting with the lowest slit of the four as a "refe rence" and repeating the double-slit geometry for e ach slit going up from
there, we have a diagram that looks like this:
Figure 3.3.1 - Geometry of Four Slits
The in each case is the difference in distance trav eled compared to the reference slit. So the extra di stance traveled by the wave
following the blue path is three times as great as the e xtra distance traveled by the wave following the orange pat h.
Alert
This diagram is blown-up for clarity, but doing so make s the angles quite different from each other. With the proper scale in
place the approximations of equal angles (and equal ∆x’ s t hroughout) would be more apparent.
Okay, so as our first task, we will look for the positio n where the first bright fringe is located. For this to occur, we need all four
waves to be in phase, which means that has to be a ful l wavelength, giving us the same formula for bright fr inges that we found
for the double slit:
[It should be noted that the positions of the fringes on the screen are measured from the horizontal line pa ssing through the center
of the collection of slits, as we did with the double slit.]
Does this mean that the result for several slits is ide ntical to that of the double slit? Certainly not! Fir st of all, there are many more
sources of light, all interfering constructively, wh ich means that the bright fringes are much brighter. How much brighter? Well,
with four slits, as in the example here, the amplitud e of a single slit is multiplied by 4, making the in tensity (which goes as the
square of the amplitude) 16 times greater than a sin gle slit. For the double slit, the intensity was increa sed by a factor of 4 (the
amplitude was doubled). Therefore doubling the number of slits increased the intensity of the bright frin ges by a factor of 4. But
wait, doubling the number of slits only lets in twice as much ener gy per second, so how is the intensity increasing so much?
The answer to this puzzle involves how concentrated the bright fringes are. All bright fringes have a po int of maximum brightness
that tapers down to the dark fringes. If the rate at which the brightness tapers down is greater, then the brightness (energy density)

3.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454near those maximum points can go up, and the energy d ensity near the dark fringes goes down, such that the s ame total energy hits
the screen. But it turns out there is even a little more to it than this, as we will now see.
To demonstrate this phenomenon, it becomes necessary to redraw the figure above a little closer to the ac tual scale. We of course
cannot possibly get very close to the actual scale, a s slit separations are typically fractions of millim eters, while distances to screens
are usually tens or hundreds of centimeters, but we wil l use what space we can manage. As before, we will use the red line as the
reference, and compare the distances traveled by the oth er three light waves.
Figure 3.3.2a - Finding Dark Fringes
We'll start with the bright fringe, and start working our way closer to the central bright fringe until we h it a dark fringe. Strangely,
we find that the first position of total destructive i nterference we encounter does not occur at the halfway point, as it did for the
double slit! Note that when the distance equals three-quarters of a wavelength, then the wave that follows the blue path
will travel 1.5 wavelengths farther than the wave that f ollows the the orange path, and as this is an odd numbe r of half wavelengths,
these waves will cancel. The same is true for the waves t hat follow the brown and red paths, which means that posi tion will be
completely dark.
Figure 3.3.2b - Finding Dark Fringes

3.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454
So what happens if we keep going up the screen? We don 't find any more maximally-bright fringes (all four waves can't be in
phase), but we do find another totally dark position. It occurs when the distance equals one-half of a wavelength. In
this case, The wave that follows the blue path travels one half-wavelength farther than the wave that follows the brown path, and
the waves that follow the orange and red paths also di ffer in the distance they travel by one half wavelen gth. So the blue path and
red path waves cancel, as do the brown path and yellow path wave s, resulting in total darkness.
Figure 3.3.2c - Finding Dark Fringes

3.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454There is one other time when a dark fringe occurs. T his happens when the distance equals one-quarter of a wavelength.
Once again, alternate slits interfere with each other, as the wa ves travel distances that differ by a half-wavelength.
We can also show this phenomenon mathematically, by sup erposing (adding) the wave functions. The waves start i n phase at the
slits, so all of the phase constants are equal (and we cho ose them to be zero at), so all that remains of the wave functions is the
position dependence. Once again, all that matters ar e the differences in distances traveled with the reference slit (whose difference
with itself is zero), so the superposition intensity looks li ke:
Putting these functions into a graphing calculator c onfirms what we found above, as well as what we suspect ab out slits – that
there are dark fringes between each maximally-bright fringe.
Figure 3.3.3 - Comparison of Interference Patterns by Number of Slits
Notice that the bright fringes for any number of slit s occur at the same places as for the double slit (provided they have the same
slit separation), and that the number of dark fringe s between bright fringes goes up by one every time an other slit is added. Also
notice that the maximum intensity of the double slit is 4 units, the 3-slit case has a maximum intensity of 9 units, and for 4-slits it is
16 units, as we expect when the amplitude increases by on e unit with the addition of each slit. But also noti ce that the widths of the
bright fringes get narrower, indicating that the energ y becomes more concentrated near the brightness maxim a, and less
concentrated near the dark fringes.
It turns out that we can mathematically check that t he energy is in fact conserved by this mechanism. Rec all that the intensity is
related to power density, which means that if we integrate one of these curves over a full interval of space that the light is land ing
(say, between adjacent bright maxima), we get a measur e of the energy landing in that region per unit tim e. Once again the
graphing calculator comes in handy (unless integrat ing the intensity functions above is your idea of fu n) as areas under these curves
between maxima come out to be in relative proportion s of 2:3:4 – the total energy landing on the screen every second really is
proportional to the number of slits allowing light through!

3.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454Adding Many, Many More Slits
We know that the regions where the bright fringes peak get more concentrated light, and that there are more dark fringes between
them when the number of slits is increased. One can ima gine that in the limit where very many slits are used (a device called a
diffraction grating), the result is very sharp, very bright lines lines a t the points of maximum constructive interference, a nd
darkness everywhere else. As we will see, this will be an e xtremely useful feature. But there is one assumption we have made here
that needs to be emphasized. Because is so small comp ared to the distance to the screen, it was easy to igno re the fact that this
particular calculation required the assumption that the first bright fringe be farther from the center l ine than the outermost slit (we
assumed that the wavelength was long enough that this had to be true). So creating a sharper interference p attern for a given
wavelength of light by adding more slits at the same separation on both sides of the center line has limita tions, because when the
number of slits gets very large, the added slits go p ast the bright fringe. However, if more slits are added by squeezing them closer
together (making smaller), then for a given wavelength, the n not only are there more slits, but the angle to the first bright fringe
increases, thanks to the relation.
It is for this reason that diffraction gratings are generally characterized by their grating density – the number of slits per unit
distance. Of course such a number can be converted in to a slit separation: If a diffraction grating has a grating density of 100 slits
per, then the slits must be separated by. This numbe r can then be used in calculations for the angle at which
bright fringes are seen.
It should also be mentioned that like double slits, diffraction gratings do allow for more than one brig ht fringe (as before,
depending upon the ratio of and). For a typical do uble slit experiment, the goal is usually to show a br oad interference pattern –
many fringes. If the slit separation is too small, t hen the angles between the fringes are large, resultin g in very few fringes, widely
separated, foiling the goal of such an experiment. Bu t use of a diffraction grating has a different goal (very sharp bright fringes),
which requires that the slits be separated by much sma ller distances. This results in far fewer fringes, separ ated by large angles. So
while the calculation for the angles of bright fringe s is the same for both devices, for a given range o f wavelengths, their slit
separations are usually quite different.
Applications of Diffraction Gratings
It was stated above that sharp bright fringes are ver y useful in applications. To see why this is so, suppo se one wishes to use a
diffraction device to measure the wavelength of a mo nochromatic light. This is straightforward – shine the light through any
number of slits with a known slit spacing, and measur e the angle at which the first bright fringe is defle cted from the central bright
fringe, then plug into (with) and solve for. The only real challenge to this procedure is measuring th e angle. Of
course, if we shine the light onto a screen whose distanc e we know from the slits, we can measure the distances between the bright
fringes, and compute the angle from there. But still we have a problem if we want to be precise. If a doubl e-slit is used, then the
bright fringe is rather broad, and it might be chall enging to get a good measurement of its center. With a diffraction grating, the
bright fringe is much better defined. Furthermore, th e light we are looking at may not be very intense, an d a diffraction crating lets
much more of the light in, and the bright fringe is much easier to see than it would be for a double-slit.
But even these two advantages pale in comparison to th e third. We have not yet considered what happens if we l ook at light that is
not monochromatic. Suppose the incoming light is a mix of three or four colors. The separate colors don't in terfere in a static
manner with each other (they can create "beats," but the frequency differences for light are so great that these will not be
observable) they only observably interfere with them selves. As such, a beam of light with three colors will exhi bit three separate
interference patterns when passed though a single devi ce (i.e. they all experience the same slit separation). The wave with color
corresponding to the shortest wavelength will have its f irst bright fringe deflected by the smallest angle. I f this light is passed
through a double-slit, the interference patterns blen d with each other, making it hard to separate the co mponent colors. But a
diffraction grating makes three sharp, distinct, firs t-order bright fringes, making it easy to determine the constituent colors of the
incoming light.
An important part of the fields of chemistry and ast ronomy is the method of measurement called spectroscopy. In Physics 9D, you
will learn that matter emits and absorbs light in ve ry peculiar ways. You might think that electrons in ato ms can vibrate at any
frequency at all and therefore emit or absorb a nice, smooth continuous spectrum of light, but it turns o ut that they cannot. In fact
each atom has a unique “fingerprint” of specific fre quencies of light that it emits and absorbs. This mea ns that when light emitted
from a certain substance is passed through a diffracti on grating, this fingerprint is manifested as a spec ific set of bright fringes

3.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454
(called spectral lines). This means that we can ascertain from a distance (in the case of astronomy, very great distances!) the
composition of the matter that is emitting light. Th ese fingerprints are so specific and unique that eve n if several different
substances are emitting light, they can generally be sort ed out.
One might worry that since stars are moving relative to the earth, that we might get the elements wrong, since what we will see in
the spectrometer (a device with a diffraction grating) will measure do ppler-shifted wavelengths. But it isn't the exact pos itions of
the spectral lines that tells us the elements emittin g the line, but rather their relative positions. That is, every spectral line is
doppler-shifted, so the "barcode" essentially looks t he same for hydrogen regardless of its relative moti on, because the whole
barcode is just shifted toward longer wavelengths if i t is moving away from the spectrometer, and toward th e shorter wavelengths if
moving toward the spectrometer.
But astronomers can do even more than identify eleme nts in burning stars. We know what the barcode for hyd rogen looks like
when the source is at rest relative to the spectromet er, so when we see the hydrogen barcode pop up for a st ar, we can measure how
much the barcode in the spectrometer is shifted com pared to the stationary case, and we can use the amou nt of shift to determine
how fast the star is moving relative to earth!
Example
A spaceship is fitted with a light beacon before bla st-off. The light from this beacon is monochromatic, and wh en it is shone
through the apparatus pictured below, the angle of d eflection of the first order bright fringe is measured. The spaceship then
blasts off, and after several years of accelerating through outer space, it is moving away from the Earth a t a very high rate of
speed, and the light from its beacon is shone through the app aratus again (which is still on Earth).
a. Will the angle of deflection of the first-order bright frin ge for the beacon coming from the moving ship be greater o r less
than the angle measured before blast-off? Explain.
b. Suppose deflection angle of the first order bright fringe cha nges by 10% as a result of the spaceship’ s motion (so it is ei ther
90% or 110% of what it was before, depending upon your answer above). Find the speed of the spaceship. Assume that the
deflection angle is small, so that sine of the angle changes by the same percentage as the angle itself when measured i n
radians.
Solution
a. The ship is receding, so the source of the light is moving away from the receiver. This doppler-shifts the light to a lower
frequency, which corresponds to a longer wavelength. The relationship between the angle of the first brigh t fringe and the
wavelength is:
The separation of the slits doesn’t change, so as the wavelength gets longer, the sine of the deflection a ngle gets bigger,
which means the angle itself gets bigger.
b. From our answer above, the deflection angle has gro wn to 110% of what it was before blastoff. By our sma ll-angle
approximation, we can therefore say that the sine of the angle has grown by the same amount, which means tha t is how much
the wavelength has shifted longer. The doppler shift f ormula (for light) gives a relationship between the se nder’ s frequency
and the receiver’ s frequency when the two are moving away from each other, and we can turn this into a re lation between the
wavelengths using Equation 2.2.10:

3.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18454
We found that the received wavelength is 10% longer than the sent wavelength, which means that the ratio of these
wavelengths is 1.1. Plugging this in allows us to solve for the velocity of the source (i.e. the ship):
This page titled 3.3: Diffraction Gratings is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184553.4: Single-Slit Diffraction
Slits Are Not Actually Point Sources
In our discussion of the double slit and diffraction g rating, we made the assumption that the gaps that we cal l slits are so narrow
that they can essentially be treated as point sources, making the analysis using Huygens's principle simpl e to do. But in reality we
know that these gaps do not have infinitesimal width, and we need to consider what happens to the light when the approximation of
"very thin gaps" breaks down. To do so, we will not con sider a grating, or even a double-slit; we'll look at the effect that a single
slit of a measurable gap size has on the light that p asses through it. Notice that whatever this effect migh t be, when we extend the
result to two or more slits, the effect will occur for every slit, superimposing itself on the multiple-slit i nterference pattern. But we
are getting ahead of ourselves...
We already know that a plane wave passing through a s ingle slit will diffract around the corners, so it will not simply leave a single
bar of light on the screen the thickness of the gap – it will spread out. But what else can we say about it? Well, we know that
without the aperture, all the Huygens wavelets would con tinue interfering perfectly to continue the plane wa ve, but when the
portions of the plane wave outside the aperture are e xcluded, the effects of interference between wavelets is bound to change. We
will analyze the effect by essentially following the p rocedure for many (infinite number) of thin slits th at are infinitesimally close
together.
Single Slit Interference Pattern
Let's call the gap width of the aperture, and assume that this is much smaller than the distance to the screen, as in the figure
below. We then consider what happens to the wavelets o riginating from every point within this region. When we look at how the
screen opposite a single slit is illuminated, on the screen at the center line we observe a brightness max imum. You can think of such
a situation as an infinite number of double-slits tha t are split by the center line with different slit sep arations. For every wavelet
above the center line, there is a "twin" wavelet on th e opposite side of the center line that travels the same distance to the screen
(depicted by lines of the same color in the figure b elow), resulting in constructive interference. Of course, the fact that pairs
constructively interfere with each other does not gua rantee that the result of two constructively-interfe ring wavelets will not cancel
with two other constructively-interfering wavelets (i. e. one pair creating a doubly-high peak, and the oth er a doubly-deep trough).
In fact this can happen, but if it does, it's only fo r select wavelets – it can't persist for the entire ape rture and leave darkness at the
center line. Without going into the math, wavelets fin d it exceedingly difficult to find canceling partne rs at the center line, and on
balance the interference is highly constructive – the c enter line is the brightest point in the entire interf erence pattern.
Figure 3.4.1 - Wavelet Pairs Constructively Interfere at the Ce nter Line
Okay, so what about dark fringes – will we see these on t he screen? Yes! To see why, we will once again find pai rs of wavelets on
both sides of the center line, which in this case tra vel different distances to the screen, differing by one-half wavelength for the first
dark fringe. For this case, we pair-off the wavelet orig inating at the top of the slit with the wavelet origi nating just below the center

3.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455line, and continue pairing them as we go down, until th e wavelet at the bottom edge pairs with the wavelet or iginating just above
the center line. This is depicted in the figure belo w with pairs of lines of the same color. The differenc e in distances for these pairs
will all be the same (, where in this case is actual ly), and when this difference is one-half wavelength, they all cancel each
other pairwise, leaving a dark fringe.
Figure 3.4.2 - Wavelet Pairs Destructively Interfering at the First Dark Fringe
Note that the same geometry holds below the center lin e as well. Setting the extra distance traveled by the twin wavelets equal to a
have wavelength, we get the angle of the first dark fringe:
As we move upward on the screen, wavelets will again find t heir destructive twins and create dark additional dar k fringes. It is a bit
tricky for us to find the second dark fringe, however. The natural approach is to assume that the next dark fringe occurs when the
pairs shown above travel distances that differ by thr ee half-wavelengths, giving the result. But in fact this result
incorrectly skips the second dark fringe, and goes to t he third! To see why, we note that we can pair-off wave lets in a way other
than across the center line. Specifically, we can thin k of this single slit as two adjacent single slits, one that has the center line as its
lower edge, and one that has the center line as its u pper edge. In this case, the wavelets pair-off within the top half, and then again
within the bottom half separately. In this case, the on ly change in the math involves replacing with, whic h means the second
dark fringe satisfies:
We can similarly break the slit into three separate slits, which changes the separation of the starting wavel ets to, and increments
the constant in the formula to 3. For the dark fringe, we t herefore have:
The bright fringes only approximately follow the sam e spacing pattern, not exactly located halfway betwee n the dark fringes, but
using the pairwise approach doesn't tell us much about the intensity of those bright regions, for the same re ason it didn't for the
central bright fringe – constructive pairs will not be in phase with other constructive pairs. Significan tly more math is required to
deal with the intensity of the bright fringes.
Intensity
To compute the intensity of the interference patter n for a single slit, we treat every point in the slit as a source of an individual
Huygens wavelet, and sum the contributions of all the waves coming out at an arbitrary angle. One way to thin k of this is to go
back to the diffraction grating case, expressed in Equation 3.3.2. With the slit being completely open, however, the spa ce between
the slits () goes to zero, and the number of slits () goes to infinity. There is of course more to the c alculation than this, and either

3.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455
the calculus or the "phasor method" described by man y standard physics textbooks will reach the famous re sult below, and the
reader is encouraged to have a look at these derivat ions. But these derivations do not contribute to the understanding of this
phenomenon, nor are they procedures essential to a wide range of future physics calculations, so we will omit t hem here, and jump
to the end result.
If we define the amplitude of the total wave on the c enter line to be due to the superposition of all t he wavelets, then the
amplitude of the wave at an angle off the center line is given by:
Yes, you are reading that right, there is a sine fu nction of within another sine function. This is often written more succ inctly by
defining a new variable that is an implicit function of:
This function comes up frequently enough in math and physics that it has even been given its own name – it is sometimes referred
to as a sinc function.
Alert
It is important to understand that this expression co mpares the amplitude at various angles to the amplitude on the center line,
equal (or approximately equal) distances from the slit. It does not provide a comparison of the amplitude o f the light wave after
passing through the slit to the amplitude of the plane wave before it enters the slit.
We know that the intensity of the wave at the center line is proportional to the square of the amplitude there, and that the intensity
of the wave at an angle with the center line is propo rtional to the square of the amplitude there, and th at the constants of
proportionality are the same in both cases, so we immediatel y have a comparison of intensities:
If the angle happens to be small, then can be writt en as a function of distance from the center line o n the screen, as we did in
Equation 3.2.5 for the double slit, giving:
where, as before, is the distance from the slit to the s creen.
Perhaps you are concerned about the behavior of this function at the center line? After all, the value of the function there does
vanish, and this function appears in the denominator. B ut the numerator also vanishes at the center line, a nd L'Hôpital's Rule saves
the day, giving the sinc function a value of 1 for, resul ting in the intensity equaling, as it should.
A graph of the intensity of the full interference pattern looks like this:
Figure 3.4.3 - Single Slit Diffraction Intensity

3.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455
Let's point out a few of the more prominent features of this intensity pattern.
The dark fringes are regularly spaced, in exactly the ma nner described by Equation 3.4.3 (note:).
The central bright fringe has an intensity significan tly greater than the other bright fringes, more that 20 times greater than the
first order peak.
Using calculus to find the placement of the non-central ma xima reveals that they are not quite evenly-spaced – the y do not fall
halfway between the dark fringes.
We have assumed for simplicity the geometry of a long rectangular slit. If we were instead shining the light through a circular hole,
this pattern would occur in every direction of two dimension s, resulting in concentric bright and dark circles, rathe r than fringes.
Example
You are on a sunny Hawaiian beach, trying to relax af ter a grueling quarter of Physics 9B. You would like to recline in your
beach chair with your feet in the water, but don’t w ant to get crushed by shore break while you snooze. A bout 100 meters off
shore, you see an exposed reef that acts as a breakw ater, but there is a gap in it, and waves (whose crest s are parallel to the
shore) are coming through that gap. While watching t he waves, you see a surfer paddle out through the g ap, and you use the
perspective this event affords you to estimate that t he gap is 25 meters wide (the diagram below is not to scale). You time a wave
as it comes from the reef, estimating that it takes ab out 2 minutes for a wave to get to the shore from the gap, and the waves hit
the shore roughly every 7 seconds. Starting from the po int on the beach directly in line with the center o f the gap, roughly how
many paces (each pace being 1 meter in length) must you walk along the beach so that you can plant your bea ch chair and get
the minimum wave intensity?
Solution

3.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455
This is a problem in single-slit diffraction, where we ar e searching for the first “dark fringe” (place where destru ctive
interference occurs). We can use Equation 3.4.3 for finding the angular deviation from the center lin e for a single slit, but it
requires the wavelength of the wave as well as the slit gap. We have the latter, but we need to calculat e the former. We can
determine the wave speed and we are given the period, so:
Now we can plug this wavelength into Equation 3.4.3 to find the angle of the first dark fringe:
The distance from the gap to the shoreline and the angl e are known, so we can determine how far along the sh ore the dark
fringe hits:
So you need to walk 24 paces.
You might be tempted to use the “small angle” equation to solve this more directly, and in fact the angle is quite small. But
we have defined our measurement limits in terms of paces, and using the small angle formula we end up with an an swer of
23 paces, so while the approximation is very good (it i s only off by less than 5%), even our rather coarse meas urement
scheme notices the difference. [Okay, so "notice" might be too strong a word, as the wave intensity one pac e from a minimum
and 23 paces from the maximum is not going to be significant.]

Including Gap Size for Double Slits
Our analysis of double slits assumed that the slits we re very thin, creating point sources. But in the real world, t hese slits must have
finite gap widths (if the widths get too small, too li ttle light gets through to see anything!). So how can we incorporate our result for
single slit interference into what we found for double -slit interference? The easiest way to see the answer i s to think of the single
slit effect as putting limits on the light that come s through. If the light that would reach the screen in the absence of the single slit is
a plane wave, then these limits just consist of the si ngle slit intensity pattern (square of the sinc func tion). If the light destined to
reach the screen is instead a double-slit intensity pattern, then the effect of the single slit is to sq ueeze down the bright peaks
(reduce the brightness) so that they conform to the "envelope" of the single slit pattern. That is, the wh ole intensity pattern of the
double-slit becomes the " " for the single slit pattern. Mat hematically, this is equivalent to multiplying the inten sity functions:
Figure 3.4.4 - Intensity Pattern for Double Slit with Finite Gap Widths

3.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455
How does this actually appear to someone viewing it on the screen? The usual double-slit pattern is there, but the fringes are not all
equally-bright. The center fringes are very bright, and it quickly tapers off. The single slit pattern is apparent in the brightness of
the double-slit fringes. Notice, by the way, that we hav e assumed here that the slit separation is larger th an the gap widths. This is
apparent from the fact that the distance between dark fringes for the double slit is much smaller than it is for the single slit, and the
separations are inversely-proportional to the slit separation for the double slit, and inversely-prop ortional to the gap width for
the single slit.
Example
Light is shone through a double slit apparatus whose s lit gaps are wide enough to also exhibit single slit interference. The slit
spacing for this apparatus is 4 times as great as the g ap sizes. How many bright fringes from the double slit pattern appear
within the central maximum of the single slit pattern (i.e. be tween the first order dark fringes)?
Solution
We are given that, so comparing the bright fringe eq uation for the double-slit (Equation 3.2.3) with the dark fringe
equation of the single-slit (Equation 3.4.3), we see that the -order bright fringe of the former c oincides with the dark
fringe of the latter:
This means that the -order double-slit bright fringe w on’t appear, as the destructive interference of the si ngle slit will wipe
it away. The central bright fringe and the three fringe s (on each side) lie between these two endpoints. Thi s makes a total 7
double-slit bright fringes within the central single-slit maximum.
Diffraction for an "Inverse Slit"
We can use our knowledge of waves to determine the lig ht pattern we will see when the incoming plane wave dif fracts around a
thin barrier. Imagine starting with a plane barrier, out of which we cut a tiny sliver. Described above is what we see if coherent light

3.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18455is shone through the opening we have created in the barrier, but what if we shine the same light on just the sliver? That is, instead
of only allowing light to pass through a thin space, we le t the light pass everywhere except the thin space.
Imagine a tight laser beam in three different situa tions: First, it goes straight to the screen unimpeded. As with all laser beams, it
spreads very little during its journey. Second, it enc ounters a thin slit that is a little bit smaller than the width of the beam. Naturally
a single-slit diffraction pattern appears on the scr een. And third, the beam encounters only a sliver th at has the same dimensions as
the single slit, so that the outer edges of the beam go past the edges of the sliver. Our question is what happens in this third case.
Figure 3.4.5 - Three Laser Beam Results
If the light from the second case was allowed to super pose with the light from the third case, it should be pretty clear that the result
will be the first case. But for the second case, some light lands outside the beam's confines (thanks to d iffraction), which means that
for the superposition to occur, the third case must also send light to those outer regions with exactly the same amplitudes as the slit,
though the light from the sliver must be radians ou t of phase with the light from the slit. But if the sliv er is by itself, the light it
sends outside the beam region doesn't cancel with an ything, which means it shows up on the screen. The end result is that the
interference pattern outside the beam region must be the same for the sliver as it was for the slit.
What about the central bright fringe? For a single s lit, the central maximum is not as bright as the un impeded beam (because some
of the light energy is diverted by diffraction). For the superposition to apply, this means that the reg ion directly behind the sliver
must also be illuminated. The relative brightness of the central maximum with the outer fringes may be di fferent for the slit and the
sliver, but the fringe spacings are the same in both cases, giving essentially the same diffraction patt erns for both cases. This
phenomenon is known as Babinet's principle.
This page titled 3.4: Single-Slit Diffraction is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184563.5: Thin Film Interference
The Basic Idea
We have already seen three physical systems that resul t in interference patterns. While they all result in different patterns, they all
function in pretty much the same way: A single wave is broken into multiple in-phase wavelets à la Huygens's p rinciple, and these
wavelets interfere with each other after traveling di fferent distances to a position on a screen. Here we will see another interference
phenomenon, and this one is also based on two waves tra veling different distances, but this comes about due to reflection rather
than diffraction.
An important element to this is that waves that strike a surface of a new medium partially reflect and par tially transmit. This allows
for the possibility that a single incoming wave can result in two waves being reflected off a thin, transparent film. Part of the wave
reflects off the front surface of the film, and the o ther part off the rear surface of the film. These t wo reflected waves both come
away from the film in the same direction, but they tra vel different distances in the process, because one of them traverses the
thickness of the film twice, while the other does not. This difference can lead to destructive interferenc e, meaning that no light is
reflected!
This only scratches the surface of this phenomenon, ho wever, because there are two other very important thi ngs going on that we
have to take into account. The first of these is tha t waves which reflect off new media can possibly exper ience a phase shift of if
they reflect off a medium in which the wave moves mor e slowly (see Section 1.5 to review this phenomenon). The wave may make
a phase shift at the front surface, the rear surface, both, or neither. As the phase difference between the two waves is the only factor
that determines whether or not there is destructive in terference, knowing whether or not each reflected wave h as changed its phase
by is critical.
Figure 3.5.1 – Thin Film Destructive Interference
In the figure above, part of the incoming wave reflec ts off the front surface of the transparent film (th e red wave), and the rest of it
is transmitted into the film, after which it reflect s off the rear surface (the blue wave). [Note that the different colors of these waves
are used to distinguish them from each other, not to re present red and blue light – these waves have the sa me frequencies when they
interfere.] These two waves come out together and interfere, but the red wave has a "head start" both in displacemen t (the thickness
of the film), and in time – it is already propagatin g left while the incoming wave is still moving right, on its way to the rear surface.
Of course, the film thickness can be adjusted to whatev er we like, and in this particular case, it is one qua rter of a wavelength of the
light, which results in the destructive interference, as we c an see in multiple ways.
To determine the interference of these two waves, we ha ve to compute their total phase difference at the point when they
superpose. So let's consider the position and time when they first encounter each other – at the front surf ace after the blue wave has
reflected back to that point...
That position is the starting point of the red wave, so. For the blue wave it is a position one quarter wavelength fro m its
origin, so, giving:
At the moment when they meet, the red wave has been propagati ng for one-half period (it propagates for the period of time that
the incoming wave travels a quarter wavelength to the right, plus the time that the blue wave propagates a quarter wav elength

3.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456
back to the left), so. The blue wave only travels a qua rter wavelength by the time the two waves superpose, so it has
been propagating for a quarter of a period:. This give s us a difference in time-of-propagation of:
Both waves experience a phase shift upon reflection, and c ome from a common incoming wave where they were in phase, so
there is no difference in their phase constants:
Putting all this together gives us the phase differe nce of the two waves when they rejoin (note that by cho osing values of to be
positive measured to the left, the wave is moving in the positive direction, which means that the positio n and time parts of the
phase must have opposite signs):
With the two waves out of phase by, they interfere destruct ively:
We can just as easily ignore the time element by cho osing the zero time to be when the incoming wave first strikes the front
surface. In this case, both waves start at the same m oment (making), but the wave that strikes the rear sur face travels an
extra half wavelength, since it has to make a round-trip across the film. Of course, the same answer results, and this i s a somewhat
simpler way to view the phase difference.
Note that a film thickness is not the only way that de structive interference can occur. If the thickness was instead three-quarters of a
wavelength, then the round-trip distance for the tran smitted wave is 1.5 wavelengths, and it once again em erges from the film out
of phase with the reflected wave by radians. We will su mmarize the effect of film thickness shortly, but the re are a couple other
loose ends we need to tie up first.
The Effect of Phase Shifts
In the example above, we mentioned the phase shifts t hat occurred at the boundaries of the media, but th ey didn't seem to take part
in the calculation. This is because the same phase shi ft occurred at both boundaries. Suppose there was no third material involved
(depicted in dark brown in the figure above), and th at the film was by itself, surrounded on both sides wi th the exterior medium
(presumably air, but no necessarily). In this case, t here would be a phase shift at the reflection with th e front surface, but no phase
shift at the rear surface. Then the blue wave in the figure would not emerge upside-down, and it would come out in phase with the
red wave. Mathematically this is not hard to see, as the space (and time) parts of the phase difference calc ulation are unchanged,
but now we have the blue wave starting with a different phase than the red wave:. When we put this into the calculation of
the phase difference, we find that the two waves emerge in phase. For the waves to emerge out of phase, the film thickn ess would
need to be different. Specifically, a thickness of o ne-half wavelength (or some integer number of half wa velengths) will make the
distance traveled a full wavelength, which would norma lly make them in phase, but one of the waves is phase -shifted by, putting
them out of phase by that amount.
Example
A thin film of glass is in flush contact with a thin film of transparent plastic. Light travels faster throu gh the air than through the
glass, and faster through the glass than through the plastic. Monochromatic light is shone on both sides of this combination (the
same frequency of light on both sides), and there is a negligible amount light reflected from either side. If the two films are now
separated slightly to allow for a small air gap betw een them, and we repeat the process with the same ligh t, what will we see in
the way of light reflections from the two sides?
Solution
The only change that occurs with the separation is that the second reflection in both thin films is now off a surface in contact
with air. This means there will be no phase shift at th at reflection, since air has a lower index of refract ion than either film.
Before the separation, the second reflection within t he plastic was off a faster medium (glass), so there is no change to the

3.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456
phase shift for the plastic, and the same interference as before (destructive) will result. But the second reflection for the glass
film was previously off a slower medium (plastic), so chan ging that reflection so that it is off air will make it go from a
radian phase shift to no phase shift. With the film thi ckness the same as before, this means that light that pr eviously emerged
from the glass out of phase with the first reflection is now in phase with it, so light will be seen reflected off the glass film.
Light in a Medium
There is one element of this phenomenon that we have not yet accounted for. Clearly the film thickness ha s to be just right for the
timing of the two reflected waves to come out exactly out of phase. But when it comes to timing, there is a nother consideration –
the wave moving through the film is moving through a d ifferent medium than the wave that reflects off the first surface, which
means the two waves are moving at a different speeds. Clearly this will have to play a role in the timing that leads to the
interference effect. Let's have a look at the effects of me dia on the speed of light.
As we stated in Section 3.1, light will travel through a vacuum, and its maximum speed occurs through that (non)medium. When
light propagates through other medium that is transpa rent to it, it slows down. Going into what physical attribu tes of the media go
into slowing down the light and by how much is beyond t he scope of this course, but generally the effect is boiled down to a single
constant called the index of refraction. This constant () is dimensionless, and is a number g reater than 1 which provides the speed
of light through a medium in terms of the speed through the vacuum () according to:
When we discussed what happens when a wave passes from on e medium to another, we concluded that the frequency remains the
same, and the wavelength changes along with the veloci ty. This means that if a light wave is traveling from a medium with index of
refraction to a new medium with index of refraction, then the unchanging frequency gives the following relationship between
the two wavelengths:
Since the index of refraction is larger where the lig ht travels slower, then light passing into a slower/fast er medium will exhibit a
reduction/increase in wavelength.
All we need to do to complete the analysis above is use the proper wavelength for the light within the film. T hat is, with two phase
shifts, the film still needs to have a thickness of o ne quarter (or three quarters, or five quarters, etc.) of the wavelength of the light,
but that wavelength must be as measured within the film. Putting it all together, destructive interference o ccurs when light is
reflected off a thin film when the light reflected o ff the front and rear faces emerge radians out of p hase, which occurs under the
following circumstances (the Greek letter is used for fil m thickness, to avoid confusion with the time variable):
You are encouraged to convince yourself that these fo rmulas do result in a phase difference of.
Putting It All Together
Let's put together a series of diagrams that reveal step-by-step what happens in thin film interference. Th ere are several
circumstances possible, but we will choose a film tha t has a thickness of three wavelengths of the light (a s measured within that
film), and assume the light is coming from a medium with a lower index of refraction, while behind the fil m is a medium with a
higher index of refraction.
Figure 3.5.2 – Step-By-Step Thin Film Interference

3.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456

3.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456

Applications
This phenomenon can be observed and exploited in sever al ways. Let's start with observations...
Sunlight that reflects off a thin film of oil floatin g on a puddle of water will exhibit thin film interfe rence in an interesting manner
that comes about because the light is comprised of many wavelengths, and the film of oil is not uniform in thickness. The light will
strike one part of the film, where the thickness hap pens to cause destructive interference for light of a certain wavelength. While it

3.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456
is not totally destructive for nearby wavelengths, t hey are out of phase by a number very close to, whic h means that they are
barely seen. So if the thickness happens to cause destr uctive interference for light near the red end of t he spectrum, the reflected
light will look more blue. At other points in the fil m, the thickness may cause the blue light to be cancel ed. The result is a reflection
of a rainbow of colors. What is more, the variation in color tracks the thickness, so the observed rainbow swir ls look like the grade
lines on a topographical map, with each line of const ant color indicating a different film thickness. Th ese thickness variation
rainbows can also be seen other thin films, such as soap bubb les.
A practical application of this effect are anti-gla re films. When light strikes a thin film with air on both sides, if the film allows for
no light to be reflected (i.e. all the reflected ligh t destructively interferes), then conservation of ene rgy requires that all of the light
passes through the film to the other side. One place where one might want as much light as possible to pass t hrough is a camera
lens. Of course, cameras generally take photographs of o bjects illuminated by the entire spectrum of visible light, and it is
impossible for thin films to create destructive interfe rence for reflected light of all wavelengths at once. So generally the film
chosen works for the middle of the spectrum (green li ght), which means that it doesn't work well for the end s of the spectrum (red
and violet). With essentially only red and violet li ght able to be reflected by the film on a camera le ns, the lens takes on a dark
purple appearance.
The following example, while not a thin film problem, ne vertheless incorporates the effect of a medium on interfere nce patterns.
Example
A chamber is filled with an unknown liquid, held with in by a small rectangular hole in its side, as shown in t he diagram below.
The plug does not fit perfectly, and it allows light to pass through its top and bottom edges. Coherent monoc hromatic light is
shone through these tiny gaps, and an interference pat tern appears on the opposite wall of the chamber. The plug is then
removed from the rectangular hole, and some of the liq uid drains out. After it does so, a new interference pattern emerges above
the level of the liquid (assume this occurs with negli gible effect from the light reflected off the surfac e of the liquid). It is noted
that the position of the first dark fringe of this ne w pattern exactly coincides with the position of the second dark fringe that
appeared when the plug was still in place. Find the index of refraction of the unknown liquid. The index o f refraction of air is
approximately the same as a vacuum:.
Solution
When the plug is in, the small slits at the outer edg es that allow light to come in function as a double slit. The separation of
these slits is the width of the hole, which we will c all. The angle at which the dark fringes occur for th e double slit is given
by the usual double slit relation, Equation 3.2.3. We see the second fringe, which corresponds to, and the light is
passing through the liquid, so the wavelength in this eq uation is the wavelength within the liquid:
The source of light remains unchanged, so whether the light is passing through the liquid or (after the ch amber drains) the
air, the frequency is the same. This means that the wavel ength of the light through the liquid is related to the wavelength
through the air according to:
where is the index of refraction we are looking for.

3.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18456
When the plug comes out, the hole now becomes a single slit with the light traveling through air, and the g ap size of this
single slit (which we typically denote as) is exactl y equal to the double slit separation we used above:. The first dark
fringe for a single slit pattern corresponds to in t he formula, so putting this (and) into the formula giv es us a
relation between the wavelength of the light in air, the g ap width, and the deflection angle:
Putting these three equations together, we find that all of the unknowns except for the index of refracti on of the liquid cancel
out, leaving simply.
This page titled 3.5: Thin Film Interference is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
Rays
As we consider more phenomena associated with light, on e of our primary concerns will be the direction that light is traveling. We
already know that light, like any wave, travels in a direct ion perpendicular to its planes of constant phase:
Figure 3.6.1 – Light Waves Travel in Several Directions at Once
So in our wave view of light, we say that the light wave i s traveling in many directions at once, but now we are g oing to change our
perspective to that of an observer and a source. Whe n we do that, we narrow down all the possible direction s of the light wave
motion to a single line, which we call a light ray. This is a directed line that originates at the sou rce of light, and ends at the
observer of the light:
Figure 3.6.2 – Source and Observer Define a Ray
Alert
When most people encounter the idea of a light ray fo r the first time, what they think of is a thinly-conf ined laser beam. This is
not what is meant here! The ray has no physical meaning i n terms of the confinement of light – we just use it as a simple
geometrical device to link a source to an observer. Al ways keep in mind that the actual physical manifestat ion of the light is a
wave that is usually traveling in many directions at on ce! Our use of rays will become so ubiquitous that thi s will be easy to
forget.
Reflection
Consider a point source of light that sends out a s pherical wave toward an imaginary flat plane, as in t he left diagram below. When
the wave reaches this plane, then according to Huygen s's principle, we can look at every point on the plane and treat it as a point
source for an individual wavelet (center diagram bel ow). These wavelets are not in phase, because they are a ll travel different

3.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457distances from the source to the plane, and when the y are superposed, we know the result is what we see, which i s a continued
spherical wave (right diagram below).
Figure 3.6.3 – Spherical Wave Passes Through Imaginary Plane
Now suppose the plane is not imaginary, but instead re flects the wave. Every point on this plane becomes a source of a wavelet, but
this time, the wave created by these wavelets is going in the opposite direction. The wavelets have the sam e relative phases as in
the previous case, and they are completely symmetric, so they superpose to give the same total wave as before, with the exception
that it is a mirror image of the case of the imaginary pla ne:
Figure 3.6.4 – Spherical Wave Reflects Off Plane
Thanks to the symmetry of the situation, it's not di fficult to see that the reflected wave is identical to a spherical wave that has
originated from a point on the opposite side of the reflecting plane, exactly the same distance from the plane as the source, and
along the line that runs through the source perpendicular to the surface:
Figure 3.6.5 – Image of a Reflected Wave
Of course, there isn't actually a point light source on the other side of the refle cting plane, it's just that someone looking at the
reflected light – no matter where they look from – wi ll see the wave originating from the direction of th at point. We call such a
point an image of the original source of the light.

3.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457Now let's put this result in terms of light rays. To do this, we need a source and an observer, and this case, we will require also that
a reflection has taken place. Once again drawing the rays pe rpendicular to the wave fronts, we get:
Figure 3.6.6 – Law of Reflection
It's clear from the symmetry of the situation that the angle the ray makes with the perpendicular (the h orizontal dotted line) to the
reflecting plane as it approaches, is the same as th e angle it makes after it is reflected. This gives us the law of reflection, which
states that the incoming angle (angle of incidence) equals the outgoing angle (angle of reflection):
The beauty of introducing rays is that from this poi nt on, we can discuss sources and observers without a c omplicated reference to
the spherical waves and Huygens's principle – we can just use t he law of reflection and pure geometry.
Refraction
We saw that light waves have the capability of changi ng the direction of the rays associated with it throu gh diffraction. We now
consider another way that such a direction change ca n occur. This process, called refraction, comes about when a wave moves into
a new medium. To get to the essence of this phenomeno n from Huygens's principle, we don't have a symmetry tr ick like we did for
reflection, so rather than use a point source of the ligh t, we can look at the effect that changing the medium has o n a plane wave.
We saw in Figure 3.1.2 how a plane wave propagates according to Huygens's Prin ciple. We can't sketch every one wavelets
emerging from the infinite number of points on the wa vefront, but we can sketch a few representative wavelet s, and if those
wavelets have propagated for equal periods of time, t hen a line tangent to all the wavelets will represent the next wavefront. It's
clear that following this procedure for a plane wave wi ll continue the plane wave in the same direction. But now let's imagine that
such a plane wave approaches a new medium from an ang le, as shown in the figure below. As each point on th e wave front comes
in contact with the new medium, it becomes a source fo r a new Huygens wavelet within the medium. These wavelets will travel at a
different rate than they traveled in the previous m edium (in the figure, the light wave is slowing down in the new medium). This
means that the distance the wave in medium #1 travel s is farther than it travels in medium #2 during th e same time. The effect is a
bending of the direction of the plane wave in medium #2 r elative to medium #1.
Figure 3.6.7 – Huygens's Principle Refracts a Plane Wave

3.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457
The amount that the direction of the light ray chan ges when the wave enters a new medium depends upon how m uch the wave
slows down or speeds up upon changing media. In other wo rds, it depends upon the indices of refraction of th e two media. We can
actually calculate this effect by freezing the figure abo ve and looking at some triangles:
Figure 3.6.8 – The Geometry of Refraction
We are looking at what happens to a wavefront when it passes from position to position. The left side of t he wave front is
traveling within medium #2, during the same time peri od that the right side is traveling through medium # 1. The rays are by
definition perpendicular to the wavefronts, and we have defined the angles the rays make with the perpendicul ar in each medium as
and. Before we do any of the math at all, we immediately n ote:
Light passing from a faster medium into a slower medium be nds toward the perpendicular, and light passing from a slower medium
to a faster medium bends away from the perpendicular.
While the second of these conclusions is not expresse d in our figure, it's not hard to see that it must b e true, if we just imagine the
wavefronts in the figure moving up to the left from medium #2 to medium #1.
Now for the math. We have two right triangles (yellow a nd orange) with a common hypotenuse of length we have c alled. The
distance between wavefronts in the upper medium is th e speed of the wave there () multiplied by the time sp ent propagating,
while the distance measured within the lower medium is c alculated the same way, with a different speed (). The an gle (shown
on the right side of the diagram) is clearly the com plement of the acute angle on the right-hand-side o f the yellow triangle, which
makes it equal to the acute angle on the left-hand-side of the yellow triangle. We therefore have:

3.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457
Similarly we find for:
Dividing these two equations results in and dropping o ut, leaving:
This relationship between the rays of a light wave which changes media is called the law of refraction, or Snell's law. While this
works in either direction of light propagation, for re asons that will be clear next, it is generally accepted that the "1" subscript
applies to the medium where the light is coming from, and the "2" subscript the medium that the light is going int o.
Total Internal Reflection
It was noted above that light which passes from a slowe r medium to a faster one bends away from the perpendic ular. What happens
then if the incoming angle is made larger and large r (obviously it can't be more than)? For example, s uppose we have,
, and. Plugging these values into Snell's law gives:
The sine function can never exceed 1, so there is n o solution to this. This means that the light incident at this angle cannot be
transmitted into the new medium. Every time light strikes a new medium some can be transmitted, and some reflected, so this result
tells us that all of it must be reflected back into the medium in which it started. This phenomenon is c alled total internal reflection.
The angle at which all of this first blows up is the o ne where the outgoing angle equals (the outgoing lig ht refracts parallel to
the surface between the two media). This angle is call ed the critical angle, and is computed by choosing the outgoing angle to b e
Figure 3.6.9 – Partial and Total Internal Reflections By Incident Ang le
Note that there is at least partial reflection (obey ing the law of reflection) every time the light hits the surface, but all of the light
along that ray is only reflected when the ray's angle exce eds the critical angle.
Alert
Note that when light is coming from one medium to anoth er, unless that light is a plane wave, it will be movi ng in many
directions at once. Only the portions of the light w ave with rays that equal or exceed the critical angle are not transmitted into
the new medium. So the word "total" in "total internal reflection" to express the fraction of light at a s pecific angle that is
reflected back, not necessarily the fraction of all the lig ht that is reflected back.

3.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457
Example
The diagram to the right shows the path of a ray of mo nochromatic light as it hits the surfaces between four different media
(only the primary ray is considered – partial reflecti ons are ignored). Order the four media according to th e magnitudes of their
indices of refraction.
Solution
We know from Snell’ s Law that when light passes from a higher index to a lower one, it bends away from the p erpendicular,
so we immediately have. For the ray to reflect back f rom the fourth medium, it has to be a total internal
reflection (we are only considering primary rays, so t his is not a partial reflection), which can only oc cur when light is going
from a higher index of refraction to a lower one, so.
Dispersion
What determines the index of refraction for a mediu m is a very complicated problem in E&M, but there is one easily-observable
fact: The amount that a ray bends as it enters a new medium is dependent upon the light’s frequency. Specif ically, the higher the
frequency of the light, the more it bends – it esse ntially experiences a higher index of refraction when its frequency is higher. This
phenomenon is most evident when white light is shone th rough a refracting object. The most iconic example o f this is white light
through a prism.
Figure 3.6.10 – Dispersion Through a Prism
The emergence of the fully-separated spectrum of col ors from a prism is reminiscent of a rainbow, and in f act rainbows are also a
result of dispersion. Unlike the prism depicted above, however, internal reflection is an integral part o f the rainbow effect (and in
fact prisms can also feature internal reflection).
A droplet of water suspended in the atmosphere is a refracting sphere. White light that enters near the top of the droplet gets
dispersed inside the droplet, reflects, and then get s dispersed as it exits the droplet, sending rays of dif ferent-colored light in
different directions. The diagram below shows this effect for rays of red and blue light for two droplets.
Figure 3.6.11 – Rainbows

3.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18457
A few things to note here:
Notice that the sun always needs to be behind the obser ver in order to witness a rainbow. That’s why it seems to move as you
move, and why reaching the “end of the rainbow” is impossible (unless you can catch a leprechaun).
The reason it is shaped like a bow is that the sun is nearly a point source, so the geometry is symmetric around the li ne joining
the sun and the observer. If you create a “human-made r ainbow” with a light and some mist, you can get close to an e ntire circle
(minus whatever light your body blocks out).
The secondary rainbow above the primary one comes from the light that enters the bottom of the droplets, and has two internal
reflections. This reversed direction of the light bounc ing around inside the droplets results in the colors bei ng reversed (the
violet is at the top and the red at the bottom).
This page titled 3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Tom Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/191223.7: Polarization
Polarization Filters (Polaroids)
As stated previously when discussing the speed of light waves through transparent media, the mechanisms that go vern light
propagation through media are complicated. There is little we can say about it in this class, except to sa y that because the light
wave is electromagnetic in nature, it interacts with electric charge, which is present in all matter. It so happens that it is possible to
construct a solid substance which greatly restricts os cillatory motion of electric charges along a single dimension. The upshot of
this is that the charges react to electric fields al ong one direction (or rather, components of electric fields along one direction),
while they don't react along a perpendicular directio n.
This material can have a dramatic effect on light pa ssing through it. If the light is plane-polarized (see Figure 3.1.1), then its
propagation through a medium will be affected by the preferential orientation of charge oscillations. Wh en the light polarization is
aligned with what we define as the polarizing axis of the substance, then little of the light is absor bed by the substance (i.e. the
substance is transparent to this light), while if the light is polarized perpendicular to the polarizing axis, then virtually all of the
light is absorbed. Such a filter is called a polaroid or polarizer.
Figure 3.7.1 – Light Through a Polaroid
One interesting application of this phenomenon is 3- D movies. Long ago someone came up with a brilliant id ea for making movies
projected onto a 2-D screen appear in 3-D. The idea is based on the fact that a large component (but not the only one) of seeing in
3-D is stereo vision. Your right eye sees objects from one perspective, while your left eye sees it from a slightly different
perspective. You can see this is true by holding up yo ur finger in a fixed position and alternately openi ng-and-closing each eye.
Your finger’s position appears to change relative t o the background. This inventor’s idea was to project not one but two images
on the same screen. One image is recorded from the per spective of the right eye, and the other from the pe rspective of the left eye.
Then the trick is to make the right-perspective ima ge invisible to the left eye and the left-perspectiv e image invisible to the right
eye, so that each eye sees only its own perspective. T he original inventor did this with colors – red lenses obscure red images, and
yellow lenses obscure yellow light, so films were reco rded from two perspectives, and each perspective was p rojected in a different
color – one red and one yellow. But today we like our movies to be in realistic colors, so someone came up wi th the idea of
projecting the two images with differently-polarized l ight, and then give viewers glasses that only admit the properly-polarized
light into the respective eyes.
We have overly-simplified things here, in a couple o f ways. First of all, a light wave does not have to arr ive at the polarizer in
either a parallel or perpendicular orientation – it could be aligned at any angle with the polarizing a xis. What happens then? Well,
electric fields are vector fields, which means they can be broken into components, so the component of the electric field that is
parallel to the polarizing axis gets through, and the other component is absorbed.

3.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19122The second oversimplification is that not all of th e individual light waves that come from a source are necessarily polarized in the
same direction. In fact “natural” light from light b ulbs and the sun is “unpolarized,” which comes about bec ause each of the
individual light sources (atoms) are aligned in rando m orientations, and all send out random, unaligned l ight waves. When such
light is passed through a polaroid, half the light ge ts through. To see why this should be so, break every electric field vector of
every wave into components parallel and perpendicular to the polarizing axis. Because the wave polarizati on directions are
randomly-oriented, there is no reason to expect ther e to be a greater sum of components along one axis th an another. By “half the
light gets through,” what do we mean? We mean that th e intensity drops by one half. We look at the more general case of intensity
next.
Intensity
We can express the fact that half of natural light gets through a polaroid in a diagram as follows:
Figure 3.7.2 – Natural Light Intensity Halves Through a Polaroid
Now let's consider what happens if we send the natural light through two polaroids in succession. Clearly when the light reach es
the second polaroid it will be plane-polarized from t he first one. If the second polaroid is oriented the same as the first, then all the
light gets through, and the intensity is unchanged, an d if its polarizing axis is at right angles to the fi rst polaroid, then no light will
get through it. But now we seek to determine the intensi ty of the light that passes through the second polaro id if the angle between
their polarizing axes is somewhere between and.
This process all comes down to what happens to the electr ic field vectors. After passing through the first pola roid, all the electric
field vectors are aligned with that polaroid's polar izing axis. When those vectors come upon the second polaroid, just the
component of the field vector that is aligned with the new ax is gets through, resulting in a new vector shorter than the or iginal.
Figure 3.7.3 – Polarized Light Through a Polaroid
Resolving the original electric field vector into c omponents parallel and perpendicular to the polarizi ng axis, and keeping only the
parallel part means that the new electric field vector ma gnitude is:
The electric field vector is the amplitude of the light wave, and we are interested in the intensity. As with any other wave, the
intensity is proportional to the square of the amplit ude, so the relationship between the outgoing intensit y and incoming intensity
is:

3.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19122
This is known as Malus's law. Notice that it works exactly as we expect for the cases where the angle happens to be and.
Example
Unpolarized light enters a series of four polaroids wi th axes of polarization that are each rotated cloc kwise from the
previous polaroid, making angles of,,, and with s ome common reference point. What fraction of the intensi ty of the
incoming light is the intensity of the outgoing light?
Solution
When the unpolarized light passes through the first filter, the intensity is cut in half and comes out pola rized at. Then it
passes through three successive filters, and applying M alus’ s law for each change of polarization angle bring s in a factor
of 0.75 for each polaroid. The result is that the final int ensity is:
One might expect that since the first and last polaroi ds are at right angles to each other, no light at all should emerge from
the last polaroid. But when the light passes through a polaroid, it gains a new polarization aligned with that polaroid's
polarization axis, and has no "memory" of its previous plane of polarization. Unless two consecutive polaroids are at right
angles, some light will always get through each polaroid.
Polarization By Reflection
While most natural light is unpolarized and we can po larize it with a polaroid, it turns out that is not t he only way it can be
polarized. A more “natural” way to create polarized light exists thanks to reflection. As we have said many times, when light (or
any wave) strikes an interface between two media, it is parti ally transmitted and partially reflected.
Consider the following scenario: Light polarized in the vertical direction strikes an interface between m edia such that the reflected
ray aligns with the electric field vectors of the tran smitted ray. There is an important principle in phys ics that states that the
conditions at the boundary have to work out properly. This means that the electric field vector of the inc oming light must add up
properly to the electric field after striking the i nterface. The electric field vector can of course b e written in components with the
“x-direction” being the electric field direction of the transmitted wave, and the “y-direction” being th e direction of the reflected ray
(which is perpendicular to the transmitted ray). But t he outgoing light cannot have an electric field vec tor pointing along its
direction of motion (light is a transverse wave), so no light reflects!
Figure 3.7.4 – Reflection of Polarized Light

3.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19122
Of course this result is only for vertically-polarized incoming light, so unpolarized light that reflects at this angle will have its
vertical component removed, which means that the ref lected light is horizontally-polarized. More generall y, light that is reflected
off a surface at just the right angle will be polari zed parallel to that surface. It also happens that if the angle is not just righ t, then
while the light is not entirely polarized, it is part ially so (depending upon how close to the correct angl e the reflection is). By
"partially polarized," we mean that the amplitude of light waves measured (using a polaroid) along one dire ction is not the same as
the amplitude measured along the orthogonal directi on. In practice this means that a polaroid aligned p arallel to a surface from
which the light is reflected will admit more light than a pol aroid aligned perpendicular to that surface.
We can easily write down an expression for the "specia l angle" at which total polarization occurs (this is known as the Brewster
angle), by noting that for this angle the reflected ray makes a right angle with the transmitted ray (because the field vector of the
transmitted wave is perpendicular to the transmitted ray and is parallel to the reflected ray). Combining this fact with Snell's law
gives the Brewster angle,:
where is the index of refraction of the medium within which the reflection is occurring, and is the index of refraction of the
medium off which the reflection is occurring.
A nice application of this effect involves polaroid sunglasses. Most glare from sunlight comes off surfa ces that are horizontal
(roads, lake surfaces, etc.), which means that the light that reflects off such surfaces has a relatively sma ll fraction of its
polarization in the vertical direction. This means t hat if we place polaroids in front of our eyes that are allow only verticallypolarized light to pass, then very little of the ho rizontally-polarized glare gets through. Of course, only half of the non-glare light
gets through as well, but at least one's vision of li ght of important objects (on coming cars or boats, et c.) does not have to compete
with the incoming light from glare.
Example
A paleontologist is looking for the remains of a woo ly mammoth in an unusually clear section of a glacier. The glare off the ice
from the sun makes it hard for her to see, so she puts on her polarized sun glasses and is immediately rewarded when, along the
line where the glare is cut to zero, she finds what sh e is looking for. Now she just needs to figure out h ow deep the carcass is.
Fortunately she has a physicist (you) on staff. You me asure the height of her eyes above the ice surface to be, and you
measure the distance from the position where she first saw the beast through the glare, to the point where y ou can look straight
down at it. This distance is. You estimate the index of refraction of the ice to be 1.4. Find the depth of the wooly
mammoth.
Solution
For the polarized sunglasses to remove all the glare, t he angle the light makes with the perpendicular to t he ice must be
Brewster’ s angle, so:

3.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/19122
From the right triangle on the left, we can derive the dist ance from the paleontologist to the point of reflection:
We can use this distance to derive the horizontal di stance from the point of reflection to the point on t he ice directly above
the mammoth:
The Brewster angle occurs when the reflected light make s a right angle with the transmitted light, and from sy mmetry (just
reverse the direction of the light to see this), tha t is also true of the incoming glare and the light fr om the mammoth.
Therefore we can use and the tangent of the angle to get the depth:

This page titled 3.7: Polarization is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Geometrical Optics
4.1: Images
4.2: Magnification
4.3: Spherical Reflectors
4.4: Spherical Refractors
4.5: Thin Lenses
4.6: Multiple Optical Devices
4.7: Wrap-Up
This page titled 4: Geometrical Optics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459
4.1: Images
Using Rays to Locate Light Sources
In our discussion leading to the law of reflection, we found (Figure 3.6.6) that if we view the light from a point source after it is
reflected off a plane, then the spherical wave we see appears to originate not from the point source, but from another point behind
the reflecting plane. We will now look more generally at locating this apparent origin of a source of li ght (which we have dubbed
"image"). We are through with doing the hard work of a nalyzing optical systems with Huygens's principle and wa ve propagation,
however. Instead, we will now embrace the tool of rays, keep ing in mind as we do the fact that rays do not represe nt what is
actually happening with light – they just make it eas ier to do the geometry of linking actual light sour ces with the images observed.
This approach to the study of certain aspects of light i s therefore generally referred to as geometrical optics.
Alert
This point cannot be emphasized enough: We will sketc h rays so that we can do geometry, but these are just imaginary lines that
we use for our own purposes to simplify our work – they d o not represent actual light, and in many cases we wil l see, there isn't
any light at all where we have drawn the ray!
Up to now, we have discussed only plane waves and poin t sources of light, but when we look at something, we re ceive light from
every part of it that is visible to us. That is, there a re actually several point sources of light. For the p urpose of simplifying our
analysis, we will reduce the objects we look at to the ir bare essence, but they must be more nuanced than merely a single point. At
the very least, we would like to have some measure of t he size and orientation of what we are looking at. As we will see, the path
that light takes from the object to our eye can alte r not only the location of the apparent source of t he light, but also what we
perceive to be its size and orientation.
The simplest way to exhibit the two attributes of size and orientation is with an arrow. The directionalit y of the arrow gives us a
sense of orientation, and the length of the arrow a m easure of its size. If the object arrow points upward, then depending upon what
happens to the light in transit from the object to t he observer, the image arrow will either point upward as well (it is upright, or
erect), or it will reverse direction and point downward (inverted). When we compare the lengths of the object and image arrows, the
image arrow is laterally magnified if it is longer than the object arrow, and laterally diminished if it is shorter. Doing this reduces
our analysis to using rays and geometry to determine where th e base and point of the image arrow are located.
Rays radiate outward from a point source (such as the point of the image arrow). If we draw a single ray that enters our eye, we
only know the direction from which the light has come, not how far away it is. The way that we locate the sou rce of the light is to
view another ray. This allows us to backtrack the rays to see where they intersect.
Figure 4.1.1 – Finding an Image
To get the full arrow image, this process would need to be followed for both the pointed end and the base. W hen looking directly at
an object, following this process locates the image e xactly where the object is located. The image locati on (where we see the light

4.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459coming from) is the same as the object location (wher e the light is actually coming from), the size of the image is the same as the
size of the object, and the image is the same orienta tion as the object. This is all so boring! What intere sts us is when the image data
differs from the object data, and this can only be ac complished when the light reaches our eyes in a less dir ect manner. Then when
we backtrack the rays they will converge at a different place t han the source from which they actually originated.
Plane Reflector
We used a clever symmetry argument with Huygens's princ iple in Section 3.6 to find the image of a point source of light in the
presence of a plane reflector. We'll now repeat this c onclusion with the ray method, using the law of reflect ion and basic geometry.
We start by drawing the object, and selecting a ray that comes out of it, reflects, and enters an eye.
Figure 4.1.2 – Plane Reflector: First Ray
The law of reflection assures us that the angle that the ray coming from the object makes with the perpen dicular to the plane is the
same as the angle the ray coming into the eye makes. We'll use this fact in a moment, but first we need t o pick another ray. To get
the answer we can pick any ray we like, but as using these rays is merely our trick for finding the image, we might as well make the
geometry we have to do as easy on ourselves as possible. Let's choose as our second ray the one that strikes the reflector
perpendicularly, and comes straight back (we can place th e eye directly behind the tip of the arrow).
Figure 4.1.3 – Plane Reflector: Two Intersecting Rays

4.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459
Okay, now for the geometry. Thanks to the law of reflect ion, we can see that the angle the first (blue) imag e ray makes with the
horizontal is the same as the angle that the first (r ed) object ray makes with the horizontal. The two righ t triangles formed by rays
on the opposite sides of the reflector are therefor e similar, and since they share a side, they are congr uent. The image is therefore
the same distance to the right of the reflector as the object is to the left of it. If we repeat this pr ocess for the base of the arrow, we
get the same result, and with the object and image ba ses and tips directly across from each other, the ima ge is clearly the same size
as the object (neither magnified nor diminished), and the im age is upright (the same orientation as the object).
As simple as this example is, it shows clearly a case where the apparent source of light (i.e. the image) is disconnected from the
actual source of light. No matter how complicated the geometry m ight get, the method of finding the image is the same – d etermine
the position that the observer backtracks two (or more) rays to.
Alert
One last warning, then you are on your own... It is easy to get caught up in the process of finding the image (backtrack rays, do
geometry, etc.), but this process is not tracking any ac tual physical process – the light is not traveling in rays, and i n fact there
is not even any light where we have drawn image rays to the right of the refl ector! Using rays is just a trick that makes our lives
easier. For this plane refractor, what is actually physical ly happening to the light is better depicted by Figure 3.6.5.
Sign Conventions
Not all examples in geometrical optics are as easy to do geometrically as the plane reflector, so it is he lpful to develop some
mathematical definitions, formulas, and conventions t hat can be used for all cases. We'll begin the proce ss of making such
definitions here, and will continue to add to them as the number of situations we can cover grows. In parti cular, in order for
mathematical formulas to work out properly, we will nee d to define when a variable is positive or negative. These are referred to as
sign conventions, and at times these can be quite confusing. This is b ecause – at least at first – the conventions will seem overly
complicated or cryptic. This is necessary, because mak ing definitions that are too simple forces us to make new definitions later for
more complicated situations, and we want to avoid this.
For the plane refractor (and in fact for every optic al device we will examine), there is one critical regi on along the horizontal axis.
For the case above, it is the plane at which the refl ection occurs. We choose this important boundary to b e an "origin" of sorts, from
which distances are measured. We start with the following v ariable definitions and their associated sign conventions:
Okay a clarification is in order here. "Incoming" and "outgoing" refer to the direction of the rays rela tive to the origin – rays
pointing toward the reflector (or more generally, the "origin") are on the "incoming" side, and rays poin ting away from it are on the

4.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459outgoing side. While "incoming" and "outgoing" sound like opposites, they are not. This is very clear for t he case of the reflector,
where the incoming and outgoing sides are the same (th e rays come in from the left, and go back out to the left). But in other cases
we will examine, the rays will pass through the "origin," making the incoming and outgoing sides different.
For the plane reflector, we found that the magnitudes of the object and image distances are equal, but wh at about the signs? Well,
the light is coming into the reflector from the left, and the object is on the left, so it is on the inc oming side, which means that.
The light is going away from the mirror on the left side, so it is the outgoing side, and the image is l ocated on the other side, so
. We therefore conclude, for the plane reflector:
We will see many more sign conventions, and we'll add them to the list as they come up.
Plane Refractor
Obviously any way that we can get the rays representin g the light to change direction will lead to a case wh ere the image position
does not coincide with the object position. Reflectio n is one way to make this happen, and another way is re fraction. We will
therefore examine the simplest case of a refraction-in duced image – the plane refractor. This consists of two regions with different
indices of refraction, delineated by a plane boundary, s uch as looking at an object below the surface of a pool of still water.
The light coming from the object (which we will say is in a medium with index of refraction) will bend as i t crosses the
boundary into a new medium, where the observer reside s, with index of refraction, according to Snell's law (Equation 3.6.4). In
this case, the plane boundary between the two media is the "ori gin" from which we measure everything.
Now proceed as we did for the reflector: Start with an a rbitrary ray that comes from the object, passes thr ough the boundary, and
enters the eye of an observer. For the sake of drawin g a figure, we will look at the case that the index of refraction of the medium
where the object resides is greater than the index of refra ction of the medium of the observer.
Figure 4.1.4 – Plane Refractor: First Ray
We need another ray to find the intersection point that defines the position of the image, and once agai n we will make things easy
on ourselves by choosing the ray that strikes the re fracting plane perpendicularly. This ray passes straig ht through without bending,
making the location of the intersection point quite simpl e.
Figure 4.1.5 – Plane Refractor: Two Intersecting Rays

4.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459
Before we go on to do the math associated with the geo metry, there is one important thing to point out he re. Unlike the plane
reflector case, where we could show using Huygens's princ iple that all of the rays that emerge backtrack to the same point, it is far
from clear that this must be true in this case. In fa ct it isn't true! That is, if we carefully keep drawing rays for other angles, the
angled rays will intersect the direct (un-deflected) ray at different points. This is not difficult to prove: There is some point on the
surface for which a ray from the object is totally i nternally reflected. Light rays coming out of the obj ect at angles greater than this
never escape the medium, so they cannot be viewed by th e observer, so they cannot be backtracked to the same image as any other
rays.
Despite this "problem," we can nevertheless get a usef ul approximate result. If we assume that the object is viewed from an gles not
too far off a direct viewing (i.e. small refracted an gles), then the image's position can be determined to a close approximation.
Under this approximation, we'll first assert the following, wh ich will be useful shortly:
Now let's label some values from the figure above. Nam ely, we'll define the incoming angle, the refracted angle, the height of
the above the axis, the object distance, and the imag e distance (note we have already defined the two indices of refraction):
Figure 4.1.6 – Geometry of the Plane Refractor

4.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18459Start by constructing the tangents of the two angles:
Now apply the small angle approximation to turn these tange nts into sines, and apply Snell's law:
So just as for the plane reflector where we found the r elationship between the object and image distance (Equation 4.1.2), we have
done the same for the plane reflector. Let's check to see if the sign conventions work out properly for th is equation. The object is to
the left of the refracting plane, and the light reac hes the refracting plane from the left, so the objec t is on the incoming side, which
means that. The light is leaving the refracting pl ane going to the right (to the observer), so the right hand side is the outgoing
side. The image is on the left, so it is on the side " other than" the outgoing side. Therefore the image di stance is actually negative.
Indices of refraction are always positive, so we need a mi nus sign to make the formula correct with our sign convent ions:
We should also note that the magnitudes work out pro perly – the fact that assures that the image is close r to the refracting
plane than the object. If the object had instead be en in the region with the lower index of refraction, then the image would have
been farther from the plane of refraction than the objec t.
This page titled 4.1: Images is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on the
LibreTexts platform.

4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184604.2: Magnification
Lateral Magnification
You may have noticed that in the diagrams for the pl ane reflector and refractor, we oriented the object arrow so that it was parallel
to the reflecting/refracting surface. We should take a mome nt to say a few words about this, as well as define a few term s.
The horizontal line that is perpendicular to and bis ects the surface that causes reflection or refracti on is called the optical axis. We
will almost exclusively work with object arrows that are oriented perpendicular to this axis, as we did in t he previous section. The
reason for this is that the "object and image distan ces" are only well-defined when every point is the sam e distance from the
surface. Shortly we will say a few words about objects th at are not oriented so conveniently, but unless expl icitly stated, one should
assume that this perpendicular-to-optical-axis is in ef fect.
In the cases of both the plane reflector and plane refractor, we found that the object and image arrows we re exactly the same size.
This result is special to these cases – in the more general cases we will examine soon, the object and im age sizes will be different.
We define the lateral magnification of the image as the ratio of the image size to the obje ct size:
For both the plane reflector and the plane refractor that we examined in the previous section, this ratio is 1. We know this because
when we compute the positions of the head and base of the image arrow, we find that the separations of the se points is the same
as the distance separating the head and base of the object a rrow.
As with every quantity we will define in geometrical opt ics, there is a sign convention defined for lateral ma gnification. We do this
by insisting that the values of and are positive whe n the arrow is pointing in one direction, and negativ e when pointing in the
other. Let's say we define upward as the positive direc tion for the two cases we have studied so far. In both case s, an up-oriented
object arrow resulted in a up-oriented image arrow, so for both cases and were both positive. Therefore th e lateral
magnifications for both cases are positive. Clearly when the orientations of the object and image are the sam e (either both positive
or both negative) – which we have previously defined as "upright") then the magnification is positive, and when the image is
inverted relative to the object, the magnification is ne gative. Adding this sign convention to our list gives:
Longitudinal Magnification
The word "lateral" is appended above because it only applies to the dimensions of the objects perpendicul ar to the optical axis. As
stated above, this is almost exclusively what we will be working with, but before we forge ahead, let's take a mom ent to look at
magnification in the cases of the plane reflector when t he object arrow is parallel to the optical axis.
Calling the object length, we seek to compute the im age length. We do this by computing the position o f each end of the image
arrow separately, and then using those positions to com pute the length. The image of each point is exactly the same distance from
the reflecting plane on the opposite side:
Figure 4.2.1 – Longitudinal Reflection

4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18460
The extension of the object is and the extension of the image is, and since, for the plane reflector,
we get that these are the same length. We can use th e same definition for the magnitude of longitudinal magnification as we did for
lateral magnification (keeping in mind here that th e measurement of is along the optical axis rather than perpendicular to it),
giving:
The magnitude of 1 indicates the object and image a re the same length. We see also that the arrows are po inting in opposite
directions, which means the image is inverted. So both t he lateral and longitudinal cases of the plane refl ector result in images that
are neither magnified nor diminished, but in the later al case the image is upright, while it is inverted in the longitudinal case.
Example
An object in a medium with index of refraction is view ed through a plane refractor from a medium with an ind ex of refraction
. Find the magnitude of longitudinal magnification of the i mage, and indicate whether the image is upright or inverted.
Solution
We follow the same procedure as above, computing distan ces to the refracting plane for the front and rear o f the image
arrow. Defining, as we did above, and as the object d istances of the rear and point respectively of the o bject arrow, we
compute the image distances using Equation 4.1.6 to be:
As above, we write the lengths of the objects and images as the differences of these quantities:
Putting these together and computing the magnitude gives:
So the image is magnified if, and diminished if the op posite is true. Clearly the object and image arrows poi nt in the
same direction (whichever end of the object is close r to the plane, that same end is closer to the plane for the image) so this
image is upright.
Interesting that this result is the exact opposite of the plane reflector – upright instead of inverted, and either magnified or
diminished rather than unchanged.
Angular Magnification
As logical as these two definitions of magnification ar e, neither of them actually captures what we think of when we hear the word
"magnification." When an object we see is magnified, we generally mean that we see it better – its details are more evident. An

4.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18460
item does not increase in size (its dimensions remai n the same), but we can see it better when it is closer. When the light from an
object is refracted by a plane such that the image is closer to the viewer than the object, the image and object are the same size, but
the image is closer, so we can see it better. This is a condition that most people would refer to as "magnified." Indeed, if you look at
a penny at the bottom of a swimming pool, it certain ly looks larger than another penny in the same position with the pool empty. So
how do we account for this commonsense definition of magni fication?
What makes something look large or small regardless o f its actual size is the percentage of our field of view that it captures. This is
determined by the angle the image subtends in our view. Let's see what this means for the refracting plane. When the object is in a
region with a higher index of refraction, we know that the image is the same size as the object, but it i s closer to the observer,
causing it to subtend a larger angle.
Figure 4.2.2 – Angular Magnification By Refracting Plane
Clearly, which means the image takes up a bigger po rtion of our field of view than the object would, if it was viewed directly
(without the refracting plane). We can measure the amoun t of this angular magnification with a simple ratio of the angles:
Alert
While we define a sign convention for lateral magnifi cation to indicate whether the image is upright or in verted, for angular
magnification, it is standard to only take into acco unt the magnitude, so the directions that the angles are swept-out are not
important, and we essentially just use absolute value s. It is understood that the lateral magnification ta kes into account
everything about the image, while the angular magnificat ion only handles the size of the field of view that the image occupies.
Example
An object in a medium with index of refraction is view ed through a plane refractor from a medium with an ind ex of refraction
. If the viewer is positioned right next to the plane refra ctor, find the angular magnification of the image.
Solution
We can use the figure above, except imagine that the e ye is right at the plane. The optical axis divides both the object and
image in half, so the ratio of these half-angles will also equal the angular magnification. These angles are p art of right

4.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18460
triangles formed by the object and image, with one sid e (the height of half the object/image, which we will call) being the
same for both. The tangents of the angles are therefore:
The angles, as aleways, are assume to be small, so the tangents are approximately equal to the angles themse lves (measured
in radians), which means we have:
Now just plug in Equation 4.1.6:
Sure enough, an observer looking at an object that i s within a medium of higher index of refraction than th e surrounding
region sees an image that is magnified angularly (i.e. t akes up a wider field of view), even though the imag e is no larger than
the object, because the image is just closer.
This page titled 4.2: Magnification is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

4.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184614.3: Spherical Reflectors
Finding the location of an image viewed in a plane re flector is a rather simple matter, but now we will look at more interesting
cases where the reflector (which we will often refer to a s "mirrors," though this does not need to be specif ically the case) is curved.
We will not examine general curves (the analytical geometry would be quite daunt ing!), but will stick to spherical surfaces. Such a
surface comes in two varieties – concave and convex. The former refers to a shape where the light enter s the hollow region (like a
cave!) before reflecting, and the latter refers to the op posite shape – one that bulges out into the region where t he light is.
Concave Mirrors – Object and Image Distances
We begin by defining the geometry we are working with. This mirror’s curve is a section from a sphere, which means that if we
draw lines perpendicular from its surface, the lines all intersect at a single point, which we call "." The distance to this point from
the mirror is the radius of curvature of the sphere,. The optical axis intersects the mirror perpendic ularly at its center point, called
its vertex.
Figure 4.3.1 – Geometry of Concave Mirror
From here we use our special trick of considering ray s, rather than waves. We do this by employing the law of reflection and doing
the necessary geometry. Our goal here is to use this method to derive the position of an image in term s of the position of the
object, and the only other variable we have here, wh ich is. The trouble is, how do we define and in thi s case? In the case of
the flat plane, every point on our object arrow (which is perpendicular to the optical axis) is the same d istance from the the
reflector, but that is clearly not the case for this curved surface. We therefore make the assumption tha t the radius of curvature of
the mirror is large enough (i.e. it is flat enough) th at the mirror's position can be treated like the po sition of a plane, and this is the
position from which the quantities and are measured. The result is that an object that is totally late ral (perpendicular to the
optical axis) will result in an image that is also late ral.
Using this "flat approximation," we will do the geometry to find the image of a point on the object that li es on the optical axis. The
diagram will be clearer for this approximation if we draw the mirror as a straight vertical line, and for no particular reason, we will
choose the object to be outside of the center point of the mirror. The critical principle here is the l aw of reflection. A ray starting at
the object that strikes the mirror will reflect off it such that the incident angle equals the reflected angle, where these angles are
measured relative to the perpendicular – the radial li ne shown in the figure above.
Figure 4.3.2 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Picture

4.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
We are only looking for how the object and image dis tances are related here, and since we are assuming tha t the image remains
lateral, we only need to do the calculation for a sin gle point (we will have more work to do later to deter mine the nature of the full
image). But how do we know that the image of this point also lies on the optical axis? Remember, just viewing a single ray is not
enough to locate the image! We need a second ray. R ather than clutter our diagram, we simply note that the ray that leaves the same
point heading along the optical axis strikes the mirror at a right angle, and therefore reflects straight back. That gives us a ray
intersection that lands right at the point indicated – indeed the image of a point on the optical axis must also li e on the optical axis.
Digression
As with the case of the image due to a flat refracto r, if one carefully sketches the rays properly for a spherical mirror, the rays
actually do not all pass through a common point. For ou r purposes, this deviation from an exact result will not be a problem,
but for optical systems involving spherical surfaces t hat require great precision, this unwanted blurriness of the image is a
consequence of the inexactitude of the geometry known as spherical aberration.
Okay, so let's clear away the clutter of the above figur e and label all the important features so that we ca n do some geometry and
apply our usual small angle approximation...
Figure 4.3.3 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Geometry
It's obvious that the angle has a value that falls between the values of the angles (which is smaller) an d (which is larger). But
when the other two angles indicated in the triangle h appen to be equal as they are in this case thanks t o the law of reflection, it
happens that the angle is precisely the arithmetic mean of and (geometric proof of this feature of interio r and exterior angles
of triangles is left as an exercise for the reader). In ot her words:
We can read off the tangents of these angles, and apply t he small-angle approximation to get:

4.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
Combining these equations, we get the following simpl e relationship between the object and image distances and the radius of
curvature of the mirror:
We have dealt with these distances as absolute values, so we need to double-check this result and make sure it satisfies our sign
conventions. The light is coming into the mirror from the left, and the object is on the left, so accordin g to our sign convention, the
object distance is positive. The light leaves the mi rror on the left side, and the image is on the left side, so the image is on the
outgoing side, which means that it too is a positive v alue. With both of these values positive, the value o f the must also be
positive, and this equation holds as it stands. We don' t want to make any assumptions about the sign of for a convex mirror, so for
now we will just note that is positive if the mirror i s concave. Or put into the language of our convention s, is positive if the
center of the sphere is on the outgoing side of the light.
Real and Virtual Images
We arbitrarily chose a position for the object, and found that the image distance was also positive. The value of is a fixed value,
but we can move the object as close to the mirror as we like. Then the value of can be made arbitrarily s mall (but still positive),
which means that can be made arbitrarily large. If this latter value exceeds the value of, then for Equation 4.3.3 to hold, the
value of must be negative. This means that the image of an object close to th e mirror lands on the side other than the outgoing
side of the light, which in this case is to the right of the mirror.
At first this seems impossible – the light never gets behind the mirror, so how can the right rays possibly intersect there to make an
image? This calls for an important reminder...
Alert
Images are not formed from light rays running into othe r light rays! First of all, it is dangerous to use th e word "formed" here,
because it implies that a new object is created, as th ough optics works like a 3-d printer. The idea of an image is simply
something we invented to express the fact that the a pparent source of light is different from the actual source (different in its
location, size, and possibly orientation). Second, we lo cate the image by looking at light and tracing imagina ry "rays" (which
we also invented) back to their apparent origin. There is nothing in this scheme that requires actual light to intersect with itself.
If the backtrack of the rays lands in a region where there is no light (as was the case for the flat reflector), then tha t is fine.
Let's see how this happens with a new figure. As before, a ray that follows the optical axis bounces straight back from the vertex of
the mirror, so the image must lie on the optical axis, b ut now when the object point is close we have:
Figure 4.3.4 – Image Point Behind the Mirror

4.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
This image is found the same way as the previous image (because that is the definition of an image) – by backtracking reflected
rays to the point where they intersect. Nevertheless, there seems to be something distinctly different ab out this image that exists
where there is no light, and the previous image that exists where the actual light is. These images don't look any different – it's not
like one is darker than the other or anything, but t here is one small difference about them that we will d iscuss later. For now, we
will simply give them different names. Images that exi st at a point where the light actually passes are calle d real, and images that
exist where there is not actually any light (at least no light from the object that reaches the eye) are called virtual.
Alert
These monikers of "real" and "virtual" are quite dange rous, as they often lead to great confusion. People enc ountering these
terms tend to think that real images are "actually the re," while virtual images are not. The truth is that neither is "actually
there," whatever that means! Both types of images are s imply where we perceive the light to be coming from – there is not
actually any light emitted from that spot in either c ase. Don't let their names fool you into thinking there is really anything
fundamentally different about these two types of images.
To understand the differences between an object, a rea l image, and a virtual image, it might help to think about the light once again
as waves. For a point object (like the tip of our usua l arrow), light travels outward in all directions in a full spherical wave. For a
real image, a partial spherical wave propagates inward toward the point image, and then outward from it on the other side. For a
virtual image, a partial spherical wave is moving out ward only, with the point image at its center, but the wave does not exist in the
immediate vicinity of the point image.
Figure 4.3.5 – Objects and Images in Terms of Light Waves

4.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461In every case, an eye viewing the outward-moving spheri cal light waves will trace the source back to the cent er of the sphere,
which is the "apparent source of the light."
Concave Mirrors – Principal Rays
We can now find the image given the location of the object, either by drawing a diagram and doing the ge ometry for a single point,
or by plugging into the equation. But this doesn't tell us everything about the image. We will now develo p the geometry a little
further in order to determine whether the image is larger or smaller than the object, and whether it inverts or re mains upright.
We can use what we have done above to locate the one point on the image that intersects the optical axis, and to simplify matters
we will place the base of the object arrow on this axi s. So all we need it to find the location of the tip of the image arrow. The tip
sends out spherical waves that are reflected by the m irror, which means we have an infinite number of rays to choose from to
perform our geometry tricks. We only need two such ra ys to get an intersection point, so let's see if we c an pick rays that make our
job as easy as possible. It turns out that there are f our such rays, called the principal rays. They are not physically any more
important than any of the infinitude of other rays – the y just make our task of geometry simpler.
Before we describe how the principal rays are defined, we need to take a quick look back at Equation 4.3.3. We saw that the image
distance can be either positive or negative, depend ing upon the placement of the object. What happens if we start the object far
away and gradually move it closer to the mirror. At so me point the image must transition from real to virt ual. What is the borderline
position of the object that defines this transition? Clearly this occurs when, which results in the image position going to
infinity. What does the ray look like that passes thr ough the image point at infinity? In this limit, the outgoing ray must be parallel
to the optical axis.
Figure 4.3.6 – Image Point at Infinity Means Ray Parallel to Optical Axis
If we swap the object and image (the law of reflection doesn't care which ray is coming in or going out), so that the object is at
, then the image of this point will be on the optica l axis a distance of from the mirror. This is true of every ray that strikes the
mirror from a direction parallel to the optical axi s. That is, every incoming light ray converges to this point, and this point is called
the focal point of the mirror.
The existence of a focal point gives us two principa l rays – one that comes in parallel to the optical a xis (note it doesn't have to
come from infinity – it still follows the same path), which reflects through the focal point, and one tha t passes through the focal
point or comes from the direction of the focal point, which reflects parallel to the optical axis. A third p rincipal ray is one that
passes through or comes from the direction of the ce nter point. When such a ray strikes the mirror, it h its it at a right angle, so it
comes straight back. And the fourth principal ray is t he one that strikes the vertex of the mirror, which re flects at the same angle
with the optical axis from which it arrived. Again, the se rays are "principal" only because they are easy t o sketch and work with
geometrically, and only two of them are needed to fin d the image location, though all four intersect at t he same point. To
summarize:
Figure 4.3.7 – Principal Rays of a Concave Spherical Mirror

4.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461

What we notice immediately is that we have our first inverte d image thus far in our exploration of geometrical optic s. It is also
diminished in size. Both of these results are specific to th e placement of the object, so one must be careful about drawing a general
conclusion from this. This process of sketching the prin cipal rays is called a ray trace, and while it is not particularly useful for
quantitative work (unless, for example, you work carefu lly on graph paper), it does quickly give an idea of th e rough position of the
image, a rough measure of the lateral magnification, and the image's orientation. Shortly we will examine how to get this
information through direct mathematics.
We can see the importance of the placement of the obje ct in the final result by performing the ray trace with the object closer to the
mirror than the focal point. The principal ray that c omes in parallel to the axis and the ray that strikes the v ertex are as easy to do as
the case shown above, but what about the ray that passes throu gh the focal point and the ray that passes through the center point? If
the light from the object has to go backward to go through t hese points, then it will not strike the mirror at all. Do we simply have
to concede that we only have two principal rays to work with? No!
The rays only represent the direction that a single poi nt on the light wavefront is moving, so their value as a too l comes from their
directions, not from there actual paths. A ray that comes to the mirr or from the direction of the center point or focal point will
behave after reflection exactly like a ray that does pa ss through those points. So all we need to do to trace these rays is start them at
or (depending upon which ray you want), and send it throu gh the tip of the object toward the mirror. [Note: The part of the ray
where there is not actually any light is often represent ed with a dotted line.]
Figure 4.3.8 – Principal Rays from an Object Close to a Concave Spheric al Mirror
Notice that the outgoing rays don't cross each other as they did in the previous example. Again, it is onl y the backtracking of rays
that has any meaning in our use of rays. We simply hav e to backtrack these rays a bit farther than before, into a region where there

4.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
is no light passing through. Put another way, the previ ous example resulted in a real image, while this examp le results in a virtual
image. Although the other two principal rays were omitte d in the above figure, if they had been included, th en they would also be
backtracked to the same point in space.
Alert
The curvature of the mirror has been exaggerated for ef fect in the figure, and a careful ray trace should actu ally treat it as flat.
If you try to confirm that the other principal rays con verge to the same point and don't correct this flaw, you will find that they
will not quite converge.
Concave Mirrors – Mathematics
The focal point is a distance of from the mirror, a dis tance known as the focal length of that mirror, designated the variable (we
stopped discussing waves just in time to be able to reuse t his symbol without confusing it with frequency). In terms of the focal
length, Equation 4.3.3 becomes:
So far we have only discussed concave mirrors, and we know in th is context that our sign convention requires, which means
that the same must be true for the focal length, which we now add to our list:
We already know how to compute the image distance from the object distance and radius of curvature. Let's lo ok at how we can
calculate the lateral magnification from these inpu ts. We know the lateral magnification in terms of the h eights of the object and
image, and with just one of the principal rays (the one, that strikes the vertex), we can accomplish our goal.
Figure 4.3.9 – Geometry of Lateral Magnification
The triangles formed by the object and image are si milar (the reflection angles are equal, and they are both right triangles), which
means the ratios of the lengths of their sides are eq ual. Using this and noting that is positive, is nega tive, and both and are
positive (according to our sign conventions), we have:

4.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
This can then be combined with Equation 4.3.3 to determine the lateral magnification in terms of the placement of the object and
the radius of curvature of the sphere. While this deri vation of the lateral magnification was performed fo r the case of the real
image, the same result comes out for the virtual imag e represented by Figure 4.3.8, and the method is exactly the same – similar
triangles are formed using the ray that strikes the v ertex, and the ratios are the same as here. Interest ingly, because the image is not
on the outgoing side of the mirror in this second c ase, then according to our sign conventions, which m akes the lateral
magnification positive, and indeed the image is upright, as it should be for a positive lateral magnification!
Example
An object is moved away from a concave mirror to a posit ion that is twice as far from the reflecting surface. In the process, the
size of the image seen in the reflection goes down b y a factor of 3. Find distance that separated the o bject and the surface before
it was moved, measured in terms of the radius of the spheric al reflector.
Solution
Using Equation 4.3.3, we can solve for the magnification in terms of the o bject distance and radius of curvature of the
sphere:
For the object at two different positions, there ar e two different magnifications. The object size never changes, so for the
image to get smaller by a factor of 3, the magnificatio n must get smaller by a factor of 3. Calling the magnifi cation at the
initial object distance and the magnification at the new object distance, we have:
Convex Mirrors – Object and Image Distances
As much work as we have done above, it only covers one of the two varieties of spherical reflector. Fortunate ly, we will not need to
repeat every single step above for convex mirrors, be cause the principles behind the geometrical optics i nvolved are the same. The
only difference we have to address is the way that lig ht behaves when it is reflected off a convex surface. After that, we will see
that the ray traces are fairly straightforward (assum ing we fully understand the ones we have done already), and the mathematics is
even easier to extend to the convex case.
The single physical principle that must be satisfied is the law of reflection. When a ray strikes a convex spherical reflector, the
incoming angle and outgoing angle are measured rela tive to the line that emanates outward from the cente r of the sphere. As
before, if we place our object point on the optical axis, the image point must also reside on that axis, so we can draw a basic picture
of what the relative positions of the object and image sh ould look like, as we did for the concave case in Figure 4.3.2.
Figure 4.3.10 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis for Convex Refl ector – Picture

4.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
The first thing we notice for this case upon closer exa mination is that the image comes out to be virtual no matter where the object
is located. Using our sign conventions, we have a positive object d istance (the object is on the incoming side of the m irror), and a
negative image distance (the image is not on the ou tgoing side of the mirror). If we want to use an equat ion that looks anything like
Equation 4.3.3, then consider when the object is very far (read "in finitely far") away... The radius of curvature has to b e negative.
We will incorporate this into our sign conventions short ly.
As we determined previously, an object infinitely far a way produces rays that are parallel to the optical ax is. In the concave case,
such rays converged to the focal point of the mirro r. In this case, the rays all diverge from the focal point, which in this case resides
on the opposite side of the mirror. The math works out the same as before regarding the focal length's re lation to the radius of
curvature, namely:.
Figure 4.3.11 – Rays Parallel to Optical Axis Diverge from Fo cal Point After Reflection
While we will not repeat the geometry here, it conveni ently works out that all the math we developed before, including Equation
4.3.3 can be used unchanged for the convex mirror, provid ed we now treat the radius and focal length as negative numbers. That is,
we can now fill-in the unknown parts of the sign conventions:

4.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
Convex Mirrors – Principal Rays
When it comes to ray traces for convex spherical mirr ors, we follow the same four methods as for the concave m irror, though we
have to keep in mind that all images are going to tu rn out to be virtual, so we can never expect outgoin g rays to intersect – we
always have to backtrack behind the mirror to find the inter section point.
The ray that strikes the vertex of the mirror (which we called "principal ray #4" in Figure 4.3.6 above) i s sketched exactly as
before, but there are subtle differences for the other three principal rays.
Principal ray #1 comes in parallel to the optical axis, an d therefore reflects away from the focal point, rather that toward it as it
did in the concave case.
Principal ray #2 can't pass through the focal point as it do es for the concave case, but it heads toward it. It then reflects back
parallel to the optical axis.
Principal ray #3 can't pass through the center point as it do es for the concave case, but it heads toward it. This causes it to strike
the surface at a right angle, so it bounces straight back.
As before, all four of these rays (to a very good appro ximation, if the mirror can be treated as fairly fl at) appear to an observer to
emanate from a common point behind the mirror, which is t he position of the virtual image.
Figure 4.3.12 – Principal Rays of a Convex Mirror
We can double-check this result with the math of Equation 4.3.3, to see that everything remains consistent. We alread y said that a
negative value of (and) and a positive value of re quires that the value of be negative, confirming t hat the image must be on
the dark side of the mirror. In addition, for the sum of and for come out negative, the absolute value of must be smaller than
that of. This means that the image is always closer t o the mirror than the object. We can see that this is true for the ray trace, and
that in fact it must be true no matter where the object is p laced.
Another check we can do is the lateral magnification. The ray trace shows that the image is diminished and upright. Given that the
math shows that is always negative and always has a smal ler absolute value than, this lateral magnification result is confirmed
using Equation 4.3.7.
The effect of a diminished image is that a greater field of view is possible in the space occupied by the mirror. This explains why
car side mirrors are convex – the greater field of view allows the driver to see blind spots. The drawback is that when the overall
field of view is increased, the percentage of that fiel d occupied by a single object (such as another car) goes down. We are
accustomed to interpreting objects occupying small fractions of the field of view as being far away, which is why these mirrors
often have the warning, "Objects in mirror are closer than t hey appear."
Example
A spherical shell is reflective on both sides. When the reflection of an object is viewed in the convex si de, the image is 40% of
the size of the object. If the shell is now turned a round so that the reflection is viewed in the conca ve side, determine the size of

4.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18461
the image (compared to the object), and whether the i mage is upright or inverted. Assume that the distance between the shell
and object are unchanged after the shell is rotated.
Solution
In terms of the focal length of the reflector, the magnificati on is:
We are given that the magnification initially is, so so lving for in terms of gives:
The negative sign comes in because the focal length fo r a convex reflector is negative, while the object d istance is positive.
When the reflector is turned around, the focal length becomes positive, and since the distance between the o bject and mirror
is unchanged, we now have that the object distance is:. P lugging this into the magnification gives:
So the new image is twice as large as the object, and because the value of the magnification is negative, t he image is
inverted.
This page titled 4.3: Spherical Reflectors is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184624.4: Spherical Refractors
Spherical Surface Refractions
In Section 4.1, when we completed plane reflectors, we moved on to p lane refractors, and having done spherical reflecti ons, we
now follow the same progression. There were two possibil ities for reflectors – concave and convex. While the same two shapes are
available for refractors, there are actually four distinct possibilities, since for each of the two shape s, the transition of media can be
either from slower medium to faster, or vice-versa. I f we assume light is moving left to right in each of t he cases, the diagram
below lists all four possibilities.
Figure 4.4.1 – Four Varieties of Spherical Refraction
Before diving into finding images for these cases, let's take a moment to get some sense of what happen s to a ray that encounters
these boundaries in each case. In particular, we will be looking to see if the ray bends toward or away from the optical axis as it
crosses the boundary between the two media. Central to thi s discussion is the law of refraction, the conceptual basis o f which is that
a light ray entering a slower medium bends toward the perpendicular to the surface, while a ray that enters a faster medium bends
away from this perpendicular.
Figure 4.4.2 – Ray Convergence and Divergence for the Four Cases of Spherica l Refraction
It is important to note that neither the shape of th e border, nor change in the speed of the light, det ermines by itself the convergence
or divergence of rays. Only the combination of both of thes e factors makes this determination.
Object and Image Distances
As with the case of reflectors, it is clear that the ima ge of an object point on the optical axis is also on the optical axis, because a
ray along the optical axis will strike the boundary at a right angle and will pass straight through without b ending. Our task is
therefore to determine how far the image is from the vertex, given the distance of the object from the vertex. In the diagrams that
follow, we will maintain the following conventions:
The object is always to the left of the boundary, and the observer to the right, viewing the light after it passes t hrough.
The shaded region is the one with the higher index of refraction. This means the light travels slowe r there, and the angle on that
side of the boundary is always the smaller one.
In each case, we will look at two rays – one that is al ong the optical axis, and the other that strikes the boundary off-axis.
Backtracking the second ray to the optical axis will locate the image point. We will diagram each of the four cases shown in the
figure above...
Figure 4.4.3 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Picture (Case 1)

4.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18462
Before we go on, it is important to note that for thi s case, we have assumed that the object is not too clo se to the refracting surface.
Imagine what happens if we move it closer: The angle grows, which causes angle to grow, according to Snell 's law. But if
grows too much, then the outgoing ray may not converg e to the axis on its way to the eye. If we move the ob ject close enough to
the refracting surface, then the image ends up on t he left side of the surface. The light rays don't ac tually cross the axis there, but
the eye sees the light coming from that point.
As with the case of the spherical reflector, we need to make the approximation that the spherical surface i s flat. The geometry here
is significantly more involved than it was for the re flector, because in the reflection case, the two angl es at the surface were equal,
while here they are related by Snell's law (Equation 3.6.4). The simplest approach to this geometry is to first reduce the clutter by
separating the three right triangles involved and naming all the relevant angles...
Figure 4.4.4a – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Geometry (Case 1)
We can now relate these angles to the sides of the triangl es, using our usual small-angle approximation:
Though the pictures are different, so far this is act ually no different from what we obtained in Equations 4.3.2. The difference
comes in how we relate these angles to each other. In the case of the spherical reflector, the law of reflec tion gave us the simple
relation of Equation 4.3.1. Here we have to employ Snell's law to obtain a link b etween these angles. To see how these angles relate
to each other, one more diagram is called for, this one focu sing on the point at the boundary where the ray passes through.
Figure 4.4.4b – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Geometry (Cas e 1)

4.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18462
This diagram includes the angles from the three trian gles, as well as the two refraction angles, and. We can now do the
geometry necessary to relate them to each other, and comb ine them with the triangle equations above:
We also have Snell's law relating and, along with the small angle approximation:
Plugging this in above gives a result reminiscent of Equation 4.3.3, with the difference coming from the two indices of refrac tion:
Although this is different from the result of the re flector, we can still define a focal length. As before, we do this by solving for the
image distance of an object at an infinite distance:
Notice that while the focal length of a reflector is sh orter than the radius of the mirror, for a refractor i t is longer. So Equation 4.4.4
can be written in terms of the focal length as:
The ray traces of the other three cases look different fro m case 1:
Figure 4.4.5 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Picture (Case 2)
Figure 4.4.6 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Picture (Case 3)

4.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18462
Figure 4.4.7 – Image of a Point on the Optical Axis – Picture (Case 4)
We will not re-work the geometry for cases 2 though 4, but rather will state without proof that the same re lationship between the
object distance, image distance, and radius of curvature holds, provided the sign conventions we have established are main tained.
Checking Sign Conventions
Let's do a quick check to see if the diagrams above match wh at we expect from the formula and sign conventions.
Case 1:
As we saw with the reflector, whenever a surface causes ra ys to converge, the image can either be real or virt ual, depending upon
the object distance. If the object is closer to the su rface than the focal point (), the image is virtual (), and if it is farther
from the surface than the focal point (), the image is real (). In Figure 4.4.3, the object distance is greater than the focal
length. We know this because the ray shown converges do wn to the optical axis. If it was at the focal point, t he ray would converge
to a line parallel to the optical axis, and if it was insid e the focal point, it would not even converge as far as the parallel.
The object is on the incoming side of the surface and is farther from the surface than the focal point:,
The center of the sphere is on the outgoing side:
The light is going from faster medium to slower medium:,
Rearranging Equation 4.4.6, we can show that the image distance must be positive, which a grees with the diagram that shows
the image to be on the outgoing side of the surface:
With and, the first term on the right hand side of this equation must be greater than the second term, making the
difference (and) positive.

4.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18462
Example
Figure 4.4.3 shows the image to be farther from the surface than th e center of the sphere. For the conditions given for that
diagram, confirm mathematically that this must be true.
Solution
Rearranging Equation 4.4.4, we have:
The left hand side of this equation is positive, so on t he right hand side the second term must be smaller than the first term,
which means the second term's denominator must be larger tha n the first's:.
Case 2:
In this case, the surface causes the rays to diverge, so the nature of the image is not affected by the magnitude of the object
distance.
The object is on the incoming side of surface:
The center of the sphere is on the outgoing side:
The light is going from slower medium to faster medium, whi ch means that the focal length and radius have opposite sign s (i.e.
the focal point is on the opposite side of the surface a s the center point):,
Rearranging Equation 4.4.6, we can show that the image distance must be negative, which a grees with the diagram that shows
the image to not be on the outgoing side of the surface:
The left hand side of this equation is positive, and the first term on the right hand side is negative. T his means that must be
negative.
Example
An object is viewed through a spherical refracting surface like that in case 2, with and. Can the image be seen
at a distance from the surface equal to the radius of t he sphere? If so, determine the distance that the object must be from the
surface (in terms of the radius of the sphere) for this to happen.
Solution
For this case, the and, so the condition we are ask ed to check is:. Plugging this into Equation 4.4.4, we
have:
So we see that this is only a possibility when, which happens to be the case here. Plugging in the values f or and
, we find that the object must be a distance 1.25 times th e radius of the sphere from the surface.
Cases 3 and 4:
The remaining cases follow similarly with the first two. Case 3 involves converging rays () like Case 1, whi ch comes about
because (center is not on the outgoing side), and (light going from slower medium to faster one). It sho uld be
noted that Case 3, like Case 1, includes a possibility that is not depicted in its associated figure. Figure 4.4.6 assumes that the object
point is sufficiently far from the refracting surfa ce (making sufficiently large) that Snell's law will result in the ray being bent
back down to the axis. The fact that a second figure wa s not drawn for either Case 1 or Case 3 should not c onfuse the reader into
thinking that having the rays converge back to the a xis is the only possibility, or that the mathematical result is any different in such
situations (the sign conventions make it all work out!).
Case 4 involves diverging rays () like case 2 because an d.

4.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18462Lateral Magnification
We do not need to go through all the principal rays to derive the lateral magnification relation for t he spherical refractor. We can
simply note that a ray coming from the tip of an ob ject arrow that approaches the refractor parallel to the optical axis is a distance
from the optical axis. Then after hitting the surface, it either converges toward or away from the focal poi nt. The tip of the image
arrow then lies on this angled part of the ray, a dis tance of from the axis. These two heights form simila r right triangles. The
right triangle associated with the object has legs of length and, while the right triangle associated wi th the image has legs of
length and. Setting the ratios of the lengths of their legs e qual, we have an expression for the lateral magnificatio n:
From Equation 4.4.6, we have:
Comparing this lateral magnification with that of the spherical reflector, we see that a factor of has be en introduced. It seems
clear that a greater difference in the two indices o f refraction will cause the light to refract more, which should lead to more
magnification. Comparing with the result from the pl ane refractor (Equation 4.1.6), we see that the lateral magnification is
confirmed to be +1.
This page titled 4.4: Spherical Refractors is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184634.5: Thin Lenses
Building a Lens
While it is interesting to see how images are formed as light passes from one index of refraction to anot her through a spherical
surface, this only rarely happens in the real world. It is far more common for light to come from an ob ject that is in the air (
), pass through a transparent region with a higher ind ex of refraction, then return again to the air befor e being observed. The
light will then be refracted at both surfaces of the region during its journey from the object to the p oint of observation. If both
surfaces of the region are spherical, then the light will either converge or diverge at each surface (de pending upon which of the four
cases of Section 4.4 applies). Such an optical device is called a lens.
Let's take a look at a glass lens that is convex on b oth sides, which is in air. When light enters one side, it is going from a lower
index of refraction (air) to a higher one (glass) th at is convex, which means we have case #1, which is a c onverging refraction. Now
the light is inside the glass, and its next encounter is with a concave surface (from the perspective of inside the glass), p assing from
a higher index of refraction to a lower one. This is case #3, which is also a converging refraction. [See Figure 4.4.2 for references to
the four possible cases.] A double-convex lens is therefore a converging lens.
Figure 4.5.1 – Double Convex Lens
Note that the two surfaces do not necessarily have the same radius of curvature. The surface with the short er radius (the one that is
more sharply-curved) will bend the light more than the o ther surface.
We can in fact put together any combination of surf aces we like in the construction of a lens. A double concave lens will result in
the light experiencing cases 2 and 4, both of which are diverging, causing the light rays that pass throu gh the lens to diverge. The
various combinations of surfaces is shown in the diag ram below. Note that the signs of the radii given ar e found using the sign
convention and assuming that the light is passing fr om left to right, and that a flat plane can be desc ribed as a spherical surface with
an infinite radius.
Figure 4.5.2 – Varieties of Lenses
Tracing a ray through a lens is a daunting bit of ge ometry, and as always, when a calculation is daunting, we m ake a simplifying
approximation. In this case, the simplifying principl e is called the thin lens approximation. This asserts, not surprisingly, that the
lens is very thin, which means that the bending of the light that occurs at each surface essentially happe ns at the same position. The

4.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463two refractions are still successive (a refraction occ urs at one surface then the other), but the light trav els no distance getting from
the point where it changes direction the first time t o where it changes direction a second time. This simpli fies things greatly,
because measurements of quantities like object and im age distances are all referenced to the same place, no matter which surface is
in play.
Defining a Single Focal Length for a Lens
We already know that each surface of a lens has its o wn focal length, but when light that comes upon the len s parallel to the optical
axis, it must go somewhere after it passes through, whic h means that the lens as a whole must have a unique f ocal length. We now
seek what this will be for a lens of index of refraction in a ir with radii of curvature of its two sides equal to and.
The key trick to use here is that after light passe s through the first surface, it appears to be coming from somewhere else (i.e. from
the position of its image). The second surface then r eceives the light, and as far as it "knows," the light is coming from this new
position. That means that the object position for th e second surface is the image position of the first surface. All that remains is to
do two successive image locations, while getting all t he sign conventions right, and the final image positio n will be what is seen as
the apparent origin of light that has passed through bot h surfaces of the lens.
Okay, so if we are looking for the focal length of the lens, we naturally start with a ray that comes into th e lens parallel, and look
for the distance from the lens that it crosses the axis. A parallel ray is equivalent to an object distan ce of infinity (), the first
medium is air (), and the second medium is that of th e lens (), so the image for the first surface (with r adius) is easy
enough to find using Equation 4.4.4:
The image position for this first surface now becomes the object position for the second surface. Because of our thin lens
approximation, the magnitude of the image distance fo r the first surface equals the magnitude of the objec t distance of the second
surface, but now the issue of the signs must be addressed.
Suppose the first surface is concave. Then this surface is case 4, and the ray is made to diverge at this su rface, resulting in an image
that is to the left of the lens (we are still assuming the light is moving left-to-right). With this imag e to the left of the second surface
and the light moving left-to-right, the object dist ance for the second surface is positive (on the incom ing side). But the image
distance calculated was negative (the divergence caus ed a virtual image), so while the image distance for the first surface and the
object distance for the second surface are equal in magnitude, they have opposite signs. We can therefore make the substitution
for the equation at the second surface. Note that this time the light is passing from a region with index o f refraction to
air:
Plugging in the result of Equation 4.5.1 and noting that the final image position is the focal po int of the whole lens gives:
This gives us a prescription for building a lens – gi ven the index of refraction of the material, we can g rind the two spherical
surfaces to radii of and to achieve a focal length give n by. For this reason, this is called the lensmaker equation.
The reader may be troubled that we assumed that the f irst surface is concave. Does a convex first surface re sult in a different
lensmaker equation? The answer is no! If the first surf ace is convex, then the image of the incoming parall el light lands to the right
of the lens. This is a positive-valued image distanc e:. Making this image the object for the second sur face gets confusing.
With the image already to the right of the second su rface, does the light even pass through the second sur face? Does it turn around
and go right-to-left? The answer is neither of these. While the idea may be difficult to visualize concep tually, mathematically the
answer is simple – the light is still going left-to- right, and the object is not on the incoming side, so the object distance is negative:
. This is sometimes referred to as a virtual object, and it can only occur when light is diverted (refle cted or refracted) twice,
so that the image of the first diversion lands beyo nd the surface that causes of the second diversion. Not ice that with and
, and their magnitudes equal, we once again get the relati on, and the same lensmaker equation results.

4.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463
You may have noticed that the term " " comes up a lo t. It's clear that the smaller the value of is, the more sharply the light is bent
by the refraction, which means that the larger is, t he more "focusing power" the device has. Frequently the focusing power of a
lens is measured with this inverse quantity rather th an focal length. This quantity has the units of, which are designated their
own name of diopters ().
Stacking Thin Lenses
With our assumption that lenses are very thin, it's fair to also assume that if two lenses are placed togeth er, the combination is also
very thin. With the ability to refract through one l ens, and then immediately the other, parallel rays t hat come into this combination
of two lenses will focus at a different point than eithe r of the lenses individually. In essence, two (or more) stacked lenses simply
form the equivalent of a new single lens. If we follo w the same process as above to determine the focal le ngth of multiple lenses,
we get sum where every term looks something like for each refracting surface the light passes through. Rathe r than break
down each lens into its two surfaces, however, we have a shortcut – just add the inverses of the individual lens focal le ngths!
Example
You have a machine that grinds glass surfaces to a cert ain specified radius. You use it to make a double-conve x lens out of a
special glass with high index of refraction equal t o. You then use it to make a double-concave lens out of a different type of
glass with index of refraction equal to. Because th e curved surfaces are the same radii, the two lenses fit together perfectly.
When this is done, it forms a single lens that is half-conv ex, half concave, as in the diagram below.
a. If you wanted to grind a third lens with the same machine that h ad the same optical properties of the combined lens abo ve,
but instead use a single type of glass, then would it be dou ble-convex or double concave? Explain.
b. Compute the index of refraction needed to accomplish the ta sk described in (a).
Solution
a. The radius used everywhere is the same, so we will call it “.” The l ens maker equation for these two lenses gives:
When the two lenses are pushed together, the diopter strengths (inverses of the focal lengths) are added to get the new
diopter strength, so since the index of refraction is greater for the converging lens, from the equations above we see that its
diopter strength has a greater magnitude than its di verging counterpart, and the sum will come out positive. The combined
lens will converge light.
b. The combined diopter strength is the sum of the diop ter strengths, so we want to make a lens with a diopte r strength equal
to that sum.
Setting this equal to the diopter strength of a single len s with the same radius and unknown index of refraction, we have:

4.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463Objects and Images
Rays that pass through lenses follow paths that have the same characteristics as ray paths for single refr acting surfaces. Rays
parallel to the optical axis all cross the axis at t he same focal point on the other side of the lens. One would therefore expect the
object and image distances to be related to the foca l length by a formula similar to Equation 4.4.6. The only question is what
happens to the indices of refraction. Well, with lense s, the object and image are in the same medium, which means that and
are the same. It is true that the lens itself has a d ifferent index of refraction, but we have packaged a ll the refractions within the lens
into a single change of direction at a single point, so those details don't come into play. Setting the indices of refraction in Equation
4.4.6 equal to each other gives a simple relation, known as the thin lens equation:
If this looks familiar even without the 's, it's bec ause it is identical to Equation 4.3.5, which we used for spherical mirrors! It is
important to note that if we dig into the details hid den within the variable, we find that for spherical mirrors the focal length is a
simple function of the radius (), while for lenses the focal length comes from the lensmaker equation (two r adii and an index
of refraction). But as along as the specific details of the focal length are not an issue, then this same equation works for both cases.
What is more, we have been very careful in the wordin g of our sign conventions (all that language about "incoming/outgoing" and
"not incoming/not outgoing" sides was carefully chose n), so that the sign conventions work perfectly well for both mirrors and
lenses. And finally, the geometry of magnification also carries over to lenses, which means that Equation 4.3.7 also holds for
lenses.
Principal Rays
While we have greatly economized the mathematics of geometrical optics to incorporate both mirrors and le nses, the physical
processes involved are obviously different. We can ex press these differences by examining ray traces for le nses. We will see that
while they obviously are a bit different from those we di d for mirrors, there are many similarities in the logic.
While for the mirror there were four principal rays, for lenses there are only three. As we saw with mirror ray traces, there are
differences for the diverging and converging cases. We will start with the converging lens. [Note: In our diagrams, we will depict a
converging lens with a double-convex structure, but it can have any combination of surfaces that results in a converging lens (
). Similarly, all diverging lenses are depicted as bei ng double concave, though they too can be any combin ation of surfaces that
results in a diverging lens (). It should also be men tioned that although the diagrams will give these len ses an apparent
thickness, we will be treating them as "thin," which me ans that the bending of rays will all occur at a singl e vertical plane through
the center of the lens.]
A major difference between lenses and mirrors is tha t lenses can allow light to travel in either directi on. Therefore, while a mirror
has a single focal point on its concave side (no mat ter which side is reflecting), lenses have focal points on both sides. Two of the
principal rays behave like we have seen already – on e comes into the lens parallel to the optical axis and exits the lens toward (for
converging lenses) or away from (for diverging lense s) the focal point. The other comes in to the lens th rough (for converging
lenses) or toward (for diverging lenses) the focal poi nt, and exits the lens parallel to the optical axis. The third principal ray passes
directly through the vertex of the lens without diverti ng its path.
Figure 4.5.3 – Principal Rays, Converging Lens (Object Outside Focal P oint)

4.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463
Figure 4.5.4 – Principal Rays, Converging Lens (Object Inside Focal Po int)
Figure 4.5.5 – Principal Rays, Diverging Lens
Checking Ray Traces with the Thin Lens Equation
It is worthwhile to confirm that the ray traces shown ab ove give results predicted by the thin lens equation (Equation 4.5.5) and our
sign conventions.

4.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463
1. converging lens () with distant object () – With, we have, and combining this with the thin lens
equation, we can conclude that, which means that the image is on the outgoing side of the lens, making it a real image
(lies at the intersection of actual light). Furthermore, wi th both and positive, the lateral magnification is negative,
which means that the image is inverted. From the thin lens equation, we can deduce that when, then the image comes out
closer to the lens than the object (), and the lateral m agnification formula tells us that this means that the im age is
diminished. All of these features are reflected in Figure 4.5.3.
2. converging lens () with close object () – This time the thin lens equation results in an image distance that is
negative, because. This indicates that the image will not be on the outgoing side of the lens, and is therefore vi rtual. The
lateral magnification comes out positive in this case, i ndicating that the image must be upright. With a posit ive object distance
and a negative image distance, for the focal length in the t hin lens equation to come out positive, it must be tru e that.
This means that the image must be farther from the lens than the object, and again looking at the lateral magnifica tion equation,
this requires the image to be larger than the object. All of this is in perfect agreement with Figure 4.5.4.
3. diverging lens () – With a positive object distance and a negative focal l ength, the only way that the thin lens equation can
be satisfied is for the image distance to be negative, which means that the image is not on the outgoing side of the le ns, and the
image is virtual. Again the object and image distances hav ing opposite signs means that the image is upright. With the po sitive
object distance and negative image distance needing to pr oduce a negative focal length in the thin lens equation, it must be true
that, which means that the image is closer to the lens tha n the object, and according to the lateral magnification
equation, the image is diminished in size compared to the o bject. The math agrees with Figure 4.5.5.
Example
Two identical objects are placed with the same orienta tion, separated by a distance of. A lens is then pla ced along the line
formed by the two objects such that all three of these items are equally-spaced, as in the diagram below. W hen one views the
light coming from the objects through the lens, one see s two images of equal size (though they do not look l ike it, as the images
are not the same distance away). One of these images is uprigh t, and the other inverted
a. Find the focal length of the lens, including the sign (in dicating whether it is converging or diverging).
b. Determine which of the two images appears larger to the observer.
Solution
a. For an image to be upright for a single lens (where the object distance is always positive), it must be v irtual (), and
for it to be inverted, it must be real (). Single div erging lenses only create virtual images, so the fac t that a real
(inverted) image exists here means this lens must be con verging. Real images for single converging lenses oc cur when the
object is outside the focal length, and virtual images occur when the object is inside the focal length. Ther efore the focal
point of the lens must land between the two objects, g iving it a range of between and. Okay, so let's do t he
actual calculation:
With images of equal size but opposite orientation, thei r lateral magnifications must be negatives of each other. This gives us
information about their image distances (we already know their object distances, which we can use):
We also have the thin lens equations for both objects. Both involve the same lens, so is the same in each case:

4.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18463
Plugging in for and for in the thin lens equation f or object #1, we get:
Adding this equation to the thin lens equation for object # 2, we get:
b. The lateral magnifications are equal, but the one th at appears bigger is the one that results in a larger a ngular
magnification. This honor belongs to the image that is closer to the observer. Since one of the images is real, it moves to the
other side of the lens, where the observer is located. The virtual image remains on the same side of the lens, s o clearly the
real image must look larger to the observer. For a conv erging lens, all real images require objects be farth er from the lens
than the focal length, and virtual images closer tha n the focal length. Therefore object #1 produces the real image, and
image #1 appears larger.
This page titled 4.5: Thin Lenses is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

4.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18464
4.6: Multiple Optical Devices
Image Becomes Object
In the previous section we built a lens from two success ive spherical refractions. The trick we used to get the lensmaker equation
can be extended to many more applications. Indeed, an ytime light is affected by more than one optical dev ice on its way from the
object to the observer, the image that results from t he first optical device in the path is effectively t he source for the second optical
device. The location of this first image can then be used to compute an "object" distance for the secon d device. As usual, the best
way to visualize the physical basis for this assumption is to think about what is happening to the light wave s as it exits the original
object, is affected by the first device (which can be a mirror, a lens, or even just a single surface int erface between two media), and
eventually converges to the image.
Figure 4.6.1 – Image Becomes Object
Alert
Clearly "image becomes object" does not mean that an it em suddenly materializes in empty space! Rather, as the li ght continues
past the convergence point, the waves that emerge ar e indistinguishable from light waves that leave an ac tual object, which
means that the image can subsequently be used as an "ob ject" for further adventures of that light, such as pa ssing through a
lens or bouncing off a mirror.
It should be noted that the image-used-as-an-object has an important difference with an actual object. Th e light that leaves the tip of
an actual object arrow propagates out in all directi ons. The light that leaves the image can only be li ght that took a path from the
original object and was altered by the optical device. This limits the outgoing light of the image to a specific cone. In the figure
above, the optical device is clearly a converging l ens, and the cone of light that leaves the image rep resents the region where one is
able to look at the object through the lens. If one does not look through the lens, of course this ima ge cannot be seen.
Example
A vessel, the bottom of which is a flat mirror, contains water that is deep. Someone looks down into the con tainer at their
reflection, from a height of from the surface of the w ater. Find how far the image they see is from their act ual face. The
index of refraction of water is 1.33.
Solution
This problem includes an extra level of thought that h as not yet been introduced in this text, but which wi ll play an important
role later, so you should not be discouraged if you f ound this especially challenging. To see how this w orks, one has to track
what happens to the light, and what the "apparent" s ource of the light is every time that the light encoun ters a change
(reflection or refraction). We will keep track of w here images and objects are throughout the calculation, so there will be no
need to track the signs of the values (we will use absolut e values throughout).

4.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18464
First, the light leaves the face of the person, on its w ay to the mirror. We know that the mirror will send back the light in a
manner exactly symmetric to how it came into the mirror, b ut the apparent source of the light for the mirror is not positioned
where the person's face is, because the water refracts the light before it gets to the mirror. We therefore need to compute the
distance from the surface of the water that the face appears to be, according to the mirror. In essence, the position o f the
image created by the light passing from the air into t he water becomes the position of the object for the mir ror. The light is
coming from air (into the water, so according the th e mirror the image of the face is farther away from the surface of
the water than the actual face is:
The "object distance" to the mirror equals the apparent distance of the face to the surface of the water, p lus the depth of the
water:
Now after the light reflects, it behaves as if it is c oming from the other side of the mirror, making the appa rent source of light
a distance of from the surface of the water.
This light passes back through the surface of the wat er and is refracted into the air, which means that the apparent source of
the light for the person observing it is closer to the wat er surface than the computed above:
This is the distance from the surface of the water of t he image seen by the person. Adding this to the distance of the face from
the water gives our answer – the distance between the fa ce and its image:.
If the water had not been present, then because it is from the mirror, the image of the face would have been on the
opposite side of the mirror, from the face. So the presence of the water has the effect of bringing the image closer.
Example
A diverging lens is placed in front of a plane mirror as in the diagram to the right. The separation of the l ens and the mirror
exactly equals the magnitude of the lens’ s focal len gth, which is. An object is placed twice this distan ce () on the
other side of the lens (see the diagram below).
a. Find the position of the image seen by eye A (which is looking into the mirror). Express your answer as a d istance measured
from the mirror, and indicate which side of the mirror the image appears on (left or right).
b. Find the lateral magnification (relative to the origi nal object) of the image seen by eye A. Indicate whether the image is
upright or inverted.
c. Repeat (a) and (b) for the image seen by eye B (which is looking through the lens into the mirror).
Solution

4.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18464
a. The object distance is positive, so it is times the focal length of the diverging, negative-focal-leng th lens. Plugging this
into the lens equation gives the position of the firs t image:
The image distance is the same sign as the focal length, so it is negative, placing it on the left side of the lens. This image
becomes the object for the next stage, which is reflecti on off the plane mirror. The distance of this new objec t to the plane
mirror is the distance to the lens (remember it is to the left of the lens), plus the distance between the le ns and the mirror,
which is given to be the focal length. Therefore the distan ce of the first image to the mirror is:
The image formed by the plane mirror is exactly the same d istance behind it as the object is in front of it, so the image
viewed by eye A is behind the mirror. Plugging in for f gives the result: The image seen by eye A is to th e right of the
mirror.
b. The only lateral magnification comes from the lens, be cause plane mirrors provide no lateral magnification (i.e..
This is easily calculated:
The positive value indicates that it is upright, and plane mirr ors don’t invert images, so the image seen by eye A is upright.
c. We use the result for eye A, as the image for the pre vious refraction and reflection becomes the object for the second
refraction. The distance of the reflected image from th e lens is the distance it is behind the mirror plus th e focal length of the
lens (since that is the separation between the lens and the mirror). Note that the object distance is positiv e and the focal
length negative, so we need to include the minus sign as before. Using this value and the lens equation give s the position of
the image seen by eye B relative to the lens:
This is the distance from the lens, so the distance from the mirror is to the left of the mirror. The lateral
magnification is the product of the three lateral magn ifications (the second one being that of the plane mi rror, which is just
1), so we just need to calculate the final lateral magnifi cation:
The magnification is positive and smaller than 1, which mean s the final image is upright and diminished.
Virtual Objects
Another thing that came up in our derivation of the lensmaker equation was the possibility that the light could pass through a
second surface before it was able to converge due to t he first surface. The same can happen with two devices. This seems to cause a
problem with the idea of the image the first optical device being an object for the next optical device, but mathematically we get
around this by giving the object distance for the se cond device a negative value, in accordance with our sign conventions. While
this mathematics does the trick and worked perfectly fo r the lensmaker equation, it is somehow not as satisfy ing as seeing how it
works with a ray trace. While it is a bit tricky to do, this can be achieved as well. Here is the method:
1. Ignore the second device and use a couple of principal rays for the original object and the first optical device t o locate the image
of the first device.
2. Keep in mind that these are not the only two rays that we can s ketch from the object. All of the rays that leave the obj ect
converge toward the first image, even if the light doesn't actually make it there. Of all these rays, select two that start at the first

4.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18464device and are principal rays for the second device. Note that one of these may be a principal ray of the firs t device (the one
that emerges parallel to the optical axis), but others wil l not be.
3. Use two of these principal rays of the second device to sket ch the rays that converge to the final image.
The trick here is that the virtual object is not the origin of rays for the second device, but rather is the target of rays emerging from
the first device before they reach the second device. Let's see an example of how this would work for two conv erging lenses, where
the real image of the first converging lens lands behind t he second.
Figure 4.6.2 – Ray Trace with a Virtual Object
Note that there is an infinite number of rays coming from t he first lens, all of them heading for the first image. We just happen to
choose two that conveniently happen to be principal rays f or the second lens.
Stacking Thin Lenses (Again)
In Section 4.5 we used the lensmaker equation to deduce that multi ple thin lenses placed back-to-back result in a sing le lens with a
diopter strength that is the sum of the diopter stre ngths of the individual lenses (Equation 4.5.4). Here we will show this same
equation follows from the first-image-becomes-second- object idea. We start with two lenses (for the sake o f this discussion, we
will use converging lenses, but this is not required) that are separated by a large distance. We'll defi ne the "total focal length"
as the distance from the first lens to the image of paralle l rays after the second lens.
Figure 4.6.3a – Deriving the Lens-Stacking Formula
To get the parallel incoming rays, we follow the usua l method of placing a point object on the axis very far away from the first lens
(just a single point is all we need to get distances we are looking for, no arrow is necessary). According to the thin lens equation,
this will result in the image point landing at the foc al point of the first lens.
Figure 4.6.3b – Deriving the Lens-Stacking Formula

4.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18464
This image point of the first lens now becomes the obj ect for the second lens, and we can compute the image distance for the
second lens.
Figure 4.6.3c – Deriving the Lens-Stacking Formula

Now we need to use the thin lens equation and do a bit of ma th to write in terms of the other variables:
Now to get the stacked thin lens result, all we need to do is take the limit where the separation of the len ses goes to zero (),
and sure enough, Equation 4.5.4 is the result.
This page titled 4.6: Multiple Optical Devices is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184654.7: Wrap-Up
Simple Magnifier
When one thinks about lenses in the "real world," on e of the first things that leaps to mind is the magni fying glass. With all of our
discussion of lateral magnification in geometrical optics, it's tempting to think that explaining how a single lens facilitates seeing
details of small objects should be simple. But it turns out that a full explanation is more complicated than one woul d think.
The first step in understanding the use of a "simple m agnifier" (a single converging lens) is to return t o the idea that seeing
something better is a function of the fraction of on e's field of view the object occupies. The angle sub tended by the object is
directly related to how big it looks. The angle subt ended is a function of two things: the size of the o bject and its proximity to the
viewer. Viewing objects through lenses results in image s that differ from the object in both of these elements, so we cannot draw a
conclusion about the effect of a magnifying glass on the basis of lateral magnification alone.
One way to "magnify" a small object does not even inv olve a lens – just bring it closer to your eye. The t rouble is, the human eye
can only observe a clear image that is beyond a cert ain distance – too close and it gets blurry. The abil ity to see close items varies
from one person to the next, but the generally-acce pted standard for the near point for human beings (the minimum distance where
a clear image can be seen) is. So whatever lateral ma gnification we can artificially create optically, we can always make the
image easier to see by moving it closer to our eye, up to a d istance of.
Let's suppose we maximize this "natural" form of magn ification for a naked eye. The biggest angle the ite m can subtend in our
view can be easily calculated from the size of the object an d the separation:
Figure 4.7.1 – Maximum "Magnification" for Naked Eye
So our goal is to use a lens to create a situation where the image subtends a larger angle than is indicated by the equation above,
without that image being closer than to the eye (which would make it impossible for a human to see cl early). There are three
single-lens scenarios to choose from: The diverging l ens (Figure 4.5.5), the real image converging lens (Figure 4.5.3), and the
virtual image converging lens (Figure 4.5.4). Let's consider each possibility in turn.
The diverging lens actually has the opposite of the desired effect. The image is actually closer to the observer than the object,
which means that the object must be placed at a dista nce greater than from the observer. The ray trace in Figure 4.5.5 reveals
that the angles subtended by the image and object is the same. This is evident from the fact that the ray t hat passes straight through
the vertex of the lens also passes through the point o f both image and object, creating similar triangles. W ith the object height still
being and the horizontal distance greater than, i t's clear that the angle subtended is smaller for th is case than if we simply
look at the object directly, without the lens.
The real image created by a converging lens can late rally magnify the image as large as we like, and if we then observe this image
from a distance of, the angle subtended can be arb itrarily large. While this works as a magnifier, it c omes with some
impractical aspects to it. The first is that the image is inverted, which can cause problems for application s like reading fine print.
More importantly, to create a real image, the lens m ust be a distance from the object that it greater th an the focal length of the lens,
and the observer must be a distance from the lens that is at least the object distance plus. This is best i llustrated with an actual
calculation...
Suppose we have a lens with a focal length of (this is a "focusing power" of), and we want to magnify
it so that it subtends twice the angle that it subtend s when we look at it directly. Whether we look directly at the object or look at its
real image, we will be doing so at a distance of, so what we need to do is laterally magnify the image by about a factor of 2.
[Actually doubling the height doubles the tangent, but we still assume that the tangent of the angle is approximately equal to the

4.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18465angle.] The lateral magnification is 2 when the image distance is twice the object distance,. Putting these criteria into the
thin lens equation gives:
The observer must be an additional from the lens t o see this image clearly, which places the observer from the lens and
from the object. Okay, so this can be accomplished, but the idea of getting an inverted magnification from a distance of
more than a meter from the object is not very practic al. Let's look at the virtual image case of the converging len s.
Like the diverging lens, the object and image both sub tend the same angle, but unlike the case of the div erging lens, it is the object
that is closer to the observer. The observer's abili ty to focus on what it is seeing depends upon the image being at least away.
This means we can actually move the object closer than from the observer, and since the angle subtended i s determined by
the height of the object and its distance from the observer, this allows the angle to get larger than it can without the lens present.
What is more, unlike the case of the real image, th e observer doesn't need to be any distance at all fro m the lens, as the image forms
behind it.
Let's re-do the calculation for the converging len s, this time using a virtual image. We want the image to be a distance of
from the observer, who can place their eye right up t o the lens. This means that the image distance we want is just
. From this we can solve for the object distance, and with that, the lateral magnification:
Given that the object and image form similar triangl es, the angular magnification comes out approximatel y () the same. So
this gives us a magnification that is greater than, the ima ge is upright, and the lens is only from the object.
There is one advantage that comes with the real image method that is not available in the virtual image c ase, though it is not easy to
implement. By adjusting the object distance closer to the focal length, the size of the image can be made as large as we like, which
means that the observer can just look from a distance of farther, and the amount of angular magnification can be made
arbitrarily large for a given lens. For the virtual i mage case, we can increase the angle subtended by the image by moving the object
closer to the lens, but doing so also moves the imag e closer to the lens (and observer). So this magnifie r is limited to images that
are from the lens.
Converging lenses used for magnification are often l abeled according to their magnifying power. When they are, the standard is
usually the angular magnification when the object is placed at the focal point of the lens. That is, the magnifying power of a lens is
the ratio of the angle subtended when the object is at the focal point and the angle subtended when no le ns is used (and the object is
at). This comes out to just a simple ratio of the two object distances:
Magnification Devices
Not surprisingly, a lens has greater magnifying power when its focal length is shorter. So suppose we have a rather powerful
magnifier that we would like to use to view something v ery small or something very far away. In both cases, fo r the magnifier to
work, we need to get the object a very small distance (less than the focal length) from the lens. This is difficult to do for very small
objects because the tolerances are so small, and bec ause it might be difficult to get light to the smal l object with the lens looming so
close to it. And it is obviously impossible for distant o bjects.
The solution is to use two lenses. The first lens (known as the objective) has as its primary function the creation of a real image at a
convenient position. Then the second lens (the eyepiece) functions as a simple magnifier that acts on that r eal image to increase the
angle it subtends.
The device that magnifies small objects is of course a microscope. As a secondary function, the objective lens creates a laterally
magnified real image, because the objective is prett y close to the object, while the real image it create s is farther away. Then the
real image becomes an object for the eyepiece, which the n magnifies it further (in the usual angular sense of a simpl e magnifier).

4.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18465
The device that magnifies distant objects is a telescope. Its objective lens's secondary function is to colle ct as much of the light as
possible coming from the object (this explains why obj ective lenses are so much larger than the eyepieces). The object distance for
the objective lens is very large and the image distan ce very small, so obviously it exhibits a tiny fract ional lateral magnification and
diminishes the image (stars are very large compared to their images). But this real image is then locat ed very precisely at a position
where the eyepiece can magnify the angle it subtends.
Odds and Ends
There are a number of interesting observations and side discussions about optics that don't fit well into the development of the
subject that we will now address.
1. light intensity – With all the geometry we do with straight-line rays, i t's easy to forget that we are talking about light waves.
Figure 4.6.1 expresses this wave nature in the context of geometrica l optics fairly well, and just reminding ourselves of th e
wave nature in this way leads to some interesting ideas. Consid er light intensity. If we have a plane wave of light coming i nto a
converging lens parallel to the optical axis, what comes o ut the other side is a spherical wave that is collapsing down to the
focal point. We already know that outwardly-moving spheri cal waves lose intensity as they move outward (the inverse -square
law), so waves that are collapsing into a single point grow in intensity. This is why one can cause a piece of pap er to light on
fire with a magnifying glass in the sunlight. By placing t he lens a distance equal to its focal length from the paper, all of the
light energy passing through the lens is concentrated to a small region, raising the temperature to the combustion po int.
2. wave forms and standing waves – For many applications we discussed in physical optics, we r equired plane waves. We can
get these by looking at a very distant source like the sun, but we can also do this locally by placing a point sou rce at the focal
point of a concave mirror. All the light that reflects o ff the mirror will come away from it parallel to the optica l axis – plane
waves. Lasers also figure prominently in our study of physical optics (thanks to their coherence), and one of the impo rtant
elements in the design of lasers is something called a resonant cavity. This is essentially two spherical mirrors that cause the
light to reflect back-and-forth, forming a standing wav e, into which energy is pumped, and from which the beam emerge s (like
sound coming from a standing wave in an organ pipe).
3. images have no substance – We have mentioned this already, but it bears repeating. When we do geometrical optics, the object
and image arrows are both drawn in the ray trace, and in some s ense are given equal status. But the object is an actual t hing,
made of atoms, while an image is a designated point in sp ace where the light appears to be coming from. The thi ng that can get
lost is that light only appears to be coming from that p lace if the actual light can be seen. Put in more visceral terms, an image
created by a lens can only be seen if the observer look s through the lens! It sounds silly to have to say this, but in a ray trace
diagram, one can see from any angle the image arrow that is drawn, and the notion that one must be looking in a spec ific
direction is lost.
4. projection onto a screen – Everyone knows that images can be projected onto a screen, b ut exactly how does that work? The
first thing to note is that every position on the scree n is associated with a single point on the image, which mea ns that for a
sharp image to occur, all the light from a single point on the object must conver ge to a single point on the screen, and from there
it is reflected. This means that the screen must be placed exac tly at the position of the image (the point where the rays converge
is the definition of the position of the image). If the dist ance is off slightly, then light from nearby points on the object land at
the same point. At any given point, most of the intruding li ght comes from nearby points, and this is perceived as bl urring of the
image. There is one other very important thing about pro jected images: It is not possible to project a virtual image onto a
screen. The reason should be obvious – if a screen is placed whe re the rays converge for a virtual object, there is not actually
any light there, so it cannot reflect off that screen.
5. lens size – If we have two lenses of equal focal lengths, what is dif ferent about them if they are different sizes? One thin g we
don't tend to do is discuss the light that misses the lens a nd continues in its straight line. This light does not co ntribute to the
image, which means that "collecting" more light with a lar ger lens only affects the brightness of the image. It perha ps seems
strange that coating the left half of a lens with an opaque pa int will not cut the image in half, but a dimmer version of the same
image is what is seen.
Example
A ray trace for an object near a plane mirror is shown below. If a converging lens with the focal length sh own is placed at the
position indicated (two focal lengths from the positi on of the image), find the distance that the new imag e is from the original
image.

4.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18465
Solution
This problem points out how easy it is to get caught u p in the geometry while losing sight of what is physic ally going on. The
lens has been placed behind the mirror. Clearly this will not change in any way the image se en in the mirror. The "new"
image will be the same as the original image.
Summary of Geometrical Optics Mathematics
To close this chapter, its useful to pull together al l of the mathematical relations into one place, as it allows us to see familiar
patterns that run through all of them. In particular, it is interesting to note how defining variables in c ertain ways has allowed us a
great deal of economy, especially in the sign conventio ns.

Looking at these, we can draw the following conclusions for cases involving single optical devices only (when an image for one
device can become an object for a second device, these do n't necessarily apply):
Object distances are positive.
When an image is virtual, its image distance is negative, which makes the magnification positive, so virtual images are upright
and real images are inverted.
Converging devices can produce real or virtual images (re al when, virtual when), while diverging devices can only
produce virtual images. This follows from the sign of the focal length and the fact that object distances are posit ive.
Diverging devices (diverging lenses and convex mirrors) produce diminished images (which, as stated above, must be upright
and virtual), since the negative value of and positive value of requires that is smaller in magnitude than.
This page titled 4.7: Wrap-Up is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics
5.1: Temperature
5.2: Thermal Expansion
5.3: Heat Capacity and Phase Transitions
5.4: Modes of Heat Transfer
5.5: Thermodynamic States of Ideal Gases
5.6: Equipartition of Energy
5.7: Thermodynamic Processes
5.8: Special Processes
This page titled 5: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184665.1: Temperature
Thermal Energy
Back in Physics 9A, the idea of thermal energy first arose in the context of energy conservation. W e concluded that work done by
non-conservative forces would convert mechanical ener gy into this form of energy, which became internal t o the system, and didn't
spontaneously return to mechanical form. We know intu itively that this form of energy reveals itself to o ur senses through
temperature. We also can intuit that two objects at d ifferent temperatures that are brought into contact c an exchange energy and
change their temperatures (cold milk added to hot coffee b oth cools the coffee and warms the milk).
It therefore makes sense that we begin our exploration of this topic by examining the concept and the measu rement of temperature,
but before we do, two definitions are in order:
thermal contact: when two systems are allowed to directly excha nge thermal energy with each other
thermal equilibrium: when two systems in thermal contact n evertheless exchange zero net thermal energy
Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
Imagine the following scenario: Three systems, which we will call A, B, and C, are arranged as shown in the left figure below (in
thermal contact), exchanging thermal energy. They are allowed to continue this until systems A and B are in thermal equilibrium,
while systems B and C are also in thermal equilibrium. The question is, af ter these equilibria are reached (the middle figure), if
system A and C are brought into thermal contact (the right figure), will they automatically be in thermal equilibrium?
Figure 5.1.1 – Thermal Equilibrium Thought Experiment
We won't beat around the bush on this – the answer is "yes." While worded in the arcane language of physics wit h all the references
to thermal equilibrium, the answer is fairly obvious when worded differently: When two systems come to therm al equilibrium, they
have reached the same temperature, and when two systems that have the same temperature come into contact, no thermal energy is
exchanged between them. That is, we don't see one of the m get spontaneously hotter than the equilibrium tem perature while the
other gets cooler than the same temperature.
The key thing to take away from this is that tempera ture is an indicator of whether a thermal transfer will spontaneously occur
between two systems in thermal contact. We know this is true intuitively, and this fact explains the peculi ar name of this law. Back
in the 19th century when thermodynamics was being deve loped, the first and second laws of thermodynamics were expressed. In
the 20th century there was a somewhat more rigorous t reatment of the subject, and physicists realized that for completeness one
should probably state that a property that we call “ temperature” exists and can be uniquely defined. They didn’t feel like it was a
good idea to make this a later law in the queue (the re were three laws of thermodynamics by then, and in the 60’s another principle
was dubbed the fourth law), so they went backwards to zero.
To co-opt a famous phrase from Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart in 1964, temperature is not easy to defi ne, but when it comes
to determining if one thing is hotter than another, you know it when you see it. What this means is that temperature has many easil ymeasurable consequences in the physical world, and we can define temperature in a relative sense in terms of those consequences.
We will see exactly how we do this now, and in fact we wi ll even come up with a clever way of defining it in a n absolute sense (i.e.
we will not have to compare temperatures).

5.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18466
Relative Temperature Scales
When it comes to defining a temperature scale, the f act that (for now) we are only interested in differen ces means that we can set
our scale arbitrarily. One way to do this is to pick a phenomenon that we can refer to as our reference. One phenomenon that we
know is related to temperature is phase changes. We co mmonly see water in all three of its phases – ice, li quid water, and steam –
and water is the most abundant substance on the surfa ce of our planet, so it seems like a good choice. We know that it freezes at
some low temperature and boils at some high temperat ure (well, we are actually defining temperature such that it is lower when
water freezes than when it boils). Therefore we can arb itrarily set temperature equal to zero degrees at t he freezing point, and set it
equal to 7.5 degrees at the boiling point. We can th en write these melting and boiling points as 0º W and 7.5º W. On this scale, the
standard temperature of a healthy human body is 2.775 ºW. This is not a very compelling scale, and one that m akes more sense is
the celsius (or centigrade) scale, which divides the temperature from water free zing to boiling into 100 equal degrees, starting at
zero for freezing. Another is the fahrenheit scale, which starts at 32º F for freezing and 212º F for boiling.
Digression: Give the Fahrenheit Some Love!
It may seem like the fahrenheit scale is incredibly arbi trary, but in fact it has many practical advantages ove r the celsius scale.
These advantages are decidedly “human” in nature. Our abi lity to sense temperature differences is pretty sensitiv e (depending
upon many factors), so having more degrees between two c lose temperatures provides us a level of precision that is easier to
relate to (without having to resort to more decimal p laces). This is especially important if we are reading t he temperature off a
device (thermometer) that has only whole number gradation s. Another human element is that the fahrenheit scale reserves 0º
and 100º for (more-or-less) the extremes of human exper ience (at least in a cold northern climate, like whe re the German
physicist Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit lived). And there is one other nice feature, which interestingly is rel ated to the advantage of
using degrees instead of radians when measuring angle s. The circle is divided into 360 degrees so that one can subdivide it an
enormous number of ways, while still making the angle o bservable – 360 has prime factors of:. Well, the number of
subdivisions of the Fahrenheit scale from freezing to boiling water is also very high, since the differenc e is 180ºF. In a time
before calculators, such advantages were always welcome.
We have two points on our temperature scale that we c an measure (using water), and these two points define th e line that is our
scale, but the question arises, “ How do we measure the temperatures between the freezing po int and the boiling point (and the
temperatures beyond them in both directions)? ” We do this not by measuring temperature directly, b ut rather by measuring the
effects of temperature changes. We will look at a few of these ef fects, and how they can be used to fashion a thermometer.
Gas Thermometers and the Absolute Temperature Scale
The first effect we will look at is how temperature cha nges cause changes in pressure in a gas (assuming tha t everything else is held
fixed). Suppose we perform an experiment where we measure the pressure of a gas for many temperatures (but a f ixed volume) and
graph the results. We find that the relationship is l inear, but the graphs of different gases (or differen t volumes of the same gas)
have different slopes. When this was first analyzed, th e technology was not available to bring the temperat ures down extremely
low, but extending these graphs reveals the remarkabl e result that when the pressure hits zero, all the gra phs hit the axis at the same
point!
Figure 5.1.2 – Extrapolating Absolute Zero

5.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18466
What this suggests is that we can redefine the zero po int for temperature, and it will hold for all gases i n all circumstances – an
absolute scale is born! All that remains is to deter mine what temperature differences between neighboring integers should be used,
and Celsius was the choice. So essentially the absolute temperature scale (a unit of measurement called kelvins, no “degrees”) is the
same as Celsius, with the zero point shifted backward. How far?.
Notice that this result also provides us an opportuni ty to simply relate pressures and temperatures of a gas in a confined volume.
Re-drawing the vs. graph with the axis measured in ke lvins, we get a line that intercepts the origin:
Figure 5.1.3 – Gay-Lussac's Law
Using similar triangles, we can immediately derive a rela tionship between pressures and temperatures for gases con fined to a fixed
volume:
This page titled 5.1: Temperature is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184675.2: Thermal Expansion
The Microscopic Model of Thermal Energy
Another phenomenon commonly seen that is a result of a changing temperature is the expansion/contraction o f solids and liquids.
While we may know that this occurs, understanding why it occurs requires a bit of review from Physics 9A.
Whenever one wants to talk about the fundamentals of thermal energy, two words immediately come up: microscopic and random.
That is, we see thermal energy as the random motions of the tiny particles that comprise the macroscopic ob jects we see. A
macroscopic indicator of the density of this random microscopic energy is what we call temperature. How does th is energy
manifest itself? Well, like any energy, it comes in basically two forms: potential and kinetic. We already know what the KE is, but
on the microscopic level, what is the PE?
The potential energy comes from inter-particle forc es that are at their core electromagnetic in nature. But there are many electric
charges involved, and the potential energy function associated with this complicated combination of forc es generally takes on a
shape that looks like this:
Figure 5.2.1 – Molecular Potential Energy
Recall that the force can be determined from the PE graph by taking the negative of the derivative (technic ally, the gradient):
So the places on this curve that have negative slopes have positive forces, and the positive direction is in the -direction, which is
a repulsive force. When the slope is positive, the force direction is negative, which is in the -direction a nd is therefore attractive.
We therefore have a force that is alternately repuls ive and attractive around a certain equilibrium posi tion – near the bottom of the
dip, usually called a potential well. The PE curve down there is closely approximated by a parabol a, so the KE and PE of the
particle combine to result in a physical system that looks very much like two particles bound together wit h a spring, with the
equilibrium point of the spring being the separatio n of the particles associated with the bottom of the well. [Go here for a more
complete review of this topic from Physics 9A.]
Figure 5.2.2 – Modeling Two-Particle Interactions with a Spring

5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18467
We know that when we add energy to a spring system, th e amplitude of the oscillations increases. The same is true here – the
distance across the well widens. But unlike a spring system, this PE curve is not quite symmetric. When the energy of the particleparticle system is increased, the average separation actua lly increases.
Figure 5.2.3 – Increasing Energy Increases Average Separation
Keep in mind that when energy is added to a macroscop ic system, it gets distributed through all the partic les, raising all of their
energies, and increasing all of their average separa tions. If we have particles in a row, and the average separation increases by
some small factor, then the overall length of this ch ain of particles increases by the same factor. While the amount of change on the
microscopic level is incredibly small, it is measurable on the macroscopic level because there are so many particle s.
Linear Expansion
The end result of this is that (for reasonably low tem perature changes) the percentage expansion/contractio n of the length of an
object is proportional to the temperature change:

5.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18467
The constant is called the coefficient of linear expansion, and it has units of (or, equivalently,). This is a constant that
depends upon the type of material we are looking at.
Alert
We can use for temperature here, because we are only interested in temperature changes. The scale for kelvin and celsius are
the same, only differing in their zero points. It will be a good idea as we go forward to keep close track of when these scales are
interchangeable (temperature changes) and when they are n ot (absolute temperature related to pressure, for example).
This thermal expansion formula can be rewritten so that it relates an initial length to a final length tha t occurs due to a temperature
change:
Example
A structural engineer is designing the portion of a bridge where steel girders rest on top of concrete pylons, as shown in the
diagram below. Space needs to be reserved between con secutive girders in the expansion joint, so that a t hermal expansion of
the girders will not cause them to butt against each other and buckle, and the width of the concrete pylo n must be sufficient so
that thermal contraction of the girder does not resu lt in it falling off the pylon. If the distance betw een the centers of consecutive
pylons is, find the minimum width of the pylons for no buckling or slippage of the girders to occur for a t emperature range
between the extremes of and. The amount of thermal cont raction/expansion of the concrete pylons is negligibl e,
and the coefficient of linear expansion of steel is.
Solution
The longest that a girder can be is the separation o f the pylon centers, or else consecutive girders would buckle with each
other. When a girder contracts due to cooling, both end s get drawn-in, so the shortest the girder can be is t he pylon
separation minus the pylon width, so:
The maximum expansion/contraction occurs when the tempera ture swings from the minimum to the maximum value (a
difference), so:
Solving for the width, we get:
Naturally in practice one would want to provide much more tolerance than this, but this is the absolute lower limit.
Volume Expansion
Of course, solids and liquids expand in more than just one dimension when their temperatures increase, and we can extend our
previous analysis to determine the amount of volume expansion. For simplicity, we will consider a cube (this works with any shape,

5.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18467
such as a sphere, but the calculus is easiest in cartesia n coordinates):
Figure 5.2.4 – Infinitesimal Volume Expansion
We already know how to handle the linear expansion of each of the dimensions of this cube, so now we want to determine how
much the volume expands as a result. The difference of the final and init ial volumes is:
This is an infinitesimal change in the volume, so we exp ect an infinitesimal on the right-hand-side of the equation, but the product
of multiple infinitesimals as we see in the last two te rms are vanishingly small compared to the single infi nitesimal, so we throw
them away. We can now do a bit of algebra on what remains, to get the effect of temperature change on the volume:
This looks very similar to the equation for linear exp ansion, with the coefficient replaced with. We can r ename this constant "
" and call it the coefficient of volumetric expansion, and for all but anomalous materials (such as crysta ls that expand different
amounts along different axes) or large temperature changes (where those other terms we threw out might beco me significant), it
simply equals three times the coefficient of linear ex pansion.
Digression: The Weirdness of Water
There is one notable exception to this phenomenon, and it happens to apply to the most common substance on the Earth’ s
surface: water. It turns out that water near its freez ing point actually expands as it cools. In addition, it expands significantly
more when it changes phase to ice. If it did not, then ice would sink rather than float (which means, for e xample, that ponds
would freeze from the bottom-up, making things significantly less comfortable for fish).
Expansion Thermometers and Thermostats
Now that we know that the expansion of a substance is pro portional to its temperature change, we can get back to our idea of using
temperature-based phenomena to measure temperature b y using this phenomenon to fashion a thermometer. The simplest is the
mercury thermometer. As the mercury changes temperatur e, it expands or contracts, so if we confine its expans ion to be along a
straight line, we can mark the container (a thin gla ss tube) with a linear scale and the temperature will follow that scale. Another
type of thermometer involves what is called a bimetallic strip.
If we take two flat strips of different metals with diff erent coefficients of thermal expansion and adhere t hem to each other, then
raising their temperature will cause their lengths to e xpand by different amounts, resulting in the combina tion bending in the
direction of the strip that reacts less to the temperature change (i.e. the one with a lower coefficient of linear e xpansion).
Figure 5.2.5 – Bimetallic Strip

5.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18467
The temperature scale can therefore be measured in an angular manner – placing a scale that records the amount o f bending will
mirror the temperature change. An interesting applica tion of this is the thermostat. The strip is made of a conducting material, so
electric current will run through it. If we position e lectrical leads so that when it curls too much, the st rip closes a circuit with the
air conditioning, it will come on automatically. If it cools to much (curls back the other way), it can c lose a circuit that kicks-on a
heater.
This page titled 5.2: Thermal Expansion is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184685.3: Heat Capacity and Phase Transitions
Definition of Heat
In the pantheon of misused physics terms, at the top of the list must be the word heat. Standard usage would have us believe that it
is a quantity of energy stored within a system, measura ble by temperature. But we already have a term for t hat – thermal energy.
Heat is a much more subtle concept.
In Physics 9A, we learned about the idea of work as a mea ns of transferring energy between systems, or between t ypes (e.g. from
potential energy to kinetic energy, or mechanical e nergy to thermal energy). Clearly it would make no se nse to say that two systems
contain a certain amount of work, which then can be tr ansferred between them. The definition of work makes it clear that it only
exists as a transfer – the contained energy is kinetic, potential, or thermal, and when energy is moved or converted through a force
acting through a distance, the energy is transferred throug h the process of work.
Heat is precisely like work in this regard. It is a pro cess of the transfer of energy between systems, which n ecessarily requires an
interaction between the systems. In the case of work, the interaction involved is a macroscopic net force. The emphasis here needs
to be on the word "net," which indicates an imbalance. For heat transfer to occur, there also needs to be an imbalance, but in that
case the imbalance needs to be in temperature. Micros copically, this means that when two systems come into th ermal contact, the
random motions of particles naturally tend toward bri nging the average energies of the particles in both systems into balance. In
short, work is energy transfer resulting from a (macro scopic, non-random) force imbalance, while heat is energy transfer resulting
from a temperature imbalance, which is expressed microscopically as an imbalance in ave rage particle energy.
Heat Capacity
We know that work can convert energy back-and-forth be tween kinetic and potential energy (when the force is conservative), and
can transfer energy into thermal form (when the force is non-conservative), but because heat involves temp erature differences, it is
obviously intimately tied to thermal energy, and not mechanical energy. The most natural first question to ask is therefore, "How is
the amount of heat transferred into or out of a system related to the temperature change that results from th at transfer?"
We can answer this question through direct experiment, and the results of such an experiment are quite int uitive. Given that the
temperature is a measure of average particle energy, then it stands to reason that if we add a known quant ity of heat to a sample and
the temperature goes up (say), we would expect that a dding the same amount of energy again to the same samp le would have
the same effect. After all, the energy added is divid ed among the same number of particles each time, so t he average energy per
particle will go up the same each time. We express this resul t as a statement of proportionality:
Another fairly obvious factor is the amount of matter in the sample. Again, the added heat is distributed a mongst the particles in the
sample, and the temperature change is a measure of h ow much their average energies go up. If we put in a known quantity of heat,
then the more particles there are in the sample to share this energy, the less each particle's temperatu re changes. This means that the
heat needed to raise the temperature a certain amou nt is proportional to the amount of matter in the s ample. Now the "amount of
matter" can be measured in many ways, and we will use two different ones, depending upon which is more conveni ent. Here we
will look at the most obvious choice – the mass of th e sample. We therefore extend the proportionality ab ove to a factor of the
amount of mass:
It's clear that the units don't match here, so there will need to be a constant of proportionality to tur n this into an equality. But there
may be additional information that needs to be cont ained within that constant as well. In this case we really do need to appeal to
experiment, and we find that different substances requi re different constants for the equality to hold. We therefore introduce the
specific heat capacity,, which differs from one substance to the next, and wh ich completes the relationship between heat
transferred and temperature change:

5.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18468
The mass is always a positive quantity, and we define t he specific heat capacity as a positive value, which means that when
. The temperature of a system rises when heat enters it, so in defining heat capacity as a positive value, we set the following
sign convention:
whenever heat enters a system, and whenever heat exits a system
Digression: Specific Heat Capacity
Perhaps the reader is wondering where the name for this constant comes from. The word "specific" generally comes into
scientific vernacular whenever one wants to factor ou t the role of a sample's mass. For example, the "specific gravity" of a
sample is the ratio of its mass to the mass of an equal v olume of water. So two samples of the same substance that have different
masses have the same specific gravity. The specific heat capacity factors out the role of mass as well – i.e. the heat capacity per
unit mass.
The second question is how the word "capacity" applie s. The idea is that the heat capacity (the product of specific heat capacity
and mass) is a measure of a sample's "capacity" to take in heat energy for a given temperature increase. Sampl es with a large
heat capacity can take in a lot of heat energy with out changing their temperature very much. There is a simil ar use of a
derivative of the word "capacity" (called "capacita nce") in the field of electromagnetic theory, which you will study in Physics
9C. In this case, it measures a system's "capacity" to separ ate charge across a given voltage difference.
The mention of specific gravity in the digression po ints out a common theme in chemistry and physics – u sing water as a standard
for units of measurement. We already have a standard set of units (SI) that we have been using since day 1 of Physics 9A, but it is
useful to point out a very common unit of energy – the calorie. This is defined as the amount of heat energy that must be added to 1
gram of water to raise its temperature by 1 degree Celsius. In other words:
We can, of course, convert between calories and joules, and it turns out that:
Alert
Because calculations involving heat capacity involve changes in temperature, it's okay to use Celsius in t he units rather than
Kelvins – changes in one of these equals changes in the oth er.
This provides us with a powerful tool for solving proble ms. If we put a hot piece of metal into a container of cool water, we can
relate the starting temperatures to the final tempe rature reached when the two substances come to equilibr ium. All we need to do is
invoke conservation of energy (the heat that leaves one substance enters the other – and be careful to follow sign conventions
properly), and use the above expressions. We can also m easure the change in temperature in a reservoir of water that surrounds a
chemical reaction to determine how much energy goes into or comes out of a chemical reaction. This process is commonly referred
to as calorimetry.
Example
A chunk of aluminum is left in a pot of boiling water at until it comes to thermal equilibrium with the wat er. It is
then placed into an insulated vessel containing of w ater at, and the system is allowed to come to thermal
equilibrium. Find the final temperature this system reach es. The specific heat capacity of aluminum is.
Solution
The starting point is noting that the insulated conta iner allows for no heat transfer to or from outside the system, which
means that all heat exchanged is between the aluminum and the water. All the heat that leaves the hot alumi num enters the
cool water, so energy conservation (and our sign conve ntion for heat) demands (the "a" subscript refers to aluminum and the
"w" to water):

5.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18468
Now plugging in Equation 5.3.3 for, we have:
Now we use the fact that the changes in temperature go from the starting temperatures to the same final tempera ture
(thermal equilibrium), and solve for the final temperature:
Note that the final expression before the numerical an swer is exactly a weighted average of the two tempera tures, with the
weightings of each temperature being the heat capacity o f each substance.
The second version of heat capacity we will work with c hanges the proportionality into terms of moles rathe r than mass. In this
case, we refer to the constant as molar heat capacity, and we denote it with an upper-case:
The in this formula is the number of moles in the sa mple. We will find this version to be very useful for gases in particular. It also
fits well with some of the more general thermodynamic concept s that we will get to later.
Phase Transitions and Latent Heat
When it comes to heat transferring into or out of s ubstances, changing the temperature of the sample is no t all that can occur. The
sample can also undergo a phase change. By "phase" we mean the solid, liquid, and gaseous states of matter. These differ primarily
in how the particles involved interact with each othe r. Adding heat to a sample changes part or all of it fr om solid into liquid
(melting), or from liquid into gas (boiling). Having heat exit a sample can result in the phase changing in the opposite direction:
liquid to solid (freezing) or gas to liquid (condensing).
What is interesting about phase changes is that they occur at a fixed temperature. The temperature at which solid/liquid transitions
occur is called the melting point of that substance, while the temperature at which liqu id/gas transitions occur is called the boiling
point. Note that the temperature of melting is the same as the temperature of freezing, and the temperature of boiling is the same as
the temperature of condensing. A transitions that occ urs at a fixed temperature requires a different rela tionship than above between
the heat transferred and the change it invokes. Rat her than being proportional to the amount of temper ature change, the heat
added/lost is proportional to the amount of mass made to change phase. We write it this way:
The value employs a lowercase to express a the amou nt of mass that changes phase which is assumed to always be a positive
quantity, without invoking the "after-minus-before" th at one generally associates with use of the uppercase – the amount of mass
present doesn't change (it doesn't go anywhere), there is just some amount of mass that is changing phase. T he sign is positive
when heat is entering the system,, and the substance is either melting or vaporizing. The sign is negat ive when heat is
leaving the system,, and the substance is either free zing or condensing. The constant is called the latent heat. This is a
rather confusing name for this quantity, on a coupl e of counts. First, it is not heat – it doesn't even h ave the units of energy. And
second, "latent" seems to imply that there is some hea t sitting around stored in a sample, a misconception we have already
addressed above. For any given substance, the constant is different if it involves a phase change between so lid and liquid than if
it involves liquid and gas. The constant associated with the former we call the latent heat of fusion (), and the the constant that
deals with the latter is called the latent heat of vaporization ().
Naturally processes where heat is exchanged can involv e both temperature change and phase change at the sa me time (such as ice
melting in a cup of warm water until equilibrium is r eached), but assuming the system where the process is occurring is insulated,
energy conservation (heat lost by one substance is gained by the other) shows the way.
Example
A sealed insulated vessel containing a quantity of water is heated until it is brought to a boil, and t he heating continues until all
of the water is steam at a temperature of. One fifth as much boiling (liquid) water is then injected into the vessel and the
contents are held at constant pressure and are allo wed to come to equilibrium. Find the final state of the contents of the vessel –

5.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18468
the percentage of water in each phase (if mixed), or th e temperature of the contents (if all in one phase). The specific heat
capacity (at constant pressure) of steam is about, an d the latent heat of vaporization of water is.
Solution
Let's start with a sketch to clarify what is happening here:
Energy is leaving the hotter steam and entering the co oler water. At least for awhile, this will result in the steam cooling off
while some of the water changes phase to steam. We won ’t know, until we do the calculation, if all of the w ater will change to
steam (and then get hotter than the boiling point), or if the steam will come down to the boiling point, ther eby reaching
thermal equilibrium. We’ll start by calculating the en ergies required to do both of these things – unfortu nately there is no
shortcut to avoid having to do this.
We see that it takes more energy to turn all of the liquid water into steam than to reduce the temperature of the steam to the
boiling point, so this heat transfer will end with a mi x of liquid water and steam at. We now calculate th e mass of the
water changed to steam in terms of the starting mass of the ste am, using energy conservation:
The total amount of steam at the end can now be divided by the total amount of steam + liquid water to get the percentage s:
So the final result is 93.5% steam and 6.5% liquid water, a t a temperature of.
Suppose we wanted to transition a very cold solid all the way to a very hot gas. There would be several steps involved:
add energy to raise the solid's temperature to the melting point
add energy to change the phase from solid to liquid (whil e not changing the temperature)
add energy to raise the liquid's temperature to the boi ling point
add energy to change the phase from liquid to gas (while no t changing the temperature)
add energy to raise the gas's temperature
Every one of these steps involves a different constan t. The specific heat capacities of the solid, liquid, and gaseous phases of the
same substance are not the same, and the latent heat of fusion is not the same as the latent heat of vapo rization for the same
substance. The full process is depicted in the graph bel ow.
Figure 5.3.1 – Effect of Heat Transfer on Temperature and Phase

5.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18468
[Note: In the final section of the graph, you'll no te that the molar heat capacity is used. This is becau se it is more common to
measure the amount of a gas in moles rather than in units of mass.]
This page titled 5.3: Heat Capacity and Phase Transitions is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Tom Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184705.4: Modes of Heat Transfer
Conduction
We know the effects of heat being transferred into o r out of systems, but now we are going to take a look at the ways in which this
transfer can occur. As we stated earlier, “heat” is a ra ther generic description of energy transfer due to a temperature difference
between two systems, and we will see there are three mo des through which this transfer can occur. The first is the most intuitive,
and as it turns out, the one we can most easily deal with ma thematically. It is called conduction.
As we saw with thermal expansion, the trick to understan ding conduction is to consider what is happening on a microscopic scale.
Consider a solid cylindrical object that connects two systems at different temperatures. This cylinder act s as the conduit for heat
energy to flow from the hotter system to the cooler one. We model this cylinder microscopically using para llel chains of particles
joined by springs.
Figure 5.4.1 – Heat Conductor Model
[Technically, these particles should be attached to al l of their nearest neighbors by springs, but we will only be looking at the
transfer of the heat along the length of the cylinder, so we have simplified the model accordingly.]
It should be clear from this model how heat energy can be transferred from one end of the cylinder to the other: If we vibrate the
particles on one end of the cylinder, they will vibr ate their nearest neighbors, and the effect will car ry its way down to the other
end. This is easy to see, but what is tougher to unders tand is that we will be considering only steady-state circumstances, which
means that the particles on each end of the cylinde r vibrate with amplitudes that have energies that ma tch the systems with which
they are in contact (these regions are called thermal reservoirs, because during the heat transfer process their tem peratures don’t
change appreciably). Every particle between the ends vibrates with an amplitude between the two extremes def ined by the hot and
cold reservoir.
Okay, so our task now (as it will be with all forms of h eat transfer) is to determine the rate at which energy is transferred from one
system to another in terms of the conditions provide d. We'll do this by considering each element of this m odel in turn. As with any
analysis of a continuously-changing phenomenon, we st art with differential elements. In this case, we have two small segments of
the cylinder at slightly different temperatures, across which some heat is transferred.
Figure 5.4.2 – Differential Heat Conduction
The more chains of spring-connected particles we can use, the faster the energy can be transferred. The nu mber of chains is
proportional to the cross-sectional area of the cylinder, so the rate of heat transfer is also proportional to the cross-sectional area:

5.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18470
The next factor in determining the rate of heat flo w between these two segments is the temperature difference. It should not be
surprising that heat will flow faster when the differe nce in temperature is greater. It turns out that the rate of heat flow is directly
proportional to the temperature difference. This phe nomenon is often referred to as Newton's law of cooling, and works fairly well
as an approximation in more general circumstances, though it is only strictly applicable to this one. We have to be careful about the
sign we use; recall that the sign for is positive when heat is flowing into a system, but in this case the heat is flowing out of the
system with the higher temperature:
In order to get all the energy in the first segment to be transferred into the second segment, energy i n the left end of the segment has
to traverse the length of that segment,. The longer this segment is, the longer it will take, so the rat e of heat transfer is inverselyproportional to that distance:
Different substances will be structured differently (di fferent springs, different masses of particles, etc.), so we have to take into
account the type of substance. We do that by incorpo rating that into the constant of proportionality (thermal conductivity,) that
turns the proportional relationships into an equality:
The derivative of the temperature is called the temperature gradient, and can be thought of as the steepness at which th e
temperature tapers-off from the origin of the heat transfer (the hotter thermal reservoir) to its desti nation (the cooler thermal
reservoir), which in the most general cases (e.g. in non-steady-state situations) will not be constant. Thi s is known as the heat
equation, but really it is a specific example of the diffusion equation, which applies to many other phenomena as well.
It turns out that this equation is overkill for our purposes (we are not about to start solving differen tial equations), and in fact in all
the cases we address we will deal with steady-state situati ons with the temperature gradient being linear. When the temperature
changes linearly from the hot thermal reservoir to the cool one, the gradient is a constant, equal to si mply the temperature
difference of the two reservoirs (), divided by the dista nce separating them ():
Example
An iron bar with a square cross-section is used to mel t square holes in a slab of ice. The bar is then cut in half and the two
halves are welded together on their sides to make a ne w shorter bar with a rectangular cross-section. If th e mass of ice melted
in 10 minutes by the original bar is, how much ice wi ll be melted in 10 minutes by the new configuration? Assume the
temperature on the hot end of the bar is the same in both cases.
Solution
The rate of heat conduction is proportional to the cr oss-sectional area and inversely proportional to the length of the
material through which the heat passes, and in this case the area doubles while the length is divided in half. The material is
the same (thermal conductivity is unchanged), so the ra te of heat flow is quadrupled. With four times as much e nergy
transferred into the ice in the same period of time, four times as muc h ice is melted, so the answer is.
Convection
Convection is another form of heat transfer, that op erates through a completely different mechanism fro m conduction. Rather than
particles interacting with each other, the energy is transferred by simply having particles with more KE move (thanks to random
motion) from the hotter region to the cooler one, whi le lower- KE particles take their place in the hotter region (t here is no net
exchange of particles), resulting in a transfer of energy.
Figure 5.4.3 – Convection Mechanism

5.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18470
Applying rigorous analysis to derive a mathematical model for the rate of heat flow via convection is wel l beyond the scope of this
course. But an approximate relation based on the tempera ture difference of the two reservoirs is:
Two things to note here:
While this doesn’t quite follow “Newton's Law of Cooling” like conduction, it comes very close.
We don’t have the constant of proportionality, or even what this constant depends upon. That doesn’t mean this isn’t useful,
because we can still compare the convection rates for two sc enarios where “all else is equal.”
Without being more specific about the proportionali ty constants for conduction and convection, it is ne vertheless a safe bet to say
that convection in general is a faster mode of heat transport. For example, if you have a plastic bag ful l of hot water and a plastic
bag full of cold water, and you want two plastic bags o f warm water (so you want to transfer heat from the hot bag of water to the
cold bag of water), the fastest way to achieve that i s by mixing the water from the bags together, rather t han by bringing the bags in
contact with each other.
Radiation
The third way in which heat transfer can occur should become obvious when one thinks about how our Earth stays warm. After all,
it is in contact with the vacuum of space (which in th e absence of a nearby sun is at a temperature of), s o heat should be
transferring out of it at an alarming rate. The sour ce of the Earth’s incoming heat transfer is of cours e the Sun. But the space
between the Sun and Earth is not conducting heat (it’ s empty space - no particles connected with springs), and the Sun isn’t firing
really hot particles to mix with the Earth’s atmosph ere (well actually it is, but that “convection” is no t doing much to heat our
atmosphere, though it puts on a nice light show at the po les). Instead, the Sun is transferring energy to the Earth via radiation.
We already know that radiation is just light waves. We also know that light waves are driven by vibrating e lectric charges
(electrons). One source of vibrating charges is atoms i n a sample with thermal energy. The hotter the sampl e gets, the more
energetically the charges vibrate, which means more energy is sent out in the form of radiation, so we woul d expect the
electromagnetic power output of a sample to grow as its temperature grows, but it is by no means obvious in what way the power
output will mathematically depend on the temperature.
These light waves don’t know where they are going, they only know that some vibrating electrons are driving them, so it is not the
temperature difference that is causing this heat transfer, but rather the absolute temperature. A fellow named Boltzmann derived the
dependence of the power output on temperature, and a guy named Stefan measured it. It turns out that the power output goes as the
fourth power of the absolute temperature. The actual power output also depends upon the surface area (more space for the radiation
to come out of), and a property called emissivity, which measures how well the surface emits light (how r ough/smooth the surface
is, how it is shaped, etc.) into the region just outside the object (the surface is the border between these two regio ns):
The constant is called the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, is the emissivity, and is the surface area of the emitting body. The
absolute value is included here because this equatio n involves the absolute temperature rather than a te mperature difference. The

5.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18470
sign we put to this equation depends upon whether we ar e talking about the rate at which heat that is exiti ng the object at
temperature (in which case the sign is negative), or the rate at which heat is entering the region surroun ding the object at
temperature (in which case the sign is positive).
Nowhere here have we mentioned the frequency of the li ght emitted. It turns out that all of the frequencies (up to a certain
maximum) are emitted, but the energy transferred is n ot uniform across frequencies. Remember, these therm al electrons are
vibrating randomly, although that randomness has a non-uniform distrib ution, making some frequencies more common than others.
Most of the light emitted in this manner at “everyday” temperatures (say, hundreds of kelvins) is in a part of the spectrum that we
refer to as infrared, a frequency range we are unable to see with the nake d eye, though we can see it with the help of special
devices (e.g. infrared cameras). The part of the power output that is in the visible spectrum is too low for u s to be able to see when
the temperature is at “typical” temperatures in the region of 300 K. But if something gets significantly hotter, the po wer output of
every frequency goes up, and power in the visible spectru m can reach a level that we can see – the object “glows hot.”
Recall we said that heat transfer requires a tempera ture difference to occur, but here we seem to be saying that heat i s transferred
out of an object at an absolute temperature. Well, a ny object that can emit light can also absorb it. So let’s consider an object sitting
in an environment which is at a different temperature.
Figure 5.4.4 – Heat Transfer to/from Surroundings Via Radiation
The emissivity is a property of the boundary surface between the two realms exchanging heat (which in this c ase we are calling the
object and its surroundings), so naturally it is the same value going in both directions (we'll see anoth er reason that this must be the
case shortly). Obviously the surface area of the bound ary is also the same going both ways as well. So the o nly thing that makes the
heat energy exiting the object different (and enter ing the surroundings) from the heat energy going the other way (from
surroundings to object) is the difference in temper ature. We can now employ the sign convention for heat and conclude that the net
rate of heat entering the surroundings is:
Once again we see that net heat flow is induced by a di fference in temperature, though like convection, th is mode does not obey
Newton's law of cooling.
Example
A typical red giant star is so big that it can fit ab out 1,000,000 stars the size of our sun inside of it (i.e. red giants occupy a
volume about 1 million times greater than the volume occ upied by our sun). For our sun to radiate energy at th e same rate as
such a star, how would their temperatures need to compa re?
Solution
One million times the volume translates into 100 times th e radius, which in turn translates into 10,000 times t he surface
area. The rate of energy transfer due to radiation is pr oportional to the surface area, so if the temperatures were equal, the
red giant would radiate energy at a rate 10,000 times that of our sun. The rate of energy transfer due to radi ation also goes

5.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18470
as the 4th power of the temperature, so if the sun was 10 times hotter than the red giant (it turns out it is not, though it is
close to twice as hot), then that would exactly compensate f or the much greater surface area of the red giant.
Digression: Temperatures Near Stars
As seen in the example, a common application of the Ste fan-Boltzmann law comes from the study of stars. But such c ases do not
involve two regions sharing a common surface border at different temperatures. That is, the space immediately o utside the
surface of the sun is not the same near-absolute-zero te mperature that it is far outside the solar system. Int uitively it makes sense
that at steady-state the temperature would gradually decrease from what it is at the surface of the sun, down to the
~3K temperature we see in deep space, but is there some way to compute this temperature gradient? It's clear it can't be linear
as it is for conduction, because drawing a straight li ne from the 5800K temperature of our sun down to 3K man y billions of light
years away would mean that the earth is residing in sp ace that has a temperature that is essentially the same temperature as the
sun.
Figuring out this temperature gradient is essential t o finding planets around other stars that could sup port life, because the
planets will be in approximate thermal equilibrium wit h the space around them, and we assume life can only be sustained within
a certain temperature range (the so-called "Goldilocks zone ").
To solve this problem, let's consider a star with radius and surface temperature. Next, construct an imaginar y spherical
surface centered at the center of the star, with a ra dius. We wish to compute the temperature evaluated a t this surface.
Treating the star as a blackbody, the rate at which energy i s radiated from it is:
Now let's imagine that we treat our imaginary surface a s a radiator of energy – we don't even know about t he star inside of it.
Naturally it behaves like a blackbody, because none of the radiation that strikes it from outside is ref lected (it is imaginary!),
and a perfect absorber is exactly the definition of a blackbody. We can therefore compute the rate at wh ich it radiates energy
outward:
But of course, all of the power that comes from the st ar passes through this surface, so the power emitted b y the surface is the
same as the power emitted by the star. Setting them equa l and solving for gives:
So we see that the temperature drops as the inverse-square -root of the distance from the star.
This page titled 5.4: Modes of Heat Transfer is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184715.5: Thermodynamic States of Ideal Gases
State Variables
One of the most important concepts we will use in this c ourse is the idea of a thermodynamic state. There are two key elements to
this:
In thermodynamics, we only deal with equilibrium states. By this we mean that if the physical conditions imposed on
the system are not changed, then none of the macroscop ically-measurable properties of that state will change. An example in
terms of what we have discussed already is the temperature o f a sample. We have been assuming that the sample is a un iform
temperature throughout its volume. If it were not, then ev en if we allow no heat to enter or exit the sample (don't c hange the
physical conditions), heat transfers within the sample would still occur, and we would be able to measure temperature changes
in various regions of the sample. A sample with differing tem peratures occurring in separate regions is not in an equil ibrium
state.
For any given equilibrium state, we can completely describ e its condition with just a few macroscopically-measurable
quantities. So for example, if we have a volume of gas, we can completely define its equilibrium state by measuring it s
temperature (), volume (), and pressure (). This may not seem to be all that amazing, but the point is that we will see there
are many other quantities that can be measured as well (number of particles (), internal energy (), etc.) that we can compute
from our three measured values, making it unnecessary to m easure these new quantities separately. That is, the thermod ynamic
state is completely defined by the measurements of tem perature, volume, and pressure, and every other measurable quantity is
then uniquely defined by the fact that we know what state the system is in.
All of the measurable quantities like those mentioned above that define a thermodynamic state are called state variables. What is
interesting is that we are not required to measure t he three specific state variables mentioned earlier in order to completely define
the system – we can mix-and-match them! Using the examp le above, we could measure the number of particles, th e pressure, and
the internal energy of the gas, and those measurements would be sufficient to compute the other unmeasured st ate variables like
volume and temperature.
Heat and work are also important concepts in thermody namics, but they are not state variables! We could have guessed this, since
they involve transfers between systems. That is, heat and work are responsib le for changing thermodynamic states – they do not
serve to define them. As we continue in this subject, we will see how both of these quantities can morph one s tate into another,
thereby changing one or more of the state variables.
Pressure
Many of the state variables mentioned above require no explanation – we have already discussed temperatu re, and the meanings of
particle number and volume are obvious. We will get to internal energy in due course (as well as other sta te functions not yet
mentioned), but pressure requires a brief introducti on. Like temperature, the formal definition of pressur e is mathematically
complicated, but also like temperature, we can get a sense of what it is by the macroscopic effects it cau ses. Fluids (and in
particular, gases, which we will be studying here) consis t of many particles moving in a random fashion. When these particles are
confined, they bounce off the walls of the container. The transfer of momentum caused by all these collisi ons is manifested as a
force on the confining wall by the fluid. The amount of force is of course a function of how many particl es are hitting the surface at
any given moment, which means it is proportional to the a rea of that surface.
We want to define pressure as a property of the fluid, and not dependent upon the container, so we therefor e define pressure of the
fluid as the amount of force it exerts on a surface per unit area of that surface. What makes pressure tricky is that i t takes into
account only the disordered (random) motion of the particles. If the fluid is moving in a macroscopicall y-measurable way (like a
river flowing), then the collisions of the particles that result from this macroscopic motion, while it d oes account for a force, it does
not contribute to the pressure of the fluid. For examp le, your hand is constantly being pressed in all dire ctions from randomlymoving particles in the air, and the force from the se collisions can be used to compute the air pressure. But when you hold your
hand out the window of your car as the car moves, the f orce of the air that you feel on your hand is not air pressure. This is because
the motion of the air that contributes to this force is n ot random – it is ordered because it acts in a single direct ion.

5.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18471
The units of pressure in SI are:. The renamed units a re called Pascals. There are several other units that are used as
well, such as psi (lbs per square inch), and torr (aka mil limeters of mercury). We will discuss pressure in grea ter detail, including
the origin of this last odd-sounding unit of measurement i n Chapter 7.
Equations of State
Given that the state of a system is defined by three state variables, with all the other state variables th ereby well-defined, there must
be some equations that get us from the values of th e state variables we measure to the values of the othe rs. These formulas that
relate state variables to each other are called equations of state. For example, the pressure of a state could be comp uted from (i.e. is
a function of) volume, the number of particles, and the t emperature:
These relationships between state variables (functions) are not the same in all cases – the relationships depend upon the physical
system we are talking about. The type of system we will examine extensively (because it is the simplest one f or which we can
derive useful information, and because it works very we ll as an approximation) is that of an ideal gas. Physically, an ideal gas is
easy to define: It is a system of particles that are free to move (within the confined space defined by th e volume), that never interact
with each other. This physical system results in an equ ation of state (called the ideal gas law) that relates the four variables
mentioned above through the following functional depen dence:
where is called the Boltzmann constant. [Yes, this is the same Boltzmann mentioned in a previous section on radiative heat
transfer. To say that he was a giant in this field would b e an understatement.]
Alert
Note that this equation of state involves temperature as an absolute quantity, rather than just the change of temperature, as we
saw previously. For this reason, it is necessary to use an absolute scale (kelvins) rather than a comparative scale (celsius) in
calculations involving this formula.
A common alternative to using the particle number a s a state variable is using the number of moles (). A mole of a gas is simply
defined as a specific number of particles of that ga s. That "specific number" is known as Avogadro's number:
Writing the ideal gas law in terms of the number of moles is therefore a simple conversion:
The constant is known as the gas constant.
Example
One mole of helium gas is injected into each side of a s liding, airtight lead cylindrical piston of radius that separates
two chambers of a sealed cylinder. The outside of the cylinder is insulated everywhere except where noted b elow. The cylinder
and piston have lengths and cross-sectional areas as labeled in the diagram below. The helium in one of the chambers is heated
from outside at a rate of, and the helium in the other chamber expels heat into a cool region. The full system e ventually
comes to steady-state, so that cooler chamber of gas is losing heat at the same rate as the hotter chamber is receiving it. At this
steady state, the pressures of the gases in both chambe rs are equal to, creating a balance in the forces e xerted on
the two ends of the piston. The piston therefore remain s stationary at an equilibrium point that is a distance from the end of
the cylinder with the chamber receiving the heat. Find the value of. The thermal conductivity of lead is.

5.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18471
Solution
Heat is being conducted from the left chamber to the r ight one through the lead piston. We are given the ra te of heat transfer,
the length of the piston, its cross-sectional area, an d the thermal conductivity of lead. We can plug all o f these into the
steady-state heat equation to find the temperature differen ce:
We are given the pressure of the gases in the two ch ambers, and the number of moles of gas in each chamber. Usi ng the ideal
gas law, we can determine the difference in the volumes of the chambers in terms of the difference in their temperatures:
Now that we know the difference in the two volumes, we can combine this with the sum of the two volumes to ge t the volume
of the left side:
The length of this chamber is its volume divided by its area:
As with everything else in physics, the idea of an ideal gas is a model. It works pretty well for gases in most real-world
circumstances, but it is by no means the only model. An other model treats the gas particles as though they are tiny hard spheres that
can bounce off each other. This model may work better in cases of larger molecules and/or higher densitie s, for example. With a
new model comes a new equation of state, and in this ca se the governing equation is known as the van der Waals equation, which
is significantly more complex than the ideal gas law:
The constant takes into account the "hard sphere" a spect of the particles. The volume available to the gas is the volume of the
vessel minus the volume occupied by the particles t hemselves. The constant accounts for attractive for ces (unsurprisingly called
van der Waals forces) between the particles. When the particles attract ea ch other, they don't strike the walls of the containe r so
hard, and the pressure measured by force-per-area on the walls is lower. Notice that taking the limit as re turns the equation
of state back to the ideal gas law. When the particl e radii are negligible and interactions forces vani sh, then the conditions for an
ideal gas are met.
Kinetic Theory of Gases
One of the most impressive aspects of the study of th ermodynamics lies in how it is possible to use a simpl e microscopic model of
how a large number () of particles in a gas behave to derive some very specific relationships between macroscopically

5.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18471measurable quantities. We see this in action in the following application of the kinetic theory of gases. We will assume a gas is ideal
– that the particles do not interact with each other – a nd that the gas is trapped within a cubical enclosure.
Figure 5.5.1 – Ideal Gas in a Cubical Container
Here are some further assumptions we will make, beyond that o f the particles not interacting with each other:
particles have random positions, speeds, and directions of motion
no energy lost to the walls (particles collide elastically with walls)
walls are smooth, so force between particles and wall is perpen dicular to wall
gas is monatomic (individual atoms, not molecules)
We will eventually loosen the last of these constraint s, but the others are reasonable and necessary to do the derivation that follows.
The assumption that the walls are smooth is not neces sary for the final result (nor is the use of a cubica l container), but it does
make the analysis that follows easier. We will not pro ve that these simplifying assumptions (smooth surfac es and cubical container)
are unnecessary, but at a minimum it should be note d that experimental evidence confirms that the fina l result works for more
general circumstances.
There are literally a trillion-trillion particles i n this box, so looking at what they do individually mig ht seem a bit pointless, but in
fact we will have the powerful ally of averaging on our side, as you will see. So we forge ahead, looki ng at the effect of a single
particle as it reflects off a wall of the container, hoping to parlay the information we gain into some u nderstanding of pressure,
which is manifested as the gas pushing on the walls of the co ntainer...
Figure 5.5.2 – Particle Reflection Off Container Wall
A particle that comes into a wall of the container a nd reflects elastically will exit with the same speed t hat it has coming in. With
the wall being "smooth," there is no force on the pa rticle parallel to the wall, so the component of the particle's velocity parallel to
the wall remains unchanged (). The elastic collision ensures that the total speed of the particle is unc hanged (
). The combination of these two facts means that the component of the particle's velocity in the directi on perpendicular

5.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18471to the wall (depicted in the figure above as the -ax is) is the same before and after the collision with th e wall, but in opposite
directions.
This particle therefore experiences a force from the wall in the -direction that results in a change of mo mentum equal to.
Newton's third law tells us that the wall experiences t he same force in the -direction from the particle. I f we average this force
over a short time that spans the period from shortly befor e the collision to shortly after, we get:
From the impulse-momentum theorem (a fancy version of Newton's second law), we can repla ce the time integral of the force with
the change in momentum over that timespan:
This particle will strike walls other than the two that are perpendicular to the -axis, but for now we will foc us only on the
component of the particle's motion along the -axis. Su ppose we wish to know the force that the left wall exert s on this particle
averaged over all time. Well, after it bounces off th e wall once, it will travel across the box, strike the o ther wall, and come back
again. The -component of the particle's velocity won' t change at the other wall either, so we know exactly h ow long it takes the
particle to make a round trip – the total distance divi ded by the speed:
With the particle exerting the same force periodical ly, the average force exerted on this particle over a ll time is found directly from
the last two equations above (we will remove the unit vec tor from here on, as the direction is clear):
We now note that this is the average force exerted on just one of the many particles present, and with the particles randomly
distributed (one of our assumptions), it is clear that the wall is constantly being pelted with particle colli sions. The average force
exerted on each particle by the wall is equal to the average force exerted on the wall by each particle (Newton's third law), and
since some number of the randomly-distributed partic les are constantly hitting the wall, there is no reas on to expect that the total
force on the wall will fluctuate over time. Therefore the force on the wall by the gas is just equal to the sum of the average forces
exerted by all particles:
We now define the pressure of the gas as the force it exerts on a surface per unit area of that surface. In the case of the wall of the
container, the area is, so we have for the pressure of the ga s:
where is the volume of the cubical container.
Nothing about what we have found here is unique to the walls of the container that are perpendicular to the -axis, so we also have:
Now we can add the last three equations to each other, and to obtain:

5.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18471
The particles in this gas do not interact, so the only form of energy they possess is kinetic energy. The s um of the kinetic energies
of all the particles is the total internal energy of the gas, which gives us a result that no longer inclu des any reference to individual
particles:
Given that this is an ideal gas which also satisfies the idea g as law, we can write the internal energy in terms of the temperature:
We have been saying for awhile that temperature prov ides a measure of thermal energy, and now we finally ha ve a formula that
gives us exactly how these quantities are related. It is truly remarkable that such specific conclusions ca n be drawn about the
macroscopic state of a gas from such simple assumptions abo ut the microscopic behavior of the particles.
Average Particle Speed in a Gas
We can use Equation 5.5.2 and Equation 5.5.14 to draw another conclusion about the particles in this g as:
This tells us that the average energy per particle is a constant times the temperature of the gas. Keep in mind that the particles’
motions are randomly (but not uniformly) distributed, so while the average particle has this energy, the actual particles have a range
of energies.
With the average kinetic energy per particle, we can determine a sort of average velocity of particles in the gas. There are many
sorts of averages, and in this case the type we are referring to is called the root-mean-square, or rms velocity, so-named because its
calculation involves taking the square root of the mea n of the square of the velocity:
So the rms speeds of the particles in an ideal gas in crease as the square root of the temperature. Also, if the gas is a mixture of
particles of different masses, the heavier particles hav e a lower rms speeds.
Alert
The root-mean-square speed of particles in a gas should not be confused with the "usual" definition of "ave rage," where the
speeds of all the particles are added together and t he sum is divided by the number of particles. To see the difference, consider a
"gas" consisting of two particles, one of which is stationary, and the other moving with a speed of. These particles have an
average speed of, and an rms speed of. The main reason for preferring to use the rms value of speed is that the rms speed
is well-defined by the total energy of the gas and the particle number. This is not true of the standard average speed – many
average speeds are possible for the same total energy and pa rticle number.
This page titled 5.5: Thermodynamic States of Ideal Gases is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Tom Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184735.6: Equipartition of Energy
Energy Modes
Reviewing our work in the previous section in kinetic theory, one might ask, “Where did we use the assumption that the particles
are monatomic?” The answer to this question certainly isn’t obvious. Imagine for a moment that we are inste ad talking about a
diatomic gas, where the particles look more like dumbbells than tiny point particles. When one of these particles str ikes the wall,
one could easily imagine it going from a state of no rotatio n to one where it is rotating.
Figure 5.6.1 – Diatomic Molecule Bouncing Off a Container Wall
Why would this invalidate the derivation of the prev ious section? By assumption, the molecule cannot ga in or lose energy when it
strikes the wall, and we used that fact to show that the speed of the molecule stays constant, but if the mole cule can now gain
rotational kinetic energy upon striking the wall, then energy conservation requires that the kinetic energy that co mes from its linear
motion be reduced.
While we can't use the result of our previous work as it stands for diatomic molecules, we can modify thing s slightly so that we
once again get a useful answer. This modification inv olves the concept of modes available to the energy. In the monatomic case, the
motion of the particles involved three independent degrees of freedom – motion along the,, and directions. Looking ba ck at the
derivation of the previous section, we see that each o f those modes of freedom accounted for an equal amo unt of internal energy,
equal to. It turns out that in general the internal energy of a system divides is itself (on average) equ ally amongst all the
available modes. This phenomenon is known as the equipartition of energy theorem.
The best way to track these modes is to imagine energ y going into one of them at a time, without changing the energy in the
previous ones. So for example, a particle can be movin g in the direction only, and it has a kinetic ener gy. We could then give it a
“kick” in the direction, and this addition of energy doesn’t change the contribution to the kinetic ener gy by the motion in the
direction. Once we have kicked it in all 3 directions, there is no other way to kick it that doesn’t give i t additional energy in one of
the modes already used, so the number of translational modes ends at three.
As we have seen, monatomic gases have only these translati onal modes, because they have negligible extension in space, which
equates to a negligible moment of inertia, which in turn results in zero rotational energy. Di atomic particles clearly do not suffer
from having zero moment of inertia, so they do have rotational modes available for kinetic energy. For a ny three-dimensional
object, there are three axes around which any object can rotate, and it is generally convenient to choose their principal axes when
discussing such rotational degrees of freedom. For a di atomic molecule which we model as two point particles joined by a rigid
rod, these axes look like:
Figure 5.6.2 – Principal Axes of a Diatomic Molecule

5.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18473
Rotation around two of these axes features a non-zero moment of inertia, but around the -axis rotation is similar to that of a
monatomic particle – no extension in space relative to that axis, and therefore zero moment of inertia. T herefore there are really
only two rotational modes into which kinetic energy can be distr ibuted for diatomic gases.
Figure 5.6.3 – Two Rotational Modes for Diatomic Particles
So with this rigid-rod model of diatomic particles, th e total number of modes into which energy can be dis tributed is five - three
translational and two rotational. With each of these modes getting an average energy of, the average en ergy per particle for
this type of ideal gas is:
If the particles in the gas are composed of enough a toms that the single axis of symmetry no longer appli es, then the axis no
longer exists, and there are three rotational modes available, resulting in an average energy per part icle equal to. We therefore
have the following relationships between internal energ ies and temperatures for various types of ideal gases:
Example
One mole of monatomic nitrogen () and one mole of diatomi c nitrogen () have equal internal energies. How do the ir rms
velocities compare? Assume the mass of is twice that of, and that can be modeled with a rigid-rod dumbbell.
Solution
With equal internal energies, the two gases cannot have th e same temperature. Their temperatures are related by:
The rms velocity of is:
We can use the temperature relationship above and the mass relationship to write this rms velocity in terms of the
rms velocity of:

5.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18473
Vibrational Modes
As we have seen in a previous section, the bonds between a toms can be effectively modeled as springs. If we do this for diatomic
particles, then there is yet another independent way to introduce energy into the system – through vibrat ions of the springs. What is
especially interesting about vibrational modes is tha t they involve not only an additional kinetic energ y degree of freedom, but also
one associated with potential energy. If we look at a large collection of masses vibrati ng on springs and do an accounting of the
energy, then on average we will find that at any give n moment half of the total energy in that collectio n is in the form of spring
potential energy, and half is kinetic energy. Theref ore the equipartition of energy theorem for a diato mic molecule that can vibrate
allows for two more modes. In this case, we have another relati onship between internal energy and temperature:
So if these modes exist, why even mention the case of " rigid bonds?" A detailed answer to this question lies outside the scope of
this course, but the short answer is this: When we get i nto the realm of the very small (like discussing bo nds between individual
atoms), we are forced to turn the discussion to an en tirely different (more appropriate) model of nature, called quantum theory. In
this theory, we find that energy cannot be indefinitel y subdivided to smaller and smaller units – it is "qu antized." The upshot of this
for vibrational modes is that a certain minimum amo unt of energy is required for this mode to be activ ated. If this energy is not
available (i.e. if the temperature is too low), then we say th at the vibrational modes are frozen-out.
It turns out that the amount of energy needed to act ivate these vibrational modes is quite high, compared to typical temperatures we
encounter – this happens at temperatures on the order of thousands of kelvins. Whenever we deal with diatomic gases, we will u se
the rigid-rod model (and its associated number of av ailable modes) as the default – if the vibrational mo des are in play, then it will
be made clear that this is the case, either by saying so ex plicitly, or noting that the temperature of the gas is e xtremely high.
Digression: More Quantum Weirdness
Lest the reader think that the freezing-out vibratio nal modes is where the quantum weirdness ends, it shou ld be noted that when
the temperature of a diatomic gas gets sufficiently low (roughly double-digit kelvins), the rotational modes also get frozen-out! It
might be possible to conceptualize that a molecule re quires a certain minimum amount of energy for it to vibra te, but the idea
that the same is true for it to rotate is quite bizarre. Quantum theory is full of these truth-is-s tranger-than-fiction phenomena.
Molar Heat Capacity
We now return to our discussion of heat. To keep things simple, we will consider the case when two samples are exc hanging heat
energy (from the hotter to the colder one, obviously), and the volumes of both remain constant. This would obviously be mostly
true for solids and liquids (the thermal expansion i s a negligible effect), while gases would have to be he ld in containers with fixed
volumes. Under these conditions, all of the heat lost/gai ned by a sample comes out of/goes into the internal energy of the sample:
For the sample that gains/loses heat, is positive/ne gative, and the internal energy goes up/down. In our discussion of heat
capacity in Section 5.3, we related the change in a sample's temperature to the amount of heat that the same gains or loses. With our
results from kinetic theory and the equipartition of energy theorem, we can determine this heat capacity per mole. For example, for
a monatomic ideal gas:
Comparing this to Equation 5.3.6, we see that the molar heat capacity (heat capacity per mole) is a simple constant. It turns out that
the assumption we have made (that the gas is confined to a fixed volume) is important to this result. We wi ll look at the more
general case later, but for now we will make sure we keep this assumption in mind by adding a subscript to th e symbol for the
molar heat capacity:

5.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18473
Despite the constraints, (the gas must be ideal, it must be monatomic, and the heat transfer must occur wi th the gas held at constant
volume), the result is nonetheless quite remarkable. Thi s same result works for all inert gases such as helium an d neon (because
they are always monatomic), as well as for other gases that ca n be found in a monatomic state, like hydrogen and nitroge n.
We can at least account for some of the constraints, by inco rporating the number of available modes into the comput ation of:
While this was approached from the case of ideal gases, the result given above is actually more general, si nce non-ideal gases,
liquids, and solids can be taken into account by inc luding the modes associated with interactions of the p articles. For example, if
we consider a monatomic solid at a high temperature (so that the vibrational modes are not frozen-out), then the lattice structure
will result in 6 vibrational modes: 3 kinetic, and 3 potential (springs). With that the case, the molar heat capacity of a monatomic
solid is simply. We don’t even care what substance we are talking about!
How do we reconcile this with the fact that we already k now that different substances have different specific heat capacities? The
answer is that one mole of one substance does not ha ve the same mass as one mole of another. If these two substances have the
same number of modes into which energy can be distrib uted, then they have equal molar heat capacities, but when one wants to
convert heat capacity per mole to heat capacity per kilo gram, the new constants are no longer equal.
Finally, it should be noted that because takes into ac count the number of modes available for any substanc e, we have a
shorthand for the relationship between the internal energ y and the temperature of a sample:
This applies no matter what type of gas (monatomic, diat omic, etc) we are talking about, because the molar hea t capacity (at
constant volume) takes into account the number of modes.
Alert
This is an equation of state, relating three state v ariables to each other (,, and) through a physical constant () that
depends only upon the number of modes available to the gas in question. While we got to this point by talk ing about a process
(heat transfer with volume held constant), that process i s irrelevant to the meaning of this equation. This is often a point of
confusion, and we will return to it later, when we conside r processes where volume is not held constant.
Example
Consider a 1-mole sample of a solid which forms a simple monatomic rectangular lattice, as in the diagram. The ty pes of bonds
formed and the temperature of the substance are such that the horizontal bonds are all free to vibrate, wh ile the vertical bonds
remain rigid. This sample is brought into thermal contact wi th 2 moles of a monatomic ideal gas at a different tempe rature (and
the combination of the two are insulated from their surr oundings). Assume that the gas and solid neither change phase nor
volume during this heat exchange. Find the ratio of th e temperature changes () of the gas and solid from th e time
when they are brought into contact to when they reach the rmal equilibrium.

5.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18473
Solution
The heat that enters or exits the solid exits or enter s the gas, so they differ only by a sign. Writing the he ats in terms of the
molar heat capacities and applying this fact gives:
The number of moles of each is given, so all that remain s is to determine the molar heat capacities, which we ca n get from
Equation 5.6.7. For a monatomic ideal gas the number of modes is 3. Thi s solid has horizontal vibrational degrees of
freedom, giving it 4 modes (two KE and two PE). It has no vertical degrees of freedom, nor does it have tran slational or
rotational degrees of freedom, so its total number of modes is 4. Plugging all of this in above (including the numbers of
moles of each), we get:
The temperature of the gas changes two-thirds as much as the tempera ture of the solid, and in the opposite direction.
While we can draw some conclusions about liquids and so lids, as we move on into thermodynamics, we are going to focus on ideal
gases, for a couple of reasons. First, gases (unlike li quids and solids) can readily change volume, which gi ves us a great deal more
depth of study. And second, we have a state equation we can wo rk with (the ideal gas law) that relates the various state v ariables.
This page titled 5.6: Equipartition of Energy is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184745.7: Thermodynamic Processes
Definition of a Thermodynamic Process
Up to now, we haven't spent a lot of time on the dynamics part of thermodynamics. So far our notion of dynamic s has been limited
to talking about heat transfer, and how it relates to temperature change. Indeed, in Section 5.5 we concluded that we can only really
deal with equilibrium states, which seems to directly contradict the notion of examining dynamics, which requires changes in the
state.
We get around this apparent conundrum through the i ntroduction of something called a quasi-static process. The idea is that a
system can evolve from one equilibrium state to a ne ighboring one (i.e. one infinitesimally close) slowly, so that at any instant in
time the state variables are in perfect balance are are not "leaning" toward change. A nice analogy for this idea of a quasi-static
process is someone balancing on a large ball. When t hey are balanced, they are in equilibrium. But they would like to move the ball
along, so they move their feet ever so slightly, and the ball rolls a tiny bit. The ball stops, and the p erson is again in equilibrium.
They can continue this process to get across the floo r, inching from one equilibrium state to another, ne ver endangering themselves.
Alternatively, they could just “go for it” and start moving their feet fast. In this case, they will have t o lean, and cannot simply stop
whenever they like at an equilibrium position. The slow, eq uilibrium-to-equilibrium process is what we call quasi-st atic.
Another aspect of processes that we need to define is reversibility. A process is reversible if it needs to be "coaxed" in to occurring –
if the process occurs spontaneously from the initial conditions, then it is said to be irreversible. It's certainly true that if a process is
not quasi-static, then it is irreversible – the person that is off-balance on the ball has no ability to stop the ball or reverse its
direction at any instant, so the system evolves from a given state without coaxing. So a process being quasi- static is necessary for it
to be reversible, but it is not sufficient.
To see this, suppose we have a large imbalance between two adjacent systems. For example, one system may be signi ficantly hotter
than the other. If these are put into direct contact, then the heat will transfer very fast – not quasi-sta tically – and since this process
proceeds spontaneously, it is irreversible. But now supp ose we introduce a transfer conduit to conduct the h eat between the two
systems. The thermal conductivity of the conduit medi um (and/or the length of the conduit) can be made a rbitrarily-small, slowing
the heat transfer process to a trickle into the cold er system. This would be a quasi-static process, because at any moment if we cut
off the transfer (insert insulation), the systems don 't have to "settle into" equilibrium – they are alre ady there, because the changes
have been so slow. However, if we again remove the insula tion, these systems do not remain in the same state – they spontaneously
start evolving (albeit slowly) again. They are not e qually-likely to go in either direction – the heat spontaneously transfers from hot
to cold. We will discuss this idea of reversibility furth er in future sections.
Process Diagrams
One way to analyze processes is with process diagrams, which are depictions (graphs) of processes through e quilibrium states. We
already said that in general, equations of state invo lve four state variables (one state variable depend ent upon three others), so if we
want to graph general processes, we will need many dim ensions. We will not be dealing with processes during which the particle
number changes, so all of our diagrams hold that num ber fixed. That leaves three variables with two of them independent, and the
third being derived from the other two through the e quation of state. The two independent variables that we choose can be plotted
on a pair of axes, and the point thus plotted will repr esent a specific thermodynamic state. As we must use abs olute temperature,
none of the state variables (such as pressure, volume, and internal energy) can ever be negative, so these plots only require one
quadrant of the axes.
Figure 5.7.1 – Equilibrium Thermodynamic States Plotted on Two Axes

5.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
The points on these diagrams, in conjunction with se parate information about the number of particles an d an equation of state (like
) completely define an equilibrium state (i.e. the valu es of all of the state variables) of the system.
A quasi-static process would be represented on one of these diagrams as a continuous curve (along with an indicated direction),
because in such a process a system changes from one e quilibrium state to another that is infinitesimally close. If we want to know
what state the system is in at any point during a pr ocess, we just read off that point’s values. The process d oes not have any
“momentum,” meaning that if we stop it at any point, it is not inclined to continue to the next point – it is an e quilibrium state.
Figure 5.7.2 – Every Point on a Process Diagram is an Equilibrium State
Note that these processes are not necessarily functions – it is perfectly acceptable for a process to circl e back on itself. They also
don’t need to be differentiable (smooth), because ea ch state along the way has no memory of the state that comes before, or
anticipation of the state that follows.
Figure 5.7.3 – Process Diagrams Do Not Need to be Differentiable Functions
However, the graph of the process does need to be continuous. Sudden jumps represent states suddenly changing to other states that
are not nearby, which can only be achieved by going through a non-equilibrium state – such a process is not quasi-static. Another
way to think of this is in terms of reversibility. Gaps involve jumps between states, and without any “bread c rumbs,” showing the
system the way back, there is no way to retrace steps, and the process is therefore not reversible.
Figure 5.7.4 – Process Diagrams Must be Continuous to be Quasi-Static

5.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
Work Done By a Gas
We said earlier that the two “oddballs” in the field of thermodynamics are heat and work, and we’ve talked a bit about heat, so it’s
time we explore the topic of work a bit more. We already know something about it from Physics 9A:
How does this apply to our study of the thermodynamics of ideal gases? Well, gases exhibit pressure, which can result in the
exertion of a force, so all we need to do is conceive of a case where gas pressure moves something. To thi s end, consider a gas
confined by a container with a piston:
Figure 5.7.5 – Work Done on a Piston by a Confined Gas
The confined gas exerts a force on the piston that e quals the pressure of the gas multiplied by the area of the piston. The forces acts
to push the piston outward a small distance, thereby doing a small amount of work on it, giving:
But the product equals the small change in the gas 's volume, allowing us to write the work done in terms of two state
variables. As along as the piston expands slowly, the gas wi ll go from one equilibrium state to another in a qu asi-static manner,
giving a total amount of work equal to:
In terms of the process diagram of pressure vs. volume, this integral is simply the area under the curve.
Figure 5.7.6 – Work Done by Gas is Area Under PV Curve

5.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
Notice that the sign of the work is also important. If the gas is compres sed rather than expanded, then the process goes righ t-to-left
in the diagram, and the integral is negative. We therefore assert the following sign convention:
work done by an expanding gas has a (+) sign, while work d one on a gas to compress it has a (–) sign
For comparison purposes, let's restate the sign convention fo r heat transfer:
heat transferred into a gas has a (+) sign, while heat transfer red out of a gas has a (–) sign
The First Law of Thermodynamics
Now that we have placed work and heat into the big pict ure of thermodynamics, we can apply a principle we ha ve known since
early in Physics 9A. We do this by taking an accounting of all the energy associated with a thermodynamic sy stem. We know that
all of the energy within the system (all kinetic and potential energy) is ac counted-for in the internal energy, which is a stat e
function. Work and heat both either bring energy int o or take energy away from the system. According to th e law of conservation of
energy, whatever the net result of the energy transf er is must be reflected in the change of internal e nergy. Since work is done by
the gas, a positive amount of work done is energy th at comes out of the gas, while a positive amount of he at is energy that enters
the gas. The change in the gas's internal energy is p ositive when net energy comes in and negative when net energy exits, so it is
given by:
This simple expression of energy conservation is known as the first law of thermodynamics.
Alert
Chemistry and physics classes typically approach the si gn conventions for the first law differently. The symbol in the equation
above represents the work done by the gas. Chemists genera lly use the symbol to represent the work done on the gas, which
has the effect of changing the sign of in the equat ion for the first law. Obviously the physical meaning is the same in both
cases, but the choice in sign convention likely comes from a difference in emphasis. The convention from chemist ry has the
advantage of symmetry between the sign conventions fo r heat and work (both are positive when energy is goi ng into the gas).
Also, chemists are more likely to concern themselves with the effects of work on a gas than the effects of ga s on its surroundings.
One advantage to the sign convention used here is tha t the work integral in terms of pressure and volume doe sn't require a
negative sign – the work done by a gas is more intui tive than the work done on it. Another is that we wil l be discussing engines,
which have the role of converting heat taken in int o work put out. The "physics sign convention" is more convenient for a
process where the amount of heat in equals the amount of work out. Anyone who finds these differences in si gn conventions
confusing should just always think "work done by the gas" when they see in the formulas encountered in this t ext.
As simple as this law is (after all, it is just conserva tion of energy), it has some interesting properties. The most striking is that we
have a change in a state variable () on one side of the equation (which depends only upon the starting an d ending states of the
process), while on the other side are two quantities that depend upon the path taken. This tells us that differ ent paths between two
states result in different amounts of each type of energy transfer, but the final energy change is the same, as it only depends upon
the endpoints.
Example
For each of the straight-line processes for an ideal gas shown belo w, answer the following questions:

5.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
Work done: on the gas, by the gas, or can't tell?
Heat transferred: into the gas, out of the gas, or can't tell?
Temperature change: gas gets hotter, gas gets colder, or can't tell?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
For all of these graphs, we have the following tools to wor k with:
a. The process goes from left to right, so the positiv e work is done by the gas. The pressure doesn't change during this
process, but the volume goes up, so the quantity must increase from A to B. With the number of moles not chan ging, the

5.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
ideal gas law tells us that the temperature must go up. Th e increase in temperature means that the internal ener gy goes up,
or. We already said that, so from the first law we find that, which means that heat enters the gas.
b. The process goes from right to left, so the work done by the gas is negative, which means work is done on the gas. With the
pressure rising and the volume falling, there is no way to tell what happens to the temperature without more details of the
endpoints. Without knowing whether the temperature g oes up or down, there's no way to tell what happens to the internal
energy, which gives us no way to use the first law to determi ne whether heat is entering or leaving the system.
c. Right-to-left process work done on gas. Both the pressure and the volume go down, which means that go es down,
allowing us to use the ideal gas law to conclude that the temperature also goes down. The decrease in temperatu re means
, and since, the first law requires that, so heat leav es the system during this process.
d. Note that this is process expressed in terms of tempe rature vs. volume. The area under this curve does not give us the work
done! Though we don't know what happens to the press ure during this process, the volume nevertheless incr eases, which
means that the gas is expanding and pushing a piston outward, so positive work is done. The temperature (meas ured on the
vertical axis) clearly drops during the process. We know that and, so the first law can't tell us what happens
with the heat without more details about the endpoints A and B.
e. This process is expressed in terms of pressure and temper ature. It isn't immediately clear from the graph whethe r the
volume is expanding or not, so we will have to wait o n drawing a conclusion about work. The temperature (measu red on the
horizontal axis) is dropping because the process is right-to-left. The pressure is rising while this occurs, so from the ideal
gas law, the volume must get smaller during this process. When the volume gets smaller, the gas is compressed, so w ork is
done on the gas. With (temperature drops) and (volu me decreases), the first law tells us that, so heat i s
leaving the system.
Example
A monatomic ideal gas undergoes a quasi-static process f rom state A to state B, illustrated in the diagram below. The
process forms a straight line on the -vs- graph.
a. Calculate the work done in this process.
b. Find the change in internal energy from state A to st ate B.
c. Find the quantity of heat transferred into or out of the system during this process and indicate whether the h eat goes in or
comes out.
Solution
a. The work done during a process is the area under th e -vs- curve, so all we need to do is compute the area of the top
triangle and the bottom rectangle and add them:
b. The gas is monatomic, so the change in internal energy is:

5.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
Putting in the ideal gas law gives:
c. The amount of heat transferred comes directly from the fi rst law of thermodynamics:
The negative sign indicates that this heat is lost by t he system. Given that work is also done by the gas (work is positive), it
isn't surprising that the internal energy goes down (and with it the temperature of the gas).
Quasi-Static vs. Non-Quasi-Static Processes
We know that work and heat only represent exchanges of energy, or changes to a system – they are not values stored in the sta te of
a system. This means that a single point on a process diagram does not define an amount of work or heat (i n the case of work, you
cannot define an area under a point!). In fact it tu rns out that every time a process occurs, it occurs because of either an e xchange of
heat or work or both. Instead of thinking of heat and work exchange as a result of a process, we can think of them as the cause of a
process.
Alert
Note that it is possible to change states without do ing work, but in that case heat must be transferred, and it is possible to
change states without heat being transferred, but in tha t case work must be done.
Let’s start with a piston at equilibrium, so the force on it due to the pressure of the gas is exactly bal anced by a force pushing
inward from the outside, holding it in place. Suppose we drop the force from the outside by a few Newtons – wha t happens? The
piston expands outward until the pressure drops enough to rebalance the forces. The force imbalance causes the piston to
accelerate. On its way to its final position, it is not in equilibrium, so this process is not quasi-static! We can’t figur e out the work,
because the pressure of the non-equilibrium gas is n ot well-defined. Furthermore, the piston gains some kin etic energy, so some of
the work goes into that. It’s a total mess. This all c ame about because we didn’t control the process from one equilibrium state to
the next. This control is only achievable if the work is done incrementally. That is, any finite difference in forces on the p iston
causes the process to be non-quasi-static, but if we do just infinitesimal changes in the force, we are okay. Of course, this is not
something we can do in practice, but it turns out th at doing this kind of analysis is worthwhile nonetheless. For now it is important
to understand that such a non-quasi-static process comes from a finite imbalance in the force.
It turns out that the same is true for heat. Recall that heat is the transfer of energy due to a temper ature difference (analogous to the
force difference for work). A process that involves he at transfer is only quasi-static if it occurs due to an infinitesimal temperature
difference. Again, this is not something we can manage in the real world – we usually just put a hot system next to a cold one – but
it is useful to use this analysis in the same way that it is u seful to study frictionless motion in mechanics.
We will be drawing lots of diagrams that indicate work done and heat transferred, and since we are always assu ming quasi-static
processes, it is important to have a clear picture of what t hese diagrams are depicting.
Figure 5.7.7 – Interpreting Heat and Work Exchanges in Diagrams

5.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18474
This page titled 5.7: Thermodynamic Processes is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184755.8: Special Processes
Analyzing Special Processes
Next we will discuss some special processes, not only beca use they are themselves important, but because they are highly instructive. In this
discussion, we will emphasize several aspects of each case:
a physical picture of what is happening, using a gas tra pped in a container with a moveable piston
a schematic representation of what is happening with re gard to heat transfer and work done
an accounting of the fates of the various thermodynamic variables over the course of the process
relationships between thermodynamic variables in the p rocess due to state equations and the first law
a diagram of the process
One must keep in mind that all of these processes are assumed to be quasi-static, whi ch means that when arrows indicate heat transfer or
work performed, this occurs due to an infinitesimal im balance.
By “special processes,” we simply mean processes that eliminate from consideration one (or more) of the the rmodynamic variables we have
discussed so far. These variables include, volume, pre ssure, temperature, internal energy, heat, and work (particle number is already
eliminated for every case, since we have decided to alway s hold it constant).
Isochoric Process
A process that involves no change in volume is call ed isochoric. With no change in volume,, there can be no work do ne on or by the
gas, which means that the only exchange of energy pos sible is through heat transfer, giving one of two phy sical situations, both including a
pegged piston, and one with heat entering and the other with heat leaving.
Figure 5.8.1 – Isochoric Processes – Physical Picture
Having already determined what happens with the non-sta te variables of heat and work in these processes, let' s do an accounting of the
changes that occur in the state variables for an id eal gas. We will consider the case of heat energy ente ring the system – the changes that
occur for the case when the system is losing heat should be obvious once this case is understood.
We already know that the volume doesn't change:
With no work done, the first law requires that all of the internal energy change is due to heat transfer, and since the internal energy is
proportional to the temperature, we get:
What about the pressure? For this we can use the ideal gas law. We know that the temperature is increasing while the volume (and particle
number) remains fixed, so the pressure goes up:
Every process results in its own unique relationship between the non-state variables (work and heat) and c hanges in the state variables, and
in this case we have:
where is given by Equation 5.6.7. The PV diagrams for these processes confirms that th e work done (the area under the curve) is zero:

5.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18475Figure 5.8.2 – Isochoric Processes – PV Diagram
A curve for an isochoric process is called an isochor.
Isobaric Process
A process that involves no change in pressure is call ed isobaric. We cannot draw a simple conclusion about work as we did in the isochoric
case, because in this case the piston is free to move. However, we can use the ideal gas law and the first l aw to determine the physical
picture. Let's take the case where the volume expands at constant pressure. We find from the ideal gas la w that this requires the internal
energy to go up:
Now applying the first law and noting that the work done t o expand the volume is positive, we find:
Therefore for an isobaric expansion of an ideal gas, heat must pass into the system. All of this can of course work in reverse as well, so we
have the following physical pictures:
Figure 5.8.3 – Isobaric Processes – Physical Picture
In determining this physical picture, we determined al l the state variable changes that occur. All that is left is to relate the heat and work to
the state variable changes. The work we can compute easil y from the pressure and volume, since the pressure is con stant:
From the ideal gas law, we can also write this in terms of th e temperature change:
We already have the relationship between the internal energy and temperature, so we can use the first law t o write the relationship between
the heat transferred and the change in state variables:
where again is given by Equation 5.6.7. The PV diagrams for these processes are simple enou gh – constant pressure translates to a
horizontal graph:
Figure 5.8.4 – Isobaric Processes – PV Diagram

5.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18475
A curve for an isobaric process is called an isobar.
Heat Capacity
In Section 5.6, we noted that the relationship between the heat add ed and the change in temperature defines the molar h eat capacity. It was
noted then that this quantity is not a fixed consta nt for a given gas, but instead depends upon the pr ocess. With the the first law of
thermodynamics and the fixed relationship between in ternal energy and temperature, we have:
The molar heat capacity is defined from the process by determining how the work done in that process is related to the temperature
change. The quantity has units of energy, and is scal ed for moles of a gas, so if we measure the work done by a process as of these
units, we can write the heat transferred in terms of the te mperature change as:
So if we can determine the value of for the process, we can compute the molar heat capacity. Since heat cap acity is a measure of how
much heat can be added to a system for a given tempe rature increase, it makes sense that if energy comes out of the system in the form of
work, then more heat can be transferred for the same temperature change than if the work did not remove en ergy.
We have now seen two special processes, and we have th e values of for both of them. For the isochoric proce ss, there is zero work done,
so, giving simply. Now we see why we originally append ed the " " in the subscript – because this constant happens to equal
the molar heat capacity at constant volume. For the isobaric process, we got a different value fo r. From Equation 5.8.8, we see that for this
process, which gives us the molar heat capacity at constant pressure:
Notice that this takes into account the number of mod es, because that information is contained in. So for monatomic ideal gases,
, for diatomic ideal gases,, and so on.
Example
One mole of a diatomic ideal gas is confined to a pis ton and undergoes a quasi-static process where of th e added heat is converted
into work. Find the molar heat capacity for this process.
Solution
Plugging into the first law gives:
Now we plug in for the constant for a diatomic ideal gas (for which, as always, we assume that the vibrati onal modes are frozen
out) to get our answer:
Gases can be mixtures of varieties (monatomic, diatomi c without vibration, etc.), and it can be cumbersome computing the contributions of
modes by each, so a more efficient method has been dev ised to characterize gases in the form of a constant, defined as:

5.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18475
In the cases where the gases are of a single type, this constant tells us exactly what type it is:
When the gas is a mixture, this constant lands between t hese values. Note that drops in value as more modes be come available.
Isothermal Process
A process that involves no change in temperature is c alled isothermal. In this case, a constant temperature means a cons tant internal energy,
and from the first law we get that the heat transferred equ als the work done:
From our sign conventions for and, we know that this me ans that if heat is entering the system, then the ga s is doing work, and if heat is
exiting the system, then work is being done on the ga s. This gives the same basic physical picture as giv en above for the isobaric process,
though the details are distinctly different, as is s een in the effects on the state variables. Let's consid er the case of the expanding gas: The
volume increases (), and the temperature and interna l energy remains constant (), so from the ideal gas law, the
pressure must be going down ().
Next we want to write the work and heat in terms of the c hanges in state variables. Fortunately, these two quant ities equal each other in this
case, so if we compute one, we immediately have the o ther. We can compute the work done with the integral, because the constant
temperature and ideal gas law enables us to write the pressur e as a function of the volume:
There are a number of differences between this process a nd the others we saw before it:
The natural logarithm function makes an appearance in the calculation of the heat or work from the state vari ables, and either the
volumes or pressures can be used in the calculation.
The relationship between heat or work and the state variab les does not depend upon whether the gas is monatomic, diatomic, etc. This
makes sense, because this process involves no chang e in the internal energy, so the number of modes availa ble for energy distribution is
irrelevant.
The molar heat capacity is infinite, since any amou nt of heat can be added and the temperature never cha nges.
The PV curve is no longer so trivial:
Figure 5.8.5 – Isothermal Processes – PV Diagram
A curve for an isothermal process is called an isotherm.
Example
The diagram below depicts two equilibrium states (“A” and “B”) of two moles of an ideal gas confined by a p iston which both lie on
the same isotherm. You are supplied with a meter stick and a thermometer, so you can determine the volume of the piston and the
temperature of the gas at any stage. Suppose you take the system from state B to state A. You do this in two stages: First you compress
the gas at a constant pressure to the final volume, t hen you raise the pressure to the final pressure with a fixed volume. You measure the

5.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18475
two volumes to be and, and before you start the com pression, your thermometer measures the temperature of
the gas to be.
a. Sketch this two-stage process (including an arrow to i ndicate the direction) on the diagram and use the ske tch to compute the total
work done on or by the gas (specify which) in joules.
b. Find the total heat that enters or exits the system (specify which) during this two-stage process.
c. Suppose you repeat this two-stage process with two diffe rent gases – and. During the process, which gas will e xhibit the
greatest difference between its maximum and minimum inte rnal energy, or will both be the same?
Solution
a.
The work done during the second process is zero, so the total work done by the two processes is the shade d area shown
under the curve. The process goes right-to-left, so the work done is negative, which means it is work done on the system:
The starting temperature is known, as is the number o f moles, and the volume so the starting pressure can be
computed, giving us the work:
b. The system begins and ends with the same temperature, since both states are on the same isotherm. Therefore it begins
and ends with the same internal energy, which means t hat all the energy that comes in as work goes out as h eat:
c. In both cases the gases pass through the same press ures and volumes, which means they will exhibit the sa me
temperatures throughout (they both satisfy the same ide al gas law). The internal energy, on the other hand, will be
different for the two, since its relationship with th e temperature is different. For the same temperature cha nge, the gas
with the higher heat capacity will experience the g reater change in internal energy. Therefore (which is diatomic and
therefore has 5 modes per particle compared to 3 for monatomic He) exhibits the higher internal energy change.

5.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18475
Adiabatic Process
A process that involves no heat exchange is called adiabatic. Like the isochoric case, this makes the physical pic ture an easy one to describe.
One difference that is added to the diagram is insul ation of the container in the form of thicker walls, to represent the inability of heat to
transfer into or out of the system.
Figure 5.8.6 – Adiabatic Processes – Physical Picture
The first law tells us immediately that the internal ene rgy change is entirely caused by work done on or by the system:
In the case of the gas expanding, positive work is do ne, which means that and. With volume increasing a nd temperature
decreasing, the ideal gas law tells us that the pressu re must be going down during this expansion. The rela tionship between the work and the
change of state variables is easy to compute from its relationship to internal energy:
We see that the work done on or by the gas depends up on the type of gas. It therefore becomes useful to ex press the work done in terms of
the constant for the gas. Plugging Equation 5.8.13 into Equation 5.8.18 gives:
Example
Each of the four "special processes" involves its own unique graph on the diagram of the quasi-static pr ocess. The graph of the
isochoric process is a vertical line (); the graph of the isobaric process is a horizontal line (); and th e graph of the
isothermal process is a hyperbola (). Use the result for the work done in an adiabatic process to show tha t the graph of this
process on the diagram is ().
Solution
Plugging the function into the work integral does th e job:
The graph for the diagram for an adiabatic process (called an adiabat) looks similar to that of an isotherm – the only di fference is the
magnitude of the exponent of the volume. In the exampl e above, we showed that the graph is defined by:
The constant is always greater than 1 for any gas, so it is not difficult to show mathematically that for a single system, the adiabat that
passes through a given point in the plane is steepe r than the isotherm (defined by) that passes through the same point.
This makes sense, since one would expect that the pressure wo uld drop faster as a gas expands when there is no heat e ntering the system.
This page titled 5.8: Special Processes is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on the
LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Applications of Thermodynamics
6.1: More Processes
6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency
6.3: Entropy
6.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
This page titled 6: Applications of Thermodynamics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184796.1: More Processes
Real Processes
We have assumed throughout the previous section that these processes occur quasi-statically. But in real world processes, this is
virtually never the case, so one could reasonably won der what good all of this is. That is, to what extent c an we apply results found
here to the real world? The answer lies in the idea of the t hermodynamic state.
Consider a system in a thermodynamic equilibrium sta te, which then goes through a real-world (not quasi-stat ic) process, and
finally comes back to equilibrium in a different th ermodynamic state. It is important to remember that the beginning and ending
states are perfectly defined, even if the journey t hat the system took to get from one to the other is n ot. This means that changes in
state variables from the starting state to the ending state are knowable, because their values are defined a t both endpoints. Our
knowledge of these special processes provides us with a very useful trick for finding these state variable changes. Let's look at a
very simple example.
Example 1 – Computing Volume Change of an Ideal Gas After a Non-Quasi-Static Process
A piston confines moles of an ideal gas at a pressur e, and is held in place with a constant force. The g as is heated quickly with
a flame, and the gas expands non-quasi-statically to a new volume, where a short time later the gas comes b ack to equilibrium. The
force on the piston is the same before and after the expansion, and the starting and ending temperatures a re and, respectively.
Find the change in volume of the gas.
We don't need any "tricks" to solve this, because we have the ideal gas equation of state, which we know applies to the starting and
ending equilibrium states. The equal force on the pi ston before and after means that the starting and endin g pressures are equal to
, so we can easily find the change in volume:
Suppose now that we didn't have this direct route to an answer available to us. A process diagram of this s ituation gives us an
idea of what we are up against:
Figure 5.8.7 – A Non-Quasi-Static Process with Equal Starting and Endi ng Pressures
What are we supposed to do with this? Okay, so here is the tri ck:
Invent any quasi-static process whatsoever that connect s the endpoints and use it to compute the change in the s tate variable.
The value of every state variable at the endpoints i s well-defined, so if you can compute these values wit h a specific process, it
doesn't matter if that process didn't actually occur, the resulting values will be correct! Notice that we cannot draw a conclusion
about the amount of work done or the amount of heat transferred – these are dependent upon a path through equilibrium states, so
picking a path arbitrarily doesn't help with those quanti ties.
What makes this trick so powerful is that we can often find a very simple quasi-static process to work with. In this particular case,
the fact that the starting and ending pressures are eq ual inspires us to select an isobaric process:
Figure 5.8.8 – Choose an Isobaric Process for the Given Endpoints

6.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18479
Consider the work done over this path. We already sol ved this for an ideal gas – it can be expressed in two ways: Equation 5.8.7
and Equation 5.8.8. Putting these together gives us the answer we reached ab ove:
Example 2 – Computing Temperature Change of an Ideal Gas After a Non-Quasi-Static Process
A piston confines moles of a diatomic ideal gas in a container at a temperature of. The piston is compressed very suddenly
to one-tenth of its original volume, after which the gas qu ickly comes back to equilibrium. Find the new temperature of the gas.
This problem cannot be solved in the same ideal-gas- law-only manner that we used first in the previous ex ample. That approach
was possible because there were only two state variable s changing, but this time the pressure, temperature, a nd volume are all
changing. We need to use our trick, but what quasi-stat ic process is appropriate in this case?
The key is in the fact that the process occurs very quickly. As we know from our studies in Section 5.4, heat transfer takes time, and
a quick process does not allow for appreciable heat flow to occur. Therefore the starting and ending state s lie along a common
adiabat, and we can use the adiabatic quasi-static pr ocess for our trick. We have a functional dependence between and for this
curve, and we have the ideal gas law, so we can relate the st arting and ending volumes to the starting and ending te mperatures:
Solving for the final temperature in terms of the in itial temperature and the ratio of volumes (and noti ng that for a diatomic gas is
) gives:
Once again, it should be emphasized that the gas is n ot following a quasi-static process, so it does not go through the intermediate
states of the adiabat, but as we are interested in t he change of a state variable, we can choose any path that passes through the
endpoints that results in no heat exchange. Interesti ngly, in this case, the fact that we know the change i n internal energy and that
there is zero heat exchanged means that we also know h ow much work is done. One might think that this is not s upposed to be
allowed, but knowing the work doesn't define the path i n the diagram – any path between the endpoints that result in the same
area-under-the-curve would work equally well.
Processes that Return to Previous States
One process that we will discuss in detail later is calle d a cyclic process. Simply put, this is a process that returns to the same
thermodynamic state at which it started. In a process diagram, it forms a closed loop:
Figure 6.1.1 – A Cyclic Process

6.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18479
One of the state variables that returns to its original value when the cycle is complete is the internal en ergy. This means that for a
full cycle we can use the first law to conclude:
If there is a net amount of heat that comes into the system, it goes out of the system in the form of work – heat enters the gas, which
in turn expands and does work on the piston. On the oth er hand, if a net amount of heat exits the system, it m ust have entered in the
form of work. We can in fact even draw a general conc lusion about which of these is occurring (and how muc h energy has been
converted), based on the direction of the cycle (clo ckwise or counterclockwise) in the diagram. Whichever direction the cycle
goes, part of the process is going left-to-right, and the rest is going right-to-left. The section of th e process that is higher has a
greater area under the curve, so if the top section is left-to-right there is net work done by the gas, and if it is right-to-left there is
net work on the gas. Furthermore, the difference in t he right-going and left-going processes is the net wo rk done, and this is the
area bounded by the cyclic loop.
Figure 6.1.2 – Work Done in a Cyclic Process is the Area Bounded by the Cycle
In the figure above, the area under the upper porti on of the curve is positive, and the area under the lower portion is negative, so the
total area for the full process is the difference, whic h is the blue region enclosed by the loop defining the cycle. Notice that for the
case shown, the total area is positive, and if the cycl e went the other way then the net work would be negativ e. We therefore
conclude:
the area inside a closed cycle loop in a diagram represents the net amount of energy converted between work and he at
clockwise cyclic processes on the diagram represent physi cal systems for which heat is entering and an equal amount of
work is done by the gas
counterclockwise cyclic processes on the diagram represent physical systems for which work is done on the gas and an
equal amount of heat is expelled by the gas
Example
The cyclic process of an ideal gas shown in the diag ram below is rectangular, with vertical and horizontal sides at the
positions labeled.

6.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18479
a. Find the total heat transferred during the full cycle in terms of the quantities labeled, and indicate whether t he heat is
transferred into or out of the system.
b. Sketch the diagram of this cyclic process.
Solution
a. As this is not a diagram, the total work done or heat exchanged is not simply the area inside the cl osed shape. We
therefore need to look at each segment individually. The horizontal segments are processes that maintain a c onstant
pressure, so they are isobaric. We know the work done d uring such a process in terms of the temperature chang e from
Equation 5.8.9:. The two isobaric processes involve equal/opposite temperature changes, so these heat
exchanges cancel each other out. The vertical segments are processes that maintain a constant temperature, so they are
isothermal, and we can write down the work done for each segment u sing Equation 5.8.16:
b. We need to sketch two isobaric and two isothermal processes that form a closed loop in a diagram. The iso therms
need to be hyperbolas, which means the upper corners ne ed to be at lower volumes than the corners directly b elow them on
the diagram. Also, the work done in the upper isobar ic process has to be equal in magnitude to the work do ne in the
lower isobaric process (since we found that they canc el in part a). But the upper process is at a higher pre ssure, so the
volume change has to be smaller (i.e. the horizontal segmen t is shorter on top than on bottom).
This page titled 6.1: More Processes is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184806.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency
A Simple Engine
Cyclic processes provide a means to have repeatable ways to convert heat energy that comes into the gas into work energy that
leaves the gas. In order for heat to be exchanged, we know there must be a temperature difference, and a pr operly-designed device
can run in a cycle to exploit a temperature differe nce to deliver useful mechanical energy. Such a device is called a heat engine. Of
course, this requires a cyclic process that runs clockwi se on the diagram. We will now examine the simplest ve rsion of an
engine – one that forms a rectangle in its diagram. Our emphasis will be to visualize each leg of the cy cle as a physical process
involving a piston that is exchanging heat with a thermal r eservoir and/or work with its surroundings.
Figure 6.2.1 – A Simple Engine
We'll start with what we already know about cycles – sin ce the thermodynamic state returns to where it started, the internal energy
doesn't change over the course of a cycle, which means that the work energy that comes out (equal to the ar ea enclosed by the loop)
equals the heat energy that goes in.
We will now compute the heat transferred during all f our individual legs of the cyclic process to confir m this result. As we do, we
will include a diagram of what is happening physically.
Figure 6.2.2a – Process A–B
This is a quasi-static isobaric process, which involv es heat being transferred into the gas slowly (from a thermal reservoir that's
barely warmer than the engine gas at every step of t he process). The temperature of the gas rises during the process, and the volume
increases, while heat comes into the system. The amount o f heat transferred is:

6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480Figure 6.2.2b – Process B–C
This time we have an isochoric process, and since the pressure drops, it must be because the temperature is dropping. This can only
occur with an unchanging volume when heat is leaving the system, and since the process is quasi-static, th e temperature of the
thermal reservoir is slightly lower than the temperature of the gas throughout the process. The heat lost duri ng this stage is:
Figure 6.2.2c – Process C–D
This third leg is again an isobaric process, this tim e with the temperature and volume dropping. Again this quasi-static process
requires that the temperature of the reservoir remain slig htly lower than the temperature of the gas. The heat lost is:
Figure 6.2.2d – Process D–A

6.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480
The final leg is again isochoric, and the pressure is increased along with the temperature by heat added from the thermal reservoir
that is slightly warmer than the gas. The heat transferred i s:
It is left as an algebra exercise to the reader to demonstrate that the sum of these four heat transfe rs equals the total heat transferred
as given in Equation 6.2.1. When doing this exercise, it will be helpful to remember that.
Real-World Engines
Throughout the calculation above, it may have occur red to the reader that there was one awkward requiremen t kept coming up –
the thermal reservoir must always be an infinitesimal amount different in temperature from the gas in th e engine. How exactly does
one accomplish such a feat? The reservoir is very sl ightly warmer, increasing the gas's temperature until they are at thermal
equilibrium, then the reservoir gets a little warmer a gain, so that it can again give a small amount of he at to the gas, and so on? This
process is obviously not something that can be reason ably engineered, and even if it could, the fact that the rate of heat flow is
related to the temperature difference means that it wou ld be painfully slow.
In the real world, we typically have two thermal reser voirs at fixed temperatures to work with – one at a high temperature from
which the engine receives heat, and one at a low tempe rature, where the engine dumps heat. Notice that in the simple engine above,
the gas had to both receive and dump heat, even thoug h it received a net amount of heat that it converte d into work. This turns out
to be a required feature of all engines (for reasons we will explore later on) – an e ngine cannot simply take heat in from a single hot
thermal reservoir and convert it into work in a cycl e without also dumping heat into another, colder the rmal reservoir. A schematic
of this general principle of engines is shown below.
Figure 6.2.3 – Real-World Schematic of a Heat Engine

6.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480
Many elements of the engine are featured in the schem atic. First, the process must be cyclic, which means th at the overall change
in the internal energy is zero, and the overall hea t that comes in (the heat in from the warmer reservoir minus the heat out to the
cooler reservoir) equals the overall work that goes out (technically there is also work that comes in, b ut this schematic includes
only the net work, while dividing the “in” heat from the “out” he at, for reasons that will soon become clear). We have i ncluded the
heats exchanged with the two reservoirs in terms of th eir absolute values, so that we don't have to concer n ourselves with heat
in/heat out sign conventions. Clearly the work produce d is the difference of the total heat energy that c omes in from the hot
reservoir minus the total heat energy that goes out to t he cold thermal reservoir.
Thermal Efficiency
Now it is true that in the real world when we take heat from one reservoir and give some to another, colder o ne, we make the two
reservoirs a little closer in temperature. Ideally, we wo uld like to avoid “wasting” any of that outgoing hea t energy that does
nothing but increase the temperature of the colder r eservoir, and instead just convert all of the heat en ergy coming from the hot
reservoir directly into work. Achieving this goal woul d mean the creation of a “perfectly efficient engin e,” and we would say that it
has a thermal efficiency of 100%. Defining the percentage efficiency of any engine is therefore pretty obvious – simply take the
ratio of the work extracted to the heat supplied:
It should be noted that the "work extracted" is the ne t work – the work that comes out during the full cycl e minus the work that is
put in (i.e. it is the area inside the closed loop in the clockwise PV diagram). Notice also that for this e ngine the temperature is not
just slightly above the temperature of the gas in th e engine, and in fact the force due to the gas pressu re is not slightly greater than
the external force when work is being done, either. So none of these processes are quasi-static. But as we ha ve seen, this will not
stop us from making good use of the quasi-static process mode ls.
We will see later that engines are maximally efficie nt when the processes they follow are reversible, but of course this requires for
some processes that the thermal reservoir involved va ries its temperature to remain infinitesimally large r or smaller than the
temperature of the engine. This contradicts the entire notion of a "thermal reservoir," so it is clear that real engine efficiencies will
be worse than those of reversible engines we may use to model them. Still, we can use the ratio of total wor k out to total heat in for
a reversible model to compute the maximum possible efficiency for the engine modeled.
Example
In the cyclic process for an engine shown below, the process from A to B triples the pressure, the process from B to C is
adiabatic, and the working gas in the engine is monatomic. Compute the maximum thermal efficiency of this engine.

6.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480
Solution
Let's call the volume of the gas during the isochoric le g (). We can use the adiabatic process to relate th e volume
the gas occupies at C to:
The total area in the loop (the net work done in the cycle) is the area under the adiabat plus the (neg ative) area under the
isobar. We have both of these quantities in terms of the pressu res and volumes:
Heat exits the system during the isobaric process, and no heat is exchanged during the adiabatic process, so all the heat that
comes into the engine does so during the isochoric process, and this is easy to compute for a monatomic ideal gas:
The efficiency comes from the ratio of net work out to heat in:

Otto Cycle
Our most recognizable type of engine is the internal c ombustion engine, and the most common cyclic proces s these follow is called
the Otto cycle.
Alert
In what follows, when the word “gas” refers to the gas wit hin the piston, which is mostly air. When referring to gasoline (the
most common combustion fuel), we will refer to it in that long f orm – we will not use the shortened version of “gas."
We'll start by putting up a diagram that approximates the process, then explain each leg of the cycle.
Figure 6.2.4 – The Otto Cycle

6.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480
process A-B (adiabatic compression)
Gasoline (or other combustible) vapor enters the cham ber and mixes with air at a cool (ambient) temperatur e, at which point work
is done on the mix to compress it. This happens very fast, so that the gas has no time to exchange heat with the surroundings, and
this prompts us to treat this process as adiabatic.
process B-C (isochoric heating)
The gasoline is ignited, which rapidly changes the te mperature of the gas inside the piston. Technically, t he heat is not coming from
outside the engine, but rather it comes from an exot hermal chemical process, but it amounts to the same thing. This ignition
happens very suddenly, before the gas has time to expand th e piston, so we treat this process as isochoric.
process C-D (adiabatic expansion)
The heated gas is now at a very high pressure, and thi s pressure expands the piston, doing work. Once again, t he speed of this
process is so great that very little heat has time to escap e the piston as it occurs, so we treat this process as adiabatic.
process D-A (isochoric cooling)
After fully expanding, the cooled-but-still-hotter-t han-ambient gas is expelled from the engine, and a ne w load of air and gasoline
vapor enters the chamber. Technically the gas doesn’ t “cool isochorically,” but this amounts to the same thing, as the chamber is
soon filled with new gas at a lower temperature and at the same volume.
This example shows how we can make use of what we have le arned about thermodynamic processes to analyze real -world
situations, even though our understanding is based on ideal situations that don’t exist in the real world. We simply look at the
features of the real-world process, and match it as c losely as possible to a quasi-static process. During t his “matching” process, we
take care that the endpoints match correctly (becaus e those are equilibrium states), and that the heat/wo rk transferred during the
process makes sense. In the above example, this consiste d of asking if the process occurred fast (no time fo r heat to flow) or if the
volume didn’t change (no work done). We’ll see another for m of this matching again shortly.
Let’s look at the efficiency of this cycle. Keep in m ind that our idealized version will be more efficient than what we are able to
achieve in the real world, but this gives us an upper- limit on what we can hope for. To get the efficiency, we need the heat supplied
by the hot reservoir and the heat taken by the cold reservoir. In this cycle, heat exchanges only occur du ring processes B-C and DA, which are both isochoric, so the heat exchanges are p roportional to the temperature changes. The efficie ncy is therefore given
by:
It should be clear from this result that the engine runs more efficiently when the temperature differenc e between the two thermal
reservoirs is greater. In this case, that is the differe nce between the temperature of the injected gas and the ignited gas. It should be
clear from the diagram that this difference can be m easured in terms of the difference between (or more correctly, the ratio of) the
two volumes the gas occupies. In practical terms, the gas cannot be squeezed to as small of a volume as on e wants before igniting

6.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480it, because the rise in temperature due to the compre ssion can itself spontaneously ignite the gas. Higher octane fuels allow for
greater compression without this unwanted spontaneous i gnition, improving efficiency.
As we can infer from above, it is possible to rewrite th e efficiency of this engine in terms of a variable th at we can measure more
easily than the temperatures – namely a property of the engine itself. Two of the four processes are isoch oric, which means that the
volume only changes twice during the whole cycle, whic h means we have only two volumes to worry about – the maximum and
the minimum. The maximum occurs when the piston is com pletely expanded, and the minimum when it is complet ely compressed.
We don’t even really care what these values are when it comes to efficiency, but rather all we care about is the ratio of these
volumes, which is called the compression ratio:
We have a relation between the temperature and the vo lume along the path of an adiabat, which gives:
Plugging the Equation 6.29 into Equation 6.27 results in the following equation for the efficienc y of this cycle for a given
compression ratio:
Diesel Cycle
With a small alteration to the Otto cycle, the efficie ncy can be improved somewhat. This alteration consist s of controlling the
ignition process so that it occurs at a constant pr essure rather than a constant volume. This engine desi gn uses what is called the
diesel cycle. This of course means that the ignition has to occur less "explosively," which reduces the rate at which the cycle can
occur, and we know from Physics 9A that the rate at whi ch work is output is the power of the cycle, so while th is cycle comes out
to be more efficient, it provides less power.
To determine the efficiency difference, one needs on ly to change the denominator of Equation 6.2.7, which accounts for the
ignition process (from B to C). Instead of occurring a t constant volume, it occurs at constant pressure, which simply changes the
to, giving:
The term that subtracts from the efficiency is lowere d by a factor of gamma, resulting in higher efficien cy. In addition, higher
compression ratios are possible, because the air is co mpressed without the fuel present (the fuel is added g radually using fuel
injectors during the ignition process, keeping the pressure con stant), removing the problem of the fuel igniting d uring compression.
Of course, while this process was exclusive to diesel e ngines many years ago, nowadays fuel injection and i ts accompanying higher
compression ratios are standard in gasoline-burning autom obiles.
Carnot Cycle
We were able to cleverly describe the Otto and diesel cycles in terms of 4 quasi-static processes, by trea ting the ignition of a gas as
if heat is added rather than coming from a chemical reaction, and by treating replacement of gas as if heat is expelled. Without
these tricks, keeping these processes quasi-static woul d make them very slow, and could not happen between reservoirs of two
fixed temperatures, as shown in Figure 6.2.3, because for a process involving heat transfer and te mperature change (which is the
case for both isochoric and isobaric processes) to occ ur quasi-statically, the reservoir must change temp erature to remain only
infinitesimally different from the temperature of th e gas. We can't get something for nothing, and in fact both the ignition and gas
replacement processes are irreversible, making these pro cesses only approximately the quasi-static cycles we dec lared them to be.

6.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480From this analysis, we see that the problem with includi ng isochoric and isobaric processes in the "real wor ld" case of an engine
constrained to function between two reservoirs with fi xed temperatures is that we can't make these processe s reversible. But even
under this fixed-temperature constraint on the rese rvoirs, there are two processes we can (in principle) pe rform quasi-statically. The
adiabatic process involves not heat transfer at all, so the relative temperature of the engine and the reservoir is not relevant. The
isothermal process leaves the temperature of the en gine fixed, so if it happens to equal the temperatu re of the reservoir, there is no
problem.
In the discussion that followed Equation 5.8.20, we noted that at any given point on a PV diagram fo r a gas, the adiabat that passes
through that point is steeper than the isotherm tha t also passes through it. Because of this, we can cre ate a cyclic process that
utilizes two isothermal processes (one on the top, one on the bottom of the PV diagram) and two adiabatic p rocesses (one on each
side of the PV diagram), and this cycle can be driven by two f ixed-temperature reservoirs. This is known as the Carnot cycle.
Figure 6.2.5 – The Carnot Cycle
We can compute the efficiency of this engine as we d id with the Otto and diesel cycles. Noting that there is no heat transferred
during the two adiabatic processes, and using Equation 5.8.16 for the heat transferred during the two isothermal pr ocesses, we
have:
There is more we can do here, however. The volume of sta te B is related to the volume of state C by virtue of being on the same
adiabat (the same is true of states D and A). Thus:
Plugging these in above has the logarithms in the nume rator and denominator cancelling, making the efficie ncy of a Carnot cycle a
simple function of the temperatures of the two reservoirs:
The greater the temperature difference is between the t wo reservoirs, the greater the efficiency of the Carnot en gine.

6.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480Refrigerators
One thing we have seen consistently in our discussion of e ngines is that the cycles are clockwise on the PV diagram. This ensures
that after a full cycle work comes out of the system as heat goes in. What happens if we run the cycle in reverse? Then wo rk goes
in and heat comes out. This is the basis of a refrigerator. Naturally this doesn’t mean that we can take an inter nal combustion
engine, put it in “reverse,” and it turns into an air -conditioner. For one thing, we can’t “un-ignite” the gas. But we can perform the
processes in the opposite direction by other means. First, let ’s look at a schematic for a refrigerator, as we did for a heat en gine:
Figure 6.2.6 – Real-World Schematic of a Refrigerator
The efficiency of a refrigerator is not defined in t he same way as an engine, since the goal here is to rem ove as much heat as
possible from the cold reservoir while putting in as l ittle work as possible. We therefore define the coefficient of performance as the
ratio of the heat removed to the work required:
An extremely-simplified way to think about how a refri gerator works is this: We know that if we very suddenly compress a gas, it
gets much hotter (see the example at the very end of Section 5.8). Unsurprisingly, the reverse is also true: Allowing a gas t o
suddenly expand a piston results in the gas cooling g reatly. Suppose we want to make the interior of a refr igerator cooler than the
exterior (duh, that's the definition of a refrigerat or!). Start with a gas in a piston outside the refrige rator, and compress it to a small
volume, and wait with it compressed until it comes to the outside temperature. Then release the piston sudde nly and quickly carry it
into the refrigerator. If we compressed it enough, th e temperature change of the gas in the piston will br ing its temperature below
that of the interior of the refrigerator. We wait a l ittle while, as the interior of the refrigerator sur renders heat to the cold air in the
piston, thereby cooling the air within the refrigerat or. When these reach equilibrium, we carry the piston b ack outside, and repeat
the process. This transports thermal energy out of the refrigerator.
The work done on the gas during compression exceeds the work done by the gas during expansion (i.e. net work needs to be put
in). The compression and expansion processes are adiab atic, while the "waiting" processes are isochoric, which g ives a PV diagram
that looks something like this:
Figure 6.2.7 – PV Diagram of a Simple Refrigerator

6.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18480
Obviously we sacrificed a lot of reality for this easy -to-understand "refrigerator." We obviously don't n eed to transport the piston in
and out of the refrigerated chamber, and can instead pipe the gas into and out of it, compressing it as i t leaves, and expanding it as it
enters. But there is still a fairly big problem with this design. In order for heat to be transferred in t he proper directions at the proper
times, we need the temperature of the gas after it co ols from expansion to be lower than the ambient tempe rature in the refrigerator.
On the PV diagram, the temperatures inside and outside the ref rigerators correspond more-or-less to the temperature s of states B
and D, respectively. This means that if we draw isotherms th rough points B and D, that the gap between those isotherms represents
the maximum temperature gap we can maintain between t he hot and cold regions. Obviously this is a function of the pressure
difference we can create between the compressed gas and the e xpanded gas, but in practical terms, this is a substantia l obstacle.
The way this limitation is overcome is to carry much of the thermal energy in the phase of the refrigerant. We know that we can
change phases by combinations of compressing/expandi ng and heating/cooling the fluid, and the latent hea t of vaporization is
substantial compared to the specific heat capacity for a s mall temperature change. This leads to this basic process:
the compressor changes the phase of the refrigerant into liquid, which warms it above the outside temperature
the fluid then enters a condenser coil, which has the purpose of increasing the contact area with the outside air, speeding up the
process of dumping heat
by the time the fluid has passed through the condenser coi l, it is at a high pressure, but has come to thermal equi librium with the
outside air, and it then passes into an expansion valve, where it expands adiabatically, changing phase back to ga s and dropping
significantly in temperature, below the temperature of th e inside air
the gas then passes through an evaporator coil, which increases the rate as which the heat can enter the ref rigerant from the
inside air, and at the end of the evaporator coil, it reent ers the compressor to start the cycle again.
This page titled 6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

6.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481
6.3: Entropy
Extensive and Intensive State Variables
All state variables can be classified into one of two categories, which we call extensive and intensive. Extensive state variables are
those that are additive when two systems are combined into one, while intensive state variables are not add itive. For example,
suppose we have two identical boxes of the same gas in the same thermodynamic state that are separated by a barrier. Removing
the barrier and treating the new bigger box as a sin gle system, we find that we have doubled the volume, par ticle number, and
internal energy of the system. These are therefore e xtensive state variables. But if we measure the pres sure or temperature of the
new state, we find that these quantities are unchanged, making them intensive variables. All state variables c ome in one variety or
the other.
The way to tell mathematically whether a state variab le is extensive or intensive is to look at what happen s to it as a function of
other state variables when they are scaled according to whether they are extensive or not. So for example, sup pose we know that
the number of moles is extensive and the total energ y in an ideal gas system are extensive, but we are n ot sure about
temperature. Writing temperature in terms of and give s:
Scaling the system by a factor of (i.e. putting together identical systems) changes and by that factor but has no effect on:
Example
Given that and are extensive, and is intensive, use the ideal gas law to show that is intensive.
Solution
Following the same process as above where we scale the extensive variables (,), and do nothing to the
intensive variables () we have:
Since doesn't change upon scaling the system, it is an i ntensive state variable.
Whether a variable is intensive or extensive also aff ects the final result when we combine two systems that ar e not identical. If we
again consider two systems separated by a barrier which this time have different state variables (but are t he same type of gas), then
we get the following differences in the results for each ty pe of variable:
Figure 6.3.1 – State Variables in Combined Systems
The extensive variables will simply add. This is obvi ous for particle number and volume, but the sum of t he internal energies of the
two systems must equal the internal energy of the combined sys tem as well (energy isn't created or destroyed by the combi nation):

6.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481We can use these to determine what happens to the in tensive variables. First use the internal energy rela tion to determine the fate of
the temperature:
And combining this with the ideal gas law gives a similar r esult for pressure:
So you see that the temperature and pressure of the c ombined system are "weighted averages" of the temper atures and pressures of
the individual systems.
A New State Variable
We know that work and heat are similar in that they a re the two quantities in thermodynamics that are not s tate variables. We know
specifically how work arises from a single infinitesima l step in a quasi-static process:, but as yet we hav e no equivalent
relation for heat. If we assume, because of its similar ity with work, that heat does have such a relation with two state functions,
then it should look something like:. Comparing thi s with the case of work, and keeping in mind what proper ties “drive”
work and heat, which of the following are likely candidate s for the state functions and?
Well, we know that a pressure difference on the two sides of a piston will result in work being done, and while work is "driven" by
a pressure difference, heat is driven by a temperature difference. We therefore infer that the state varia ble is temperature, but is
a mystery. One thing we can perhaps conclude that since work is defined from a combination of an intensive function () and the
change of an extensive function (), then should be extensive (note that the driving variable temperat ure is intensive, as
pressure is in the case of work).
None of the state variables we have seen so far fit th e bill, so we'll just postulate the existence of anot her state variable we call
entropy, and give it the symbol. We therefore have, in analog y with work the relation for a small quantity of heat:
The units for entropy are the same as those for heat capacity (), but heat capacity and entropy are not the same. As with the case
of work, we can add up all the small contributions to heat tr ansferred during a quasi-static process:
This is good place to point out that these relationsh ips for work and heat can also be turned around to re sult in a change of a state
function for a quasi-static process:
Of course, the first of these relations is virtually ne ver used, because we can generally just look at what t he piston does to
determine the volume change – we don’t have to calcu late it. The second relation is another matter – th e change in entropy is not
immediately apparent, and as we will see, knowing the chang e of entropy can be quite important to understanding a pro cess.
Question: A gas is sealed in an insulated cylinder with a pist on. The piston is then compressed slowly (a quasi-stati c process), and
the temperature of the gas rises. In what direction does the entropy function change for that gas?
Answer: The piston is insulated, which means that the gas does not exchange heat wit h the outside environment. This is a quasistatic process, so throughout the process means that thro ughout the process, which means that.
Here we can see why the equation is so much more common ly-used than the equation – we know that an adiabati c process
occurs when we insulate the container, and that this pre vents heat from being transferred, so the entropy ch ange is zero. The

6.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481equivalent process for the case of work is the isochor ic process, which we know immediately involves zero chan ge in volume – we
don’t need to reason that we have rigged the apparat us so that no work is exchanged and therefore conclud e that there must not
have been a volume change.
In the case of a quasi-static process where zero work is done, we were able to characterize it in terms of a ch anging state variable –
an isochoric process. Until now, we had no such charac terization for a quasi-static process where no heat is exchanged. But so long
as we are talking about a quasi-static process, we can rename the adiabatic process in terms of the unchan ging state variable: an
isentropic process.
Ideal Gases
When we first started discussing state functions, we said that there are four independent state variables nee ded to define a state, but
when we know more about how the particles interact (such as an ideal gas, where they don't interact), this num ber drops to three.
We said that this allows us to express one state variabl e in terms of three others, as we did in Equation 5.5.2. Well, now we have a
new state variable, and it is useful to express it as a function of three others. Derivation of this expressio n is a bit involved, but here
it is:
One thing to note here is that while the ideal gas law state equation is the same for all ideal gases, the state equation for entropy
depends upon the type (monatomic, diatomic, etc) of ideal gas, as evidenced b y the presence of the constant.
This beastly-looking expression actually carries with it quite a lot of power, though it can take a bit of mathematics to extract it. We
can get more by rewriting the entropy in terms of th ree other variables. For example, we can replace inte rnal energy with pressure
by noting that:
Using the properties of the logarithm and doing the algebra t o simplify the entropy function gives:
where is a function of that does not need to be writ ten out here. Holding constant as we always do in our limited
treatment of thermodynamics, we can write this equation as:
If we now ask, “On what curve on a graph will the entropy of the st ate remain constant ()?”, the answer is obvious:
This is the equation for an adiabat, which is a curve for which there is no heat transfer when the process is quasi-static. This makes
sense, given the relationship between entropy and heat e xchange.
Entropy Changes in Special Processes
Back when we studied the four “special” processes, we d erived all the changes in state functions for each p rocess. We can do the
same for entropy using the function above, but it i s simpler to do with the integral. We have already st ated (and shown) that for a
quasi-static adiabatic process the entropy change is zero. Let’s see how we get the change for the other processes. In every case, we
are using Equation 6.3.7, and plugging in what we know about heat for each cas e from Section 5.8 (note that the final equality in
each result uses the ideal gas law and the constant variable in that case):

6.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481Free Expansion
We ended Section 5.8 with an important discussion about how we can deal with non-quasi-static processes even though all of our
models and results regarding processes are centered ar ound solving quasi-static processes. The subtle and impor tant point is that if
the endpoints of such a process are equilibrium states, then the val ues of the state variables at those points are well-def ined, and we
can sometimes use what we know about the process to rela te those points to each other, and then use what we kn ow about special
processes to solve for something useful. What follows is u ndoubtedly the best example of this method.
Consider an insulated container of a monatomic ideal gas that has all of the gas confined at equilibrium in one half of the container,
thanks to a membrane (barrier) between the two halves, wi th the other half completely evacuated. Suddenly, the membrane
ruptures, and gas quickly fills the container and even tually returns to equilibrium. We call this process free expansion. It helps to
put this process into our usual context of a gas confined with a piston, so here is an appropriate picture of what is going on:
Figure 6.3.2 – Free Expansion as a Sudden Shove of a Piston
Clearly this is not a quasi-static process. But that do esn't mean we can't say anything about how the beginn ing and ending states are
related. We are defining our system as the whole con tainer, and it is insulated, so we know for sure that n o heat enters the system
while it evolves. Also, the piston is shoved so quickl y that the gas particles do not rebound against it a s it moves. Consequently, the
gas exerts no force on the piston, and therefore doe sn't do any work. [That is not to say that no work is done at all, of cour se – we
do work on the piston from outside the system. But the point is that the work done on the piston is not re flected in the state of the
gas.]
With no work done on or by the gas, and no heat added to or taken away from the gas, the first law ensures tha t the internal energy
of the gas is unchanged. This actually makes sense, sin ce the internal energy is the sum of the kinetic en ergies of all the particles,
and why would suddenly removing the barrier cause any of the particles to change the kinetic energies th ey had just before the
barrier moved? But when one considers that an unchang ing internal energy means that the temperature is also unchanged, then it

6.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481
starts to seem a bit weird – we are used to quick expa nsions cooling the gas. But here we have to be careful. A gas cools when it
expands adiabatically, which assumes that work is done on the piston. We on ly treated "quick" expansion as adiabatic because it
was a practical means of having an expansion without significant heat loss. But free expansion is not the same as adiabatic
expansion – there is no work done on a piston at all, and ther efore no way for the internal energy to exit the system.
So with no work done, no heat transferred, and no chang e in temperature, what has changed? Well, clearly the volume has doubled.
With the temperature and number of particles unchan ged, the ideal gas law tells us that the pressure is cut in half. That accounts for
all of the state variables except for one... What abou t the entropy? It is tempting to say that because th ere is no heat exchanged that
tells us that the entropy change is also equal to z ero, but this is not correct! The reason is that this relation, like
, only links two equilibrium states when a quasi-static proce ss is followed, and this is not such a process.
We therefore turn to our trick – we use what we know ab out the actual process and the equilibrium endpoints to invent any quasistatic process whatsoever between the two endpoints to calculate the entropy ch ange. To see how we might do this, let's start by
plotting the two points on a diagram:
Figure 6.3.3 – PV diagram of Free Expansion
There is no "correct" path here – the system does no t pass through any equilibrium states during its journ ey. But as we are looking
for a change in a state function, only the endpoints matter, and if a particular path is useful, we can g o ahead and use it. So let's just
run through our options one-by-one. Both the pressure and volume are changing, so neither an isochoric nor an isobaric process
will connect these dots. Let's try an adiabat. in thi s case, the pressure and volume are related in a spe cific way, so we can check to
see if the endpoints lie along the same adiabat:
The two points do not lie along an adiabat. Wait a mi nute – we already said that the temperature doesn't change, so we know these
points lie along an isotherm. We already have this solu tion in terms of the volume (or pressure) change from Equation 6.3.14, so we
get the answer immediately:
Example
For the free-expansion case above, show that you can get the same entropy change, even if you choose the less-convenient path
between the endpoints that is first isochoric to the pr oper pressure, and then isobaric to the proper volume.
Solution
The first process is isochoric from to, and we have the ent ropy change for this process in Equation 6.3.14:
The second process is isobaric from to, and once again we h ave already computed this result in Equation 6.3.14:

6.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18481
The total change in entropy is the sum of these changes:
Example
For the free-expansion case above, show that you can get the same entropy change using Equation 6.3.11.
Solution
Noting that the particle number doesn't change and computin g the entropy change directly using properties of the logar ithm:
This page titled 6.3: Entropy is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

6.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184826.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
TS Process Diagrams
We have spent a lot of time with diagrams because t hey so clearly relate to the work done in a process through the area under
the curve. We have also looked at a number of process diagrams that involve two other state variables. Now tha t we have added
entropy to our arsenal, it's time to get it in on t he action. Returning to our original motivation for introducing the entropy – as a way
of creating an integral for heat analogous to that for work, it comes to mind that a process diagram c an do for heat what
diagrams do for work.
Figure 6.4.1 – Heat Transferred as the Area Under the T vs. S Curve
Interestingly, for a cyclic process, since (so), the area inside the closed loop (which for a diagram is the total
heat transferred), still equals the total work done over the cycle. Another i nteresting feature is the Carnot cycle that was such an
ugly mess on the PV diagram is a nice, easy rectangle on the TS diagram.
Figure 6.4.2 – Carnot Cycle on a TS Diagram
Of course, the nice rectangular (isochoric & isobaric) cycle on the PV diagram becomes quite a mess on the TS diagram, as the
Carnot cycle is on the diagram.

6.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482Multiple Systems
The topic of entropy becomes particularly important when you consider the effect that an exchange of hea t or work has on all of
the systems involved in the exchange. When we think about these kinds of situations, we need to keep two things in mind:
The energy lost by one system is gained by the other(s). That is, we are considering only isolated combinations of systems –
there is no interplay between the systems in question and the “outside.”
The entropy function is extensive, which means it is addit ive when two systems are considered as one.
Consider first two systems that exchange heat reversib ly, meaning that their temperatures are infinitesimal ly close. The entropy
change of the two systems combined remains unchanged:
Figure 6.4.3 – Entropy Change for Reversible Heat Exchange
Let's write the heat lost by system #1 and the heat gained by system #2 in terms of the temperatures and entropy cha nges:
Now we note that the heat gained by system #2 equals th e heat lost by system #1 (remember, by assumption thes e systems do not
interact with their surroundings). Also, when comparing a single differential to a product of differential s, the latter vanishes, which
means that one of the terms above goes away, leaving:
So we see that for a reversible transfer of heat, the to tal entropy of the two systems involved remains uncha nged. Recall that we
said that the key feature of reversible processes is that the system doesn't carry any "momentum" from on e state to the next – every
state in the process is in equilibrium, and the proce ss can stop instantly in an equilibrium state. We can now see that the state
variable of entropy gives us a way of characterizing thermal equilibrium. Whenever a function satisfies, is means that the
function has hit an extremum (a maximum or a minimu m). We formally state it this way: A closed system is in a state of thermal
equilibrium whenever the entropy function of the system hi ts an extremum, that is, when.
The question now becomes, "Is the extremum defined by a maximum or a minimum? To answer this, let's look at a case of
two systems undergoing an irreversible heat transfer be cause their temperatures differ by more than an infinit esimal amount.
Figure 6.4.4 – Entropy Change for Irreversible Heat Exchange
This time with the temperature difference finite, we d on't get the "product of infinitesimals vanishes" sit uation that we got with
the reversible case:

6.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482
We see that the change of entropy for the closed sy stem is positive here, which means that for equilibr ium the zero change in
entropy within the closed system corresponds to a maxi mum. We therefore make our former statement more speci fic, and elevate it
with its very own pink lettering:
A closed system is in a state of thermal equilibrium if and onl y if the entropy function of the system is a maximum:.
The Second Law
The relationship between the entropy state function and thermal equilibrium now established, we can extend it to processes that
take place within a closed system. The subsystems within a closed system can exchange work and/or heat to prod uce processes, and
if these are reversible, the entropy of the full sys tem is unchanged, though the entropy of each subsystem can change (one goes up
while the other goes down the same amount).
But if the subsystems differ such that the processes they produce are irreversible (due to finite diffe rences in temperature or
pressure), then the entropy of the full system will n ot be a maximum. If a process occurs due to the subsy stem imbalance that
brings the whole system closer to equilibrium, then t he entropy of the whole system must get closer to its maximum – it must go
up. Note that the entropy for a single subsystem can go down, b ut in that case the entropy of the other subsystem must go up more.
Accounting for both the reversible and irreversible cas es, we end up with the second law of thermodynamics:
For any process within a closed system, the values of the entropy function at the endpoints of the process satisfy.
The equality occurs when the process is reversible, and irreversible processes result in an increase of this state v ariable.
Alert
The most common error made by students when considering t he second law is that they focus entirely upon the fact that entropy
increases, and forget about the "closed system" require ment. This leads to confusion when a calculation shows t hat a system's
entropy goes down – oftentimes the calculation is cor rect, but the system under discussion is not actually i solated. This fact can
sometimes be quite subtle and hard to see.
A nice way to illustrate the second law is with diagr ams. Let's consider two thermal reservoirs which direct ly exchange heat
with each other, and are at temperatures that differ by more than an infinitesimal amount and exchange he at. We'll draw
diagrams for both of these systems side-by side, with the hotter subsystem on the left and the temperature axes on the same scales:
Figure 6.4.5 – TS Diagrams for Thermal Reservoirs Exchanging Hea t
As these are thermal reservoirs, their temperatures d on't change during this heat exchange. We know that the horizontal line on
diagram for the hotter reservoir is higher than that of the cooler reservoir. We also know that the magni tude of the areas under the
curves have to be equal, since all the heat that leav es the hotter reservoir enters the cooler one. Therefo re the length of the graphs
cannot be equal – the length of the segment on the diagra m for the cooler reservoir must be longer.

6.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482Our sign convention for heat requires that the heat t hat leaves the hot reservoir is negative (and the int egral goes right-to-left),
while the heat entering the cooler reservoir is positive. Therefore we have:
The combined entropy of the two reservoirs goes up, bec ause the entropy gain of the colder reservoir is gre ater than the entropy
loss of the hotter reservoir.
Forbidden Cyclic Processes
It was stated without proof in Section 6.2 that engines cannot run in a cycle with only a singl e thermal reservoir. That is, they must
always give up heat to a colder reservoir, forcing th em to have less than 100% efficiency. We can now prov e this is true with the
second law. The engine runs in a cycle, which means t hat its thermodynamic state returns to the state at wh ich it starts. Since
entropy is a state variable, it comes back to where it started, which means that the engine's entropy does n ot change during the
course of a full cycle. The reservoir that provides the heat converted into work by the engine is losing heat, which means that its
entropy goes down. If this was the only reservoir, then the closed syst em of the engine and reservoir would experience a dec rease in
total entropy, violating the second law. With the ad dition of a cold reservoir, the heat that goes into i t causes its entropy to rise, and
the closed system of the engine and both reservoirs av oids having its total entropy go down.
Another forbidden device is a refrigerator that draws heat from a colder reservoir and puts it into a warm er one without work being
put in. A refrigerator works in a cycle, so its inter nal energy (which is a state function) doesn’t change from beginning to end. This
means that all of the heat that leaves the colder r eservoir enters the warmer one. Therefore with no work put in, the amount of heat
that leaves equals the heat that enters. But with a lowe r temperature and, this means that the colder rese rvoir loses more
entropy than the warmer one gains. The refrigerator’ s cycle leaves its entropy unchanged, so this means t hat the entropy of the
closed system consisting of the two reservoirs and the refrigerator has gone down, in contradiction with the second law. But why
does the work make a difference, if a work process has no effect on the entropy? Because the energy that c omes in as work gets
added to the heat that goes into the hot reservoir. This increases the entropy that enters the hot re servoir, compensating for the
entropy lost by the cooler reservoir.
Entropy and Efficiency
It is also enlightening to have another look at eng ine efficiency from the perspective of entropy. The definition of the efficiency of
an engine between two thermal reservoirs is given by Equation 6.26. We know that the state of the engine returns to wher e it
started, and entropy is a state function, so for a ful l cycle it has no change in entropy. Also we assume th at the reservoirs do not
change temperature, so we can immediately write the heat they gain or lose in terms of their entropy changes:
Plugging these into the engine efficiency formula gives:
If all of the processes for the engine are reversible, then the entropy change of the full system (engine and both reservoirs) is zero,
which means that the entropy change of the reservoirs are equal in magnitude, which gives:
This was the same result we got for the Carnot cycle, wh ich makes sense, because that cycle allows for constant -temperature
reservoirs and reversible processes to coexist (othe r engines require heat be supplied-to and/or accept ed-by a region that keeps
changing temperature to stay infinitesimally close to t he temperature of the engine).
Now consider what happens to the efficiency if there ar e irreversible heat exchanges with one or both of th e thermal reservoirs (i.e.
they have temperatures differing from that of the e ngine by a finite amount). The entropy of the engine itself still doesn’t change
for a cycle, but the entropy of the closed system m ust get larger. The entropy change of the cold reservoir is positiv e (heat is going
in), and for the hot reservoir it is negative, so to e nd up with a net positive, the former must exceed the latter. When this happens,

6.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482the magnitude of the negative second term in the eff iciency grows, causing the efficiency to drop. The ups hot is that the efficiency
given for the Carnot cycle is the maximum possible atta inable efficiency for the two reservoirs provided, and as soon as irreversible
heat exchanges are introduced, that efficiency decline s.
Why Do Systems Head Toward Equilibrium at All?
There is a danger at this point of falling into the foll owing circular reasoning:
Closed systems head toward equilibrium because their entr opy must increase toward its maximum.
Entropy increases because heat flows from hotter regions to cooler ones.
Heat flows from hotter regions to cooler ones because they always head toward equilibrium.
The question we need to answer to get out of this ugly infinite loop is why systems head toward equilibrium at all. Why can't the
hotter subsystem get even hotter while the colder subs ystem gets even colder? Energy is still conserved in this case, so it doesn't
seem to violate any fundamental laws of physics, other than the second law of thermodynamics, which we only derived by
assuming that systems do head toward equilibrium.
It's actually a very vexing question, and we will not be able to answer it rigorously in this class, but the g eneral idea is not hard to
grasp, and is quite elegant. The crux of the matter lies in the idea of bridging the microscopic goings-o n of many particles to the
macroscopic quantities we can measure. We first saw th is in the kinetic theory of gases (Section 5.5), when we related pressure and
temperature to the random motions of particles in a gas.
With a mole of gas containing more than particles, it 's safe to say that we can't account for all of them at once. We therefore
need to account for them with some sort of "overview" that can't distinguish between exact situations. An acc ounting of every gas
particle's position and momentum tells us everything there is to know about the physical state of the syst em, and we call this the
microstate of that system. Clearly there are many different mic rostates that will result in the same average kinetic energy of a
particle (which is proportional to the temperature), and these average quantities define what we have called the thermodynamic
state, which is also called the macrostate of the system. The following is therefore clear: Every macrostate is associated with many
possible microstates which we cannot distinguish from e ach other because we can't account for the motions o f every one of ~
particles. Let's do an exercise to see how this view of thermody namic states leads to the fact that closed systems m ust evolve
toward equilibrium...
We enclose a mole of a gas in a container which inclu des an airtight barrier that divides it in two. At t he beginning, the barrier is
in place, and all of the gas is confined to one side of the container. Then the barrier is removed, and the gas is allowed to expand
into both chambers for a long period of time, after which th e barrier is replaced.
1. Clearly waiting a long time allows the gas in the chamber to come to equilibrium before the barrier is replaced. What
does this tell us about the amount of gas in each chamber? Is this answer ex act?
Most people would claim that there is an equal amount of gas in each chamber, but would then admit that this is an approximation,
because it would be folly to assume that a bunch of p articles bouncing around randomly are divided exact ly in half. We certainly
couldn't tell if, in a collection of particles, the re is an imbalance of 2 or 3... Or for that matter, 2 or 3 billion (), which would
still only account for a vanishingly-small percentag e discrepancy – the pressure difference, for example, would not be measurable
if one side got a billion particles more than the other.
Clearly the key to defining the macrostate is defini ng the tolerances to which we can measure, and these tolerances will be based on
percentages, not absolute numbers. We can see how this works mor e clearly by talking about situations with numbers we c an deal
with more easily. From now on, we will need to keep in mi nd that we assume that individual particles bounce ar ound in a random
fashion.
2. If we were to attach a tiny flag to one of the gas particles and wait for awhile as it moves around in the chamber, what
would be the probability that it would be found on the right side of the chamber?
Given the assumption of "random motion," we are force d to conclude that the probability of finding a spe cific particle in a specific
half of the chamber is.
3. Suppose there is a total of 10 particles in the entire gas. If we let t his gas move through both sides of the chamber for a
long time and then replace the barrier, what is the probability that the gas will be divided exactly in half?

6.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482Now our discussion takes a mathematical turn. To compu te the probability, we need to know how many ways there are to arrange
the particles such that they split evenly, and divide that number by all the ways that the particles can sp lit. The numerator is found
by computing a combination, which is often stated as " -choose-." In this case, t his counts the number of unique ways we can
select 5 particles out of 10 to place in one side of the container. We will not go into the details of thi s calculation, but will rather
state the result:
Plugging in our specific numbers here gives:
The total number of ways to arrange the 10 particles is easy to compute. Every particle can go into one o f two sides, so for one
particle the number is 2. For two particles, the seco nd particle has two choices for each of the first part icle's two choices, giving a
total of 4. Then the third particle gets two choices f or each of the first four, giving 8, and so on. When we reach particles, there is
a total of ways to arrange them. For this example, we t herefore get that the probability of seeing the 10 p articles split exactly in
half is:
There is less than a one-fourth probability that we will see this gas split exactly in half.
4. The problem with 10 particles is that we can tell at a glance if they are divided evenly between the two chambers (it
doesn’t require any detailed examination to determine this). This is not a fair model for equilibrium, given what we
discussed earlier. So let’s include a margin for error. Let’s say that we’ ll only recognize that the gas is not in equilibrium
if the discrepancy from equilibrium is more than 10%. So for exam ple, our blurry vision allows us to only distinguish
distributions that are skewed by more than 60%-40%. So if there are 6 part icles on one side of the barrier and 4 on the
other, we don’t immediately notice the difference, and we declare the gas “ evenly-distributed” in accordance with
equilibrium. That is, we define our macrostate to be defined by this 60-4 0 tolerance. What is the probability we will find
the gas in equilibrium under this definition?
Now there are more states that fall under our "roughly half-and-half" requirement than was true in the exac t case. We have to
account for the 10-choose-4 and 10-choose-6 results now, and add them into the probability calculation:
Not surprisingly, the likelihood of seeing an "equilib rium" goes up greatly as our ability to distinguish detail gets worse. But we
won't let it get any worse from here. Let's see what hap pens if we keep this 10% margin for distinguishing mic rostates but increase
the number of particles.
5. Using the same 10% margin-of-error definition of equilibrium as we use d above, what is the probability of finding a 20particle gas in equilibrium? Repeat the calculation one more time aft er doubling the particle number again to 40.
For 20 particles, the 10% margin encompasses distributions of (8:12), (9:11), (10:10), (11:9), and (12:8), giving:

6.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482For 40 particles, the 10% margin encompasses distributi ons ranging from (16:24) to (24:16). Sparing the reader the math, the result
is:
Notice that keeping the same percentage margin, the l ikelihood that we will not be able to distinguish the macrostate from the exact
50-50 distribution gets larger as the number of par ticles grows. From this example with a very small particl e number, it's not
difficult to imagine that this probability becomes i ndistinguishable from 1 when the particle number appr oaches the enormous
number of, even if we make the percentage margin signi ficantly smaller.
So what have we learned here? We found that a macrostat e is simply a result of not being able to distinguish microstates, and that
the macrostate associated with the equilibrium state (the one where the gas is divided 50-50) includes an ab surdly large percentage
of all the possible microstates. We state it this way:
The macrostate associated with equilibrium is the one that includes the largest number of microstates.
At last we are in a position to explain why systems hea d toward equilibrium. Naturally the particles "don't know anything" about
what they need to do to get the state to equilibrium, but they don't have to. All they need to do is move randomly, and as they pass
through all the possible microstates, eventually the system evolves through the weird, rare microstates and then will spend virtually
all of its time in one of the vast majority of micr ostates associated with equilibrium. From this point o n, every time we look at it, it
looks the same as before (even though the microscopic state has changed), so we declare it to be at equilibrium.
An analogy might help here. Suppose we have a cookie she et with 100 pennies on it, all with heads facing up. Cle arly this is a
highly-ordered state, and the macrostate of "all hea ds" has only one microstate. Now we rap on the bottom of the cookie sheet, and
some pennies randomly flip over. We did not hit it hard, so we can still tell that the pennies are not e venly-distributed between
heads and tails, but it is clearly more disordered t han before. If we keep hitting the sheet, eventually enough pennies flip between
heads and tails that we estimate half of them to be he ads and half to be tails. No matter how many more tim es we hit the sheet from
now on, our estimate doesn't change, because the prob ability that a large number of coins will randomly fl ip to one variety is very
small. In other words, the distribution of heads and tails reaches equilibrium.
We noticed that as we hit the sheet, the state of the pennies became more "disordered," and the equilibri um state was reached when
this disorder reached its maximum. In this way, entropy is thought of as a measure of disorder of a system, and the second law of
thermodynamics is merely a statement of probability – microstates are far, far more likely to randomly ev olve into new microstates
that are associated with an equilibrium macrostate th an any others. Without getting too technical about h ow we count the number of
microstates using positions and momenta of particles, the entropy of a system's macrostate is defined in t erms of the logarithm of
the number of microstates available to that macrostate (represented by below, called the system's multiplicity):
To see that this makes sense, consider the case of two systems at equlibrium being combined into one. If sy stem has possible
microstates, and system has possible microstates, t hen how many microstates are possible for the combined system? Well,
every individual microstate of system can be combin ed with every individual microstate of system to cre ate a new unique
microstate for the combined system, so the combined s ystem's total number of available microstates is the product of the
multiplicities of the two individual systems:
Plugging this into the entropy definition above and using th e property of the logarithm gives:

6.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18482This confirms that entropy is an extensive state functio n with this definition.
This page titled 6.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Tom Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Fluid Mechanics
7.1: Static Fluids
7.2: Buoyancy
7.3: Fluid Dynamics
This page titled 7: Fluid Mechanics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483
7.1: Static Fluids
Pressure in Static Fluids
A fluid is a collection of matter that is not a solid. That is, the particles that comprise the matter are not stron gly bound to each other in
a fixed lattice. This includes the liquid, gaseous, and even plasma states of matter. We will actually need t o restrict the properties of the
fluids we examine to some extent, so that we can get some approximate results, but the usefulness of the app lications of these models
cannot be overstated.
A key property in all fluids is pressure. We have disc ussed this at length in the context of gases in therm odynamic equilibrium, but in
the context of fluids, we need to loosen the restrictio ns we previously placed on this quantity. The main diffe rence is that unlike gases
at equilibrium, where we assumed that the pressure was a s tate variable that was the same in every cubic centim eter of a volume of gas
at equilibrium, now we will allow the pressure to vary fro m one position to the next within a fluid. [In truth, having a pressure that
varies with position within a gas also lies in the pur view of thermodynamics, though we did not delve suffici ently deeply into the
subject to discuss it.]
Consider a container of fluid in a gravitational field. If we draw a free-body diagram for a small section of th at fluid (and exclude the
horizontal forces), then three forces come to mind: The f orce of gravity on that section, the amount that the fluid above that section
pushes down on it, and the amount that the fluid belo w that section pushes up on it. This diagram is really no different from one we
would draw for a book in the middle of a stack of books.
Figure 7.1.1 – Free-Body Diagram for a Section of Fluid
The question is, how exactly does one region of fluid exert a force on another? Truthfully, it does not. Parti cles in one region are
changing places with particles in the other region all the time. Also, as we know, if this fluid happens to b e an ideal gas, then the
particles aren't even interacting with each other. Howeve r, if we were to place a membrane between two regions, the n particle
reflections off the membrane would result in a force, and the resulting physics would be the same – the segment of fluid does not
accelerate up or down. We therefore take the view that although over time it is not actually the same parti cles enclosed within the small
volume, it behaves in precisely the same way as if we could somehow confine them to that volume, and our fo rce analysis is valid.
As we first discussed in Section 5.5, we can express this particle-reflects-off-surface force in terms of a property of the fluid that we
call pressure. The forces from the fluid above and below i s therefore equal to the pressures of the fluid above and below multiplied by
the cross-sectional areas, and the zero net force from t he FBD gives:
As we can readily see, the pressure varies with position in a fluid (namely, at differing heights) in the presence of g ravity, even though
the fluid is in equilibrium. Perhaps the reader is wonde ring how we got away with ignoring this effect in our stud y of thermodynamics.
A sample calculation will answer this question.
Example
Compute the pressure difference between the top and b ottom of a volume of 1 mole of diatomic nitrogen at at atmospheric
pressure () confined to a cubical container.
Solution
Start by treating the gas as ideal and compute the vol ume:

7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483
The container is cubical, so from the volume we can det ermine the length of each side, which gives us the cros s-sectional area:
The molecular mass of is 28.0, so the mass of the enclos ed gas is. This means that the weight of the gas enclose d is:
This weight, divided by the horizontal cross-sectional ar ea equals the difference in pressure between the top and bottom:
When measured against the average pressure of, this di fference is easily negligible.
Given that we need very large height differences to start seeing significant pressure differences in gases, we will p rimarily be dealing
with liquid fluids from this point forward. More importan tly, considering only liquids takes away another troubl esome complication
that exists for gases – liquids are largely incompressible. This means that we don't have to worry about the effec t that increased
pressure has on the mass density of the liquid – an imp ortant quantity, as we will see next.
Pascal's Law
We can rearrange things in Equation 7.1.1 so that the pressure difference between two heights in t he fluid are related to the mass
density, mass per unit volume) of the fluid:
The nice thing about this result is that it directly co mpares two pressures, and doesn't rely upon a choice of a particular disk of fluid for
our free-body diagram. This means that if we choose a di sk that has less cross-sectional area (but with the same t hickness), we find the
same difference in pressure. In other words, it turns out tha t the pressure difference at two depths only depends upon th e density of the
fluid and the difference in height between the two depths.
Just how robust is this conclusion? For example, suppose we have a fluid confined to a container like the one s hown in the figure
below. Is the pressure difference between the two heights indicated the same on both sides of the container?
Figure 7.1.2 – Comparing Pressures in Different Parts of a Continuous F luid
Well, naturally the same analysis applies to both side s of this container, so the pressure difference is the same on both sides, but are
they the same two pressures on both sides? Here we need to invoke the principal t hat pressure does not have a direction. That is,
whatever the pressure is at the bottom of, that results i n a force pushing up on the section of fluid, it also results in a force pushing
on a segment of fluid to the side of the position in question. That lateral segment is static just like the remainder of the fluid, so the
pressure on both sides must be equal, which means that the pressure is the same everywhere along the lower dashed l ine.

7.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483
We already concluded that the pressure difference betwe en the two dashed lines is the same in both columns o f fluid, so since the
pressures are the same in both columns at the bottom line, they are also the same at the top line. We the refore conclude Pascal's law:
The pressures measured at all points at the same height in a continuous static fluid are equal.
Alert
It is important to make a note of all the qualifiers in Pascal's law. Besides being at equal heights, the f luid must be static – later we
will get a slightly more complicated result when the f luid is moving. Also, the fluid must be continuous – if a solid barrier cuts one
section off completely from the other, then the requir ement that pressure is the same horizontally no longer h olds. Another way for
the fluid to not be "continuous" is for the fluid's d ensity to not be the same everywhere. So two unmixed f luids in contact will result
in the density changing across the boundary of the t wo fluids, and we cannot conclude that pressures at the same height within the
different fluids are equal.
The Hydraulic Lift
The result we obtained above compares the pressure at any two points in the fluid, but by far the most common c omparison is between
the pressure at the top surface of the fluid and the pressure at some depth below that surface. Calling the p ressure at the surface and
the depth below that surface, Equation 7.1.2 becomes:
Digression: Rule of Thumb for Water
With the density of liquid water equal to, atmospheric pressure at sea level equal to about, and the const ant
approximately equal to, it's easy to compute approximat ely how fast the pressure rises with depth under wate r – the pressure
increases by an amount of one atmosphere with every of added depth.
The salt water of the oceans is slightly denser than fr esh water, so the pressure goes up slightly faster t han this, and all certified
scuba divers that use the English system of units are awa re that one atmosphere of pressure is gained for every 33 feet of added
depth. At the deepest point in the ocean, this amount s to a pressure of almost 1100 atmospheres!
The top surface of the fluid may just be exposed to t he atmosphere, in which case is simply (at sea level). But the fluid could
also be confined by a piston, which leads to an intere sting application called a hydraulic lift. The idea is to confine the liquid with
pistons of different areas on opposite ends of a conti nuous fluid, as shown in the following figure.
Figure 7.1.3 – Balancing Forces on a Hydraulic Lift
With the bottom surfaces of the two pistons in contact with the same continuous fluid at the same height, the pressure of the fluid is the
same at both surfaces. The forces exerted by the fluid on the two pistons are not the sa me, however, because the areas are not equal.
With pressures equal at both ends, the fluid exerts mo re force on the piston with a larger area, which means a heavier weight on the
larger piston is balanced by a lighter weight on the o ther piston. This allows for a mechanical advantage in lifting a heavy weight with
far less force than the weight, determined by the ratio of the piston areas:

7.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483Manometers
Pascal's law also gives us a way to measure unknown press ures by comparing them to known values. A generic dev ice of this kind is
called a manometer. There are many specialized devices designed to measu re specific pressures, such as a barometer (which measures
the pressure of the atmosphere), and a sphygmomanometer (which measures blood pressure).
The simplest designs for manometers involve exposing one end of a continuous confined liquid to the region for wh ich the pressure is
to be measured, and the other end to a vacuum (i.e. a region where the pressure is effectively zero), then measu re the difference in
height of the two columns of the liquid and use the l iquid's known density to compute the pressure difference. For example, here is a
simple barometer:
Figure 7.1.4 – A Simple Barometer
In the figure above, the fluid is exposed to the atmosp here in the large tub, and the top of the vertical t ube is evacuated. This is most
easily achieved by filling the tube with the fluid, c overing the open end, inverting it in the tube, the n uncovering the open end so that
the fluid runs out until equilibrium is reached. [Technically this does not result in an actual vacuu m, as the particles in the liquid will
leave the surface to go into vapor to fill this regi on, but this vapor pressure is very small compared to atmospheric pressure (less th an
4% of atmospheric pressure at).]
Applying Pascal's law, the pressure of the atmosphere at the exposed surface is the same as within the column at the same height, and
applying our equation for pressure at depth, we have:
Thus we can measure the pressure of the atmosphere by measu ring the height of the column of fluid and knowing it s density. Note that
this means that there is a maximum height to which we can raise this column by evacuating the space above it, and it points out an
important common misconception. It is commonly believ ed that "suction" is an attractive force – that the more suction a pump can
apply, the more it can "draw" a fluid. Here we see that al l "suction" does is remove the pushing force due to one source of pressure,
allowing the force exerted due to a pressure elsewhere to act unbalanced.
Plugging in the density of water and atmospheric pressure at sea level, we find that the farthest a column of water can be held up with a
vacuum is a bit over. If we wish to pump water out of a well (or to a higher floor of a building), we can't "d raw it up" by creating a
vacuum above it from any depth greater than that. The approach that is therefore used instead is to pump the bottom of the column of
water to increase its pressure. The only limit to depth from which the water can be extracted in this case is in the horsepower of the
motor driving the pump.
Assuming we are working with pressures in the vicinity of a n atmosphere, using water makes for a pretty tall manom eter! The way to
bring down this column size is to use a fluid that is m ore dense. The substance that is a liquid at room temp erature and has the greatest
density is mercury, and so ubiquitous was its use many y ears ago, that a unit of measurement for pressure was ba sed on it. It turns out
that 1 atmosphere will only support a column of Hg tha t is high. One atmosphere of pressure is therefore expre ssed in
alternative units as " " or "."
Here is a simple design for a simple gas pressure manome ter (i.e. for enclosed gases of any variety, not just t he atmosphere):

7.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483
Figure 7.1.5 – A Simple Manometer
When the pressure is measured in this manner, we say t hat it is the absolute pressure that is measured. It seems silly to add the
unnecessary extra word "absolute," but there is a practical reason for this. When it comes to gauges that measure p ressure of gases in
industrial applications, what the operator of a machin e wants to know is if the pressure is close to exceeding th e capacity of the device
confining the gas. Well, any pressure acting from outsi de the device is helping to keep it from exploding, so what is needed is the
pressure difference between the trapped gas and what is outside. We can me asure this directly using the device above by openin g the
top of the tube so that there is no longer a vacuum there. Then the column height measures the difference between the trapped gas and
the ambient pressure. This measurement of pressure is c alled gauge pressure. There is an analogy here with temperature – absolute
temperature is measured on the kelvin scale, and zero i s as low as it can go. The celsius scale has the same grading as kelvins, but puts
the zero point at the freezing point of water, thus a llowing for negative values. Similarly, gauge pressure pl aces the zero point at the
ambient (typically atmospheric) pressure, also allowing for a negative value of the pressure measurement.
Example
A U-shaped glass tube of constant cross-sectional area and two right angles has a base that is long, and is open to the air at
both ends, as shown in the figure below. Some water is poured into this tube, and it just exactly fills the bottom, horizontal part of
the tube. An equal volume of oil with a density of i s then slowly added to one side of the tube, such th at the oil and water
remain unmixed, in contact at a single point in the t ube.
a. Find the distance from the contact point of the oil and water to the center of the glass tube.
b. The end of the tube with the water is connected to a confined volume of gas at an unknown pressure, and the contact point of the
oil and water moves to the center of the tube. Find the gauge pressure of the gas.
Solution
a. The contact point of the oil and water is a point where the pressure of the oil equals the pressure of the water (otherwise one
would displace the other). Assuming this point of contact is somewhere in the bottom section of the tube (and i t has to be, since
the oil can't simply come in contact with the water w ithout pushing it at least a little bit up the othe r side), the pressure for the
oil an water are each related to how high their colu mns go up their respective sides:
The density of water is, so the ratio of the height o f the oil column to the water column is. The liquids a re
incompressible, so since there are equal volumes of oil and water, the total length of the two columns must b e, which gives
us a second equation, allowing us to solve for the heights of the two columns:

7.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18483
With the top of the column of oil higher than the to p of the column of water, the contact point of the o il and water must be
offset from the center by.
b. With the contact point centered in the bottom sec tion of the tube, the columns of water and oil are e qual heights. Once again,
the pressures of the fluids at the contact point are equal, but the pressures at the tops of the columns ar e not. The gauge pressure
is the difference between the pressure of the gas and the atmosphere, so:
The gauge pressure is negative, which means the gas pr essure is lower than atmospheric pressure.
This page titled 7.1: Static Fluids is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18484
7.2: Buoyancy
Archimedes's Principle
In the previous chapter, we discussed the pressure diff erence between the top and bottom of a section of th e fluid. What happens if
we replace that same section with a solid object? As we have seen, the presence of the solid object doesn't affect the pressure
difference at the two heights, since the fluid is co ntinuous and static. But in the case of a solid object, the higher pressure at the
bottom and the lower pressure at the top result in ac tual forces on the bottom and top surfaces of the ob ject. The result of these two
forces is a total force by the fluid upward, which is calle d the buoyancy force.
We concluded in the previous section that the pressu res on top and bottom differed just enough to balan ce the weight of the section
of fluid, so we know precisely what the resulting force o f this unbalanced pressure is – it is the weight of the fluid that would be in
that section if the solid object was not there. Put concisely, we have Archimedes's principle:
The buoyancy force on an object in a fluid equals the wei ght of the fluid displaced by that object.
As simple as this seems, it is very easy to get confused about this force. The main source of confusion ten ds to be distinguishing the
buoyancy force from the net force on the object (whi ch also experiences gravity). Here are some secrets to winding one's way
through the daunting mazes commonly encountered regar ding buoyancy:
Keep in mind that buoyancy is just the force from the fluid on the object – it is completely independent from the gravity force
on the object, and it is not the net force. Draw force diagram s whenever possible, with separate force vectors for gravi ty and
buoyancy, and apply Archimedes’s principle only to the buoyancy force vector.
Apply Archimedes’s principle very strictly – the volume of fluid displaced does not always equal the v olume of the object (it
has to be completely submerged for that).
Be careful about drawing conclusions based on the density o f the object only – whether an object sinks or floats, it ex periences
the buoyancy force described by Archimedes’s principle.
Assuming the object in the fluid is completely submer ged, then its full volume displaces fluid. This mea ns it feels a buoyancy force
equal to the weight of fluid that occupies that same volume. The net force on such an object is the buoya ncy force up minus the
gravity force down, so if the object weighs more than the displaced fluid, it sinks. Given that the object and the displaced fluid have
equal volumes, we can just as easily compare their mass -to-volume ratios to determine which is heavier. This ratio for the fluid is
simply its uniform density. For the object, it is its average density. The distinction is that the object may, for example, be hollow.
This explains how an aircraft carrier, made of material s significantly denser than water, can float – the hol low parts of the vessel
that contain only air reduce its average density greatl y.
Examples
The full flower of the tricky topic of buoyancy only becom es apparent with examples, so here are a few...
Example
Two identical hollow metal cubes are in the Earth’ s atmo sphere. One cube contains helium (at one atmosphere of pressure), and
the other a vacuum. Which of these cubes experiences t he greatest buoyancy force, and which registers the lo west weight on a
scale?
Solution
The cubes are identical, so they displace the same vol ume of air, and the buoyancy force is the same on both. Because the
buoyancy forces are equal, the cube that registers the higher weight on the scale will be the one that po ssesses the greater
mass. Helium has more mass than a vacuum, so the cube filled w ith helium will register a larger weight on the scale. [Note:
Helium does not "naturally rise" and pull things upward. It has mass, like all matter, and is therefore subject t o gravity like
everything else!]

7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18484
Example
A tub of water sits on a spring scale. A toy boat is f loated on the surface of the water, and the scale is read. Later, the boat is
submerged until it takes on enough water to sink and settle on the bottom. Still later, the boat is removed from the water and
placed on the scale beside the tub. Order the weighings f rom least to greatest.
Solution
The simple answer is that all of the forces between th e water, the tub, and the boat are internal to the wa ter + tub + boat
system, and therefore all have Newton's third law pai rs that cancel each other. The force external to the system, from the
spring scale, is the same in all three cases.
While this makes sense, it may be a bit unsatisfying, s o let's look very briefly at the details of the inte rnal forces. Strange as it
seems, buoyancy forces come in third-law pairs, just li ke every other force, which means that while the water pushes up on a
floating boat, the floating boat pushes down equall y on the body of water. The scale beneath the tub of water must be great
enough to balance all the other forces on it, which includes the weight of the tub + water plus the buoyancy force down on
the water by the boat. Since the boat isn't accelerat ing up or down, the buoyancy force up on the boat mus t equal its weight,
which means that the buoyancy force down on the water (and balanced by the scale) is exactly the weight of the boat.
One might try to argue that the force down on the tub by the water must equal the pressure of the water at the bottom
multiplied by the area of the bottom of the tub, and a ren't these two things the same whether the boat is i n the water or not?
No! When the boat is floating, it is displacing water. Where does this displaced water go? Nowhere - it j ust gets deeper! The
increased depth changes the pressure at the bottom ju st enough to contribute an additional force equal t o the buoyancy force
on/by the boat, and with the boat floating, this equals t he weight of the boat.
Example
A small balloon containing air (which we can treat a s an ideal gas) has negligible mass, and is attached t o a rock with a string.
This combination is thrown into the middle of Lake Taho e, and the hanging rock pulls down on the balloon en ough to submerge
one-eighth of its volume. A scuba diver grabs the ball oon and submerges it, swimming downward. Find the depth to which the
balloon must be submerged such that it will sink when it is released. Assume the temperature of the water does n't change
appreciably during the dive.
Solution
The gravity force on the rock equals the weight of wa ter occupying one-eighth of the balloon's volume in the atmosphere.
Therefore, when the balloon no longer displaces at leas t one eighth of its starting volume, the buoyancy for ce will be
insufficient to keep it from sinking. But what would c ause the balloon to stop displacing so much volume? The pressure on
the outside of the balloon approximately balances the pressure inside the balloon (not counting the forc e from the balloon's
elasticity), and as the balloon goes deeper, the outs ide pressure gets greater. With the temperature and th e number of moles
not changing, the increased pressure must be balanced by dec reased volume.
The volume of the balloon must decrease by a factor of 8 to keep sinking, so the pressure of the water must equal 8 times
atmospheric pressure. We found in the digression of the previous section that 1 atmosphere of pressure i s added for
approximately every 10 meters of depth in fresh water. The balloon starts at the surface with 1 atmosphere, so it needs 7
more atmospheres to reach the goal of one eighth of i ts original volume – the diver must push the balloon below the
surface in order to pollute the bottom of Lake Tahoe with it.
While this answer is in keeping with information we h ave been given to this point, it is not actually co rrect, and is off by a
fairly large margin! The problem lies not in the logic of the solution, but in the assumption that the press ure increases by the
amount of the atmosphere with every 10 meters of added de pth. This is incorrect because that rule-of-thumb only applies to
atmospheric pressure at sea level. The pressure of the atmosphere at the elevation of Lake Tahoe is only ab out 79% of what
we refer to as "atmospheric pressure." This means that a t the surface of the lake the pressure of the air i n the balloon is 0.79
atmospheres, and in order to increase the pressure by that much, the balloon must be submerged only. Follow ing the

7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18484
logic of the original solution, in order to increase the pressure to eight times the pressure at the lake s urface, the balloon
must be submerged.
This page titled 7.2: Buoyancy is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/184857.3: Fluid Dynamics
Steady-State
As with thermodynamics, fluids involve trillions of trill ions of particles with freedom of movement, and also like thermodynamics,
we would rather not treat them one particle at a time. One useful concept (which we have used previously bu t never discussed
explicitly) is the concept of “steady-state.” We will find this idea to be extremely useful in our study o f fluids, so we will take a
closer look at what it means.
Consider the energy of a cannonball projectile.
Figure 7.2.1 – Before and After for a Single Cannonball
We know that energy is conserved for this cannonball a s it flies through the air (we will ignore air resist ance here), and we express
this mathematically in terms of a zero change from "before " to "after."
Note especially that the here means "after minus bef ore," that is, it expresses a difference of quantitie s that are measured at
different times.
Suppose now that cannonballs can be launched in rapid successi on.
Figure 7.2.2 – Common Trajectory for Stream of Cannonballs
Of course they all follow the same trajectory, and this fact allows us to write down a new equation that looks identical to the one
above, but has a different interpretation. In this ca se, we are not comparing the energies of a single canno nball at different times,
but rather the energies of two different cannonballs at the same time. This leads us to a different type of model from wha t we used
before. Previously we dealt with energy conservation f rom a before/after perspective, but with a steady flo w, we are now able to
use the concept of steady-state to make our comparisons at different positions rath er than different times. Steady-state is a
condition for flowing systems whereby the conditions a t a fixed position remain constant in time. In other words, if you take a snap
shot at two different times of the system as a whole, you would not be able to distinguish one snap shot from the other.

7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485Assumptions: Incompressibility and Laminar Flow
As you might imagine, with particles in a fluid free to move around, it turns out that their motions can be v ery complicated. As with
everything we study in physics, we need to make some si mplifying assumptions so that we can reach some testa ble conclusions,
and it is no different with fluid flow. We have alre ady made one simplifying assumption in the previous section – we will treat
fluids as though they are incompressible. Again, this m eans that we have to be very careful about applying these results to gases
(though we can sometimes do so, at least approximately), bu t mostly the model we should keep in mind is that of a liquid.
The second simplifying assumption has to do with how th e particles move relative to one another as they fl ow in steady-state. We
will require that the flow of the fluid be laminar (also called streamline). Essentially what this means is that adjacent particl es are,
to a large degree, moving along parallel paths. Whe n the flow gets too fast, or the shape of whatever is c onfining the motion of the
flow changes too dramatically (actually, it is a comb ination of these things), then swirls and eddy curre nts arise, and turbulence
ensues.
Figure 7.2.3 – Laminar vs. Turbulent Flow
The phenomenon of turbulence arises from effects th at are non-linear, which makes it incredibly difficult to model and st udy. A
non-linear phenomenon can loosely be described as on e which feeds back on itself, and is therefore extreme ly sensitive to the
conditions placed upon it. Most people are familiar with the unpredictability of weather patterns, and have perhaps heard of the
famous "butterfly effect." This is an example of a n on-linear system whose evolution is extremely sensiti ve to initial conditions. As
important of a physics topic as turbulence is, we sim ply are not equipped to discuss it in any detail in this class ("not equipped"
meaning we don't have a supercomputer to work with).
It should be noted that laminar flow does not assume that the inner walls of the vessel carrying t he fluid are free of friction. For the
flow to be streamline, the neighboring particles only have to move parallel to each other, they don’t hav e to move at the same
speed. For a tube with friction against its inner surfac e, the particles will be moving slower than the partic les near the center of the
tube, but the flow is still streamline if they are moving pa rallel to each other.
Current, Volumetric Flow Rate, and Continuity
In fluid statics, the assumption of incompressibility wa s helpful in deriving a simple relationship between p ressure and depth,
because the density remained constant throughout t he fluid. In fluid dynamics, it has another interesting effect, when the vessel
through which the fluid is flowing changes its cross-sectional area. Following a section of fluid through such a flow reve als:
Figure 7.2.4 – Incompressibility in a Bottleneck

7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485
With the fluid unable to compress, a given collection of particles in the fluid must morph their shape i n the conduit such that their
volume remains the same. This means that as the cro ss-sectional area of the conduit gets smaller, the vo lume of the fluid section we
are tracking must get longer. That is:
Now we invoke our steady-state condition on this as foll ows: Let's wait a period of time equal to, which is th e amount of time it
takes all the fluid that is initially within volume (the wide, short, red cylinder in the diagram above) to exit that volume. It should
be clear from the fact that this is operating at stea dy-state that in this same period of time, all the f luid in volume (the thin, long,
red cylinder in the diagram above) has just enough time to exit that volume. The speed of the flow throu gh each volume is the
distance the fluid at the rear of the cylinder must travel to get to the front of the cylinder, divide d by the time required, so we can
relate the velocities of the fluid at the two points in que stion:
The value of each side of this equation is the rate at which volume of fluid is passing a fixed point. T his is commonly referred to as
volumetric flow rate, or more generically as current (which technically can be any kind of flow rate, not just volume), and can be
written as:
What Equation 7.3.3 tells us is that for an incompressible fluid, the vo lumetric flow rate is the same everywhere in the flui d. This
relation is referred to as the equation of continuity, which can be alternatively expressed as:
This expresses a conservation principle of sorts – all t he fluid that comes into a given region in a given period of time also passes
out of that region in the same period of time – there is no build-up or loss of fluid in that region.
Energy Density
In studying the dynamics of fluids, we seek to describe mathematically how the various physical properties of a moving fluid are
related to each other. Judging from our study of fl uid statics, there are already a number of propertie s that we know must play a
role:
the density of the fluid,
the height at some position in the fluid,
the pressure at some position in the fluid,
Now that we are dealing with dynamics, we need to add this to the list:

7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485the speed of the fluid at some position,
Whatever relationship we find between these quantitie s must reduce to what we found previously in our disc ussion of statics, when
we set the speed equal to zero.
We are not worried about directions here, so a compl icated vector analysis is (thankfully) unnecessary. We therefore turn to energy
conservation. We also will make use of our steady-sta te condition, which means that our energy conservati on equation will involve
a comparison of two different positions in a continu ous fluid, rather than the fate of a single sample o f fluid at two different times.
This will certainly fit nicely with our study of fluid statics, where we also compared properties of a conti nuous fluid at different
places.
There is one problem we need to overcome in our appl ication of energy conservation, however. What energie s are we comparing?
Each particle in the fluid has some amount of energy, but there is a degree of randomness to their moti ons, so two particles that are
side-by-side in the fluid do not necessarily have t he same energy. Really what we want is to compare the average energies of
particles. To do this, we need to compare energies of a collection of particles. Suppose we take a tiny samp ling of the energies of
particles at two different positions in a fluid:
Figure 7.2.5 – Sampling Small Volumes of Particles in a Fluid
The average energy per particle in each of these sa mplings is found by adding up their individual energ ies and dividing by the
number of particles:
Assuming no work is done on the particles from position A to position B by forces other than those accounte d-for in the potential
energy, these averages should be equal for each samp le. The number of particles is difficult to work with, so we note that we are
assuming that this fluid is incompressible, which tells us that the particle density is the same everywhere in the fluid. So rather than
use the average energy per particle as a basis for compariso n, we can use the average energy per volume:
We call this the average energy density of the fluid for the sample selected. We want to stu dy the fluid at a specific position, so we
need to make our sample volume smaller and smaller. As we do so, the energy contained therein also gets small er and smaller, but
the ratio of energy and volume converges to the energy density at that position:
We can break this energy density into the kinetic and p otential parts. We'll start with kinetic...

7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485When the focus is narrowed down to a single point (i.e. the volume goes to the zero limit), the average spe ed of the fluid doesn't
change, but with the constant density, the mass gets eve r smaller. We have, therefore, that the kinetic energy density is written in
terms of the mass density and speed:
The only potential energy we will be dealing with here is gravitational. Once again, we see that only the ma ss gets small in the limit
as the volume vanishes, that is, the height doesn't chang e. so we have:
So the full mechanical energy density is:
Energy Conservation
So now we have a way of comparing energy at different p ositions in a fluid – we compare the energy densities a t those points.
Before we just launch into invoking energy conservati on, there is one thing we need to address. Above we mad e the qualification,
"Assuming no work is done on the particles from position A to position B by forces other than those accounted -for in the potential
energy... " Are there any forces present that could be responsi ble for work like this? Well, there could be friction along the walls of
the vessel, but in true Physics 9 fashion, we will treat thi s as negligible. There is, however, one source of work tha t we can't ignore.
We saw in the case of static fluids that the pressure c an vary from one place to the other. Now that the flu id can move, if the
pressure in front of a moving segment of fluid is di fferent from the pressure behind it, the net force cr eated by the difference in the
pressures can do work. We therefore need to include t he work done by pressure differences in our energy c onservation calculations.
Fortunately, from our work in thermodynamics, we are already f amiliar with how to compute work done by pressure:
The difference in this case is that the work done is n ot acting to compress or expand a gas – the volume ch ange in this case is just
the displacement of an incompressible segment of fluid. The picture we have then is of a fluid passing thro ugh a conduit which in
general changes heights and cross-sectional areas. B ecause we are more comfortable dealing with energy co nservation from a
before/after perspective, we'll start with that, then inv oke steady state to extend our conclusions to compa re different positions in
the fluid.
Figure 7.2.6a – Fluid Flow Through a Pipe
The fluid we are watching here is blue. The red section s also contain fluid, but we are confining ourselves t o watching what
happens to the blue segment of fluid. In the time bet ween "before" and "after," the fluid flows up through the pipe, and the same
amount of fluid that vacates the bottom portion of t he pipe (turning that section red) fills in the top p ortion of the pipe (turning it
from red to blue).

7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485
This blue segment of fluid is experiencing a force d ue to the adjacent fluid, so the bottom face of the blue segment of fluid
experiences a force in the direction of motion of t he fluid segment, while the top face of the blue segme nt of fluid experiences a
force opposing its motion. The total work done on the blue segment of fluid is is therefore:
The fluid is incompressible, which means that the volu mes for top and bottom (represented by the red regio n) are equal to each
other, which tells us that the work done on this segment of fluid is:
Now we are ready to invoke energy conservation. The work done on the system equals the change in its mechanic al energy, which
is a change from one small quantity to another (both top a nd bottom involve a tiny volume), so:
Dividing every term in this equation by and plugging in E quations 7.3.9, 7.3.10, and 7.3.14 gives:
We can write this result (called Bernoulli's equation) two ways, as with our usual energy conservation principle:
Figure 7.2.6b – Fluid Flow Through a Pipe
Note that although we derived this using a "before/aft er" approach, the refers to a difference in positio ns, in keeping with the
steady-state assumption.
Recall we wanted to check the result we got in fluid st atics against this result for. Sure enough, if we put in, we
get back to Equation 7.1.2.
Example
Air flows from left to right through a horizontal pipe that has different diameters in two different section s, as shown in the
diagram. The narrow section has a radius of, and the wider section has a radius of. At point 1, the air i s flowing
with a velocity of, and has an absolute pressure of. A narrow U-shaped tube has been attached to the ai r
tube, and this U-shaped tube is filled with water. Not e that no air actually flows into or out of the U-shap ed tube, but instead
flows right across its openings. The pressures at points 1 and 2 are different, so the water in the U-shaped tube is not level.
Assume that the transitions between the sections have a negligible effect on the frictionless flow of air, and that the density of air
is a constant throughout the pipe. Also, despite h ow the diagram looks, assume that the difference in hei ght of the
connection points of both ends of the U-shaped tube is n egligible.

7.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/18485
a. Find the speed of the air and its pressure at point 2.
b. Find the difference in heights () of the water in the U-shaped tube.
Solution
a. We can apply Bernoulli’ s equation to the moving ai r in the pipe and in the U-shaped tube, but we must d o so separately,
since they are two separate fluid systems. In order to work out, we need to know the pressure differen ce at the two ends of
the U-shaped tube, which means we have to work out th e air flow part first. Start by finding the speed of th e air at point 2,
using the continuity equation (Equation 7.3.3):
Applying Bernoulli's equation with no change in height g ives us the pressure at point 2:
b. The difference in pressures at the two ends of the U-shaped tube is, and this determines the differenc e in heights of
the columns of water. The water in these tubes is not moving, so we can plug in zero for the velocities (or equivalently, just
use the fluid statics formula):
This page titled 7.3: Fluid Dynamics is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/26850Index
B
buoyancy
7.2: Buoyancy
C
cyclic process
6.1: More Processes
D
diffraction grating
3.3: Diffraction Gratings
dispersion
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
E
entropy
6.3: Entropy
equipartition theorem
5.6: Equipartition of Energy
F
fluid
7.1: Static Fluids
fluid dynamics
7.3: Fluid Dynamics
fluid mechanics
7: Fluid MechanicsG
Geometrical optics
4: Geometrical Optics
H
heat engine
6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency
I
images
4.1: Images
M
magnification
4.2: Magnification
P
physical optics
3: Physical Optics
R
reflection
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion
refraction
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and DispersionS
second law of thermodynamics
6.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Spherical Reflectors
4.3: Spherical Reflectors
Spherical Refractors
4.4: Spherical Refractors
Static Fluids
7.1: Static Fluids
T
temperature
5.1: Temperature
thermal efficiency
6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency
thermal expansion
5.2: Thermal Expansion
thin film interference
3.5: Thin Film Interference
thin lens
4.5: Thin Lenses
Y
Young double slit
3.2: Double-Slit Interference

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/29062Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65508Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: UCD: Physics 9B – Waves, Optics, Thermodynamics, and Fluids
Webpages: 54
All licenses found:
CC BY-SA 4.0: 83.3% (45 pages)
Undeclared: 16.7% (9 pages)
By Page
UCD: Physics 9B – Waves, Optics, Thermodynamics, and
Fluids - CC BY-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Waves - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.1: Wave Mathematics - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.2: Wave Properties - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.3: Energy Transmission - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.4: Superposition and Interference - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.5: Standing Waves - CC BY-SA 4.0
2: Sound - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.1: Fundamentals of Sound - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.2: Doppler Effect - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.3: Interference Effects - CC BY-SA 4.0
3: Physical Optics - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.1: Light as a Wave - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.2: Double-Slit Interference - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.3: Diffraction Gratings - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.4: Single-Slit Diffraction - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.5: Thin Film Interference - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.6: Reflection, Refraction, and Dispersion - CC BYSA 4.0
3.7: Polarization - CC BY-SA 4.0
4: Geometrical Optics - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.1: Images - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.2: Magnification - CC BY-SA 4.04.3: Spherical Reflectors - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.4: Spherical Refractors - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.5: Thin Lenses - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.6: Multiple Optical Devices - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.7: Wrap-Up - CC BY-SA 4.0
5: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.1: Temperature - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.2: Thermal Expansion - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.3: Heat Capacity and Phase Transitions - CC BY-SA
4.0
5.4: Modes of Heat Transfer - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.5: Thermodynamic States of Ideal Gases - CC BYSA 4.0
5.6: Equipartition of Energy - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.7: Thermodynamic Processes - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.8: Special Processes - CC BY-SA 4.0
6: Applications of Thermodynamics - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.1: More Processes - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.2: Engines and Thermal Efficiency - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.3: Entropy - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics - CC BYSA 4.0
7: Fluid Mechanics - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.1: Static Fluids - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.2: Buoyancy - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.3: Fluid Dynamics - CC BY-SA 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared