BIOLOGY
CK-12 Foundation

Default Text

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 03/27/2026

1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/16128TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: Introduction to Biology
1.1: Carbohydrates
1.2: Proteins
1.3: Lipids
1.4: Nucleic Acids
1.5: Biochemical Reactions
1.6: Energy and Biochemical Reactions
1.7: Types of Biochemical Reactions
1.8: Enzymes
1.9: Enzyme Function
1.10: Water and Life
1.11: Scientific Method
1.12: Acids and Bases
1.13: Experiment
1.14: Scientific Theories
1.15: Characteristics of Life
1.16: Principles of Biology
1.17: Interdependence of Living Things
1.18: Organization of Living Things
1.19: Evolution of Life
1.20: Significance of Carbon
2: Cell Biology
2.1: Cell Organization
2.2: Diffusion
2.3: Osmosis
2.4: Passive Transport
2.5: Active Transport
2.6: Sodium-Potassium Pump
2.7: Exocytosis and Endocytosis
2.8: Autotrophs and Heterotrophs
2.9: Glucose and ATP
2.10: Chloroplast
2.11: Parts of the Cell
2.12: Leaves and Photosynthesis
2.13: Photosynthesis
2.14: Calvin Cycle
2.15: Photosynthesis Summary
2.16: Chemosynthesis
2.17: Cellular Respiration
2.18: Glycolysis
2.19: Krebs Cycle
2.20: Electron Transport

2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/161282.21: Fermentation
2.22: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
2.23: Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration
2.24: Cell Division
2.25: Cell Cycle
2.26: Chromosomes
2.27: Mitosis
2.28: Reproduction
2.29: Meiosis
2.30: Gametogenesis
2.31: Genetic Variation
2.32: Life Cycle
2.33: Phospholipid Bilayer
2.34: Membrane Proteins
2.35: Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton
2.36: Nucleus
2.37: Ribosomes and Mitochondria
2.38: Cell Structure
2.39: Plant Cell Structure
3: Genetics
3.1: Genetic Linkage
3.2: Mendelian Inheritance
3.3: Genetic Disorders
3.4: Biotechnology
3.5: Biotechnology Applications
3.6: Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues in Biotechnology (ELSI)
3.7: Pea Plants
3.8: Mendel's First Experiment
3.9: Mendel's Second Experiment
3.10: Mendel's Laws
3.11: Probability
3.12: Punnett Squares
3.13: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
3.14: Human Genome
3.15: Human Chromosomes
4: Molecular Biology
4.1: Mutation Effects
4.2: Gene Expression
4.3: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
4.4: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
4.5: Central Dogma
4.6: DNA
4.7: DNA Structure and Replication
4.8: RNA
4.9: Transcription
4.10: Genetic Code
4.11: Translation

3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/161284.12: Mutation
4.13: Mutation Causes
5: Evolution
5.1: Classification
5.2: Phylogeny and Cladistics
5.3: Darwin
5.4: Influences on Darwin
5.5: Theory of Evolution
5.6: Fossils
5.7: Comparative Anatomy
5.8: Biogeography
5.9: Population Genetics
5.10: Hardy-Weinberg
5.11: History of Life
5.12: Forces of Evolution
5.13: Natural Selection
5.14: Origin of Species
5.15: Coevolution
5.16: Macroevolution
5.17: Animal Evolution
5.18: Formation of Earth
5.19: First Organic Molecules
5.20: First Cell
5.21: Eukaryote Evolution
5.22: Late Precambrian
5.23: Paleozoic Era
5.24: Mesozoic Era
5.25: Cenozoic Era
6: Ecology
6.1: Aquatic Biomes
6.2: Freshwater and Wetland Biomes
6.3: Aquatic Organisms
6.4: Predation
6.5: Competition
6.6: Symbiosis
6.7: Succession
6.8: Population
6.9: Population Structure
6.10: Population Growth
6.11: Ecosystems
6.12: Population Growth Patterns
6.13: Human Population
6.14: Demographic Transition
6.15: Recent and Future Population Growth
6.16: Biodiversity
6.17: Importance of Biodiversity
6.18: Mass Extinction

4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/161286.19: Resources
6.20: Soil and Water
6.21: Air Pollution
6.22: Energy Flow
6.23: Global Warming
6.24: Food Chain
6.25: Trophic Level
6.26: Water Cycle
6.27: Carbon Cycle
6.28: Nitrogen Cycle
6.29: Biomes and Climate
6.30: Terrestrial Biomes
7: Prokaryotes and Viruses
7.1: Virus Structure
7.2: Virus Classification
7.3: Virus Origin
7.4: Virus Replication
7.5: Viral Disease
7.6: HIV
7.7: Virus Control
7.8: Viruses in Research
7.9: Prokaryotes
7.10: Bacteria Classification
7.11: Bacteria Structure
7.12: Bacteria Nutrition
7.13: Bacteria Habitat
7.14: Bacteria Reproduction
7.15: Bacteria and Humans
7.16: Viruses
7.17: Virus Characteristics
8: Protists and Fungi
8.1: Fungi Reproduction
8.2: Fungi Evolution
8.3: Fungi Classification
8.4: 8.13 Fungi Nutrition
8.5: Fungi Symbiosis
8.6: Use of Fungi
8.7: Fungi Diseases
8.8: Protists
8.9: Protist Evolution
8.10: Protist Characteristics
8.11: Protozoa
8.12: Algae
8.13: Mold
8.14: Protists and Disease
8.15: Fungi
8.16: Fungi Structure

5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/161289: Plants
9.1: Angiosperm
9.2: Plant Cell
9.3: Plant Tissue
9.4: Plant Growth
9.5: Roots
9.6: Stems
9.7: Leaves
9.8: Plant Reproduction and Life Cycle
9.9: Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants
9.10: Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants
9.11: Plant Characteristics
9.12: Life Cycle of Gymnosperms
9.13: Life Cycle of Angiosperms
9.14: Plant Adaptations
9.15: Plant Responses
9.16: Importance of Plants
9.17: Plant Life Cycle
9.18: Plant Evolution
9.19: Seed Plant Evolution
9.20: Plant Classification
9.21: Nonvascular Plants
9.22: Vascular Plants
9.23: Seed Plants
10: Animals
10.1: Animals
10.2: Animal Classification
10.3: Animal Behavior Evolution
10.4: Innate Behavior
10.5: Learned Behavior
10.6: Social Behavior
10.7: Cyclic Behavior
10.8: Reproductive Behavior
11: Invertebrates
11.1: Arthropods
11.2: Insects
11.3: Echinoderms
11.4: Invertebrate Chordates
11.5: Invertebrate Diversity
11.6: Invertebrate Evolution
11.7: Invertebrate Classification
11.8: Sponges
11.9: Cnidarians
11.10: Flatworms
11.11: Roundworms
11.12: Mollusks

6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1612811.13: Annelids
12: Vertebrates
12.1: Amphibian Structure and Function
12.2: Amphibian Reproduction
12.3: Amphibian Classification
12.4: Amphibian Evolution and Ecology
12.5: Reptile Structure and Function
12.6: Reptile Reproduction
12.7: Reptile Classification
12.8: Reptile Evolution
12.9: Reptile Ecology
12.10: Bird Structure and Function
12.11: Chordates
12.12: Bird Reproduction
12.13: Bird Classification
12.14: Bird Evolution
12.15: Bird Ecology
12.16: Mammal Overview
12.17: Mammal Structure and Function
12.18: Endothermy
12.19: Locomotion
12.20: Placental Mammals
12.21: Marsupials
12.22: Vertebrate Diversity
12.23: Monotremes
12.24: Mammal Ancestors
12.25: Mammal Evolution
12.26: Mammal Classification
12.27: Vertebrate Reproduction
12.28: Vertebrate Classification
12.29: Vertebrate Evolution
12.30: Fish
12.31: Fish Reproduction
12.32: Fish Classification
12.33: Fish Evolution and Ecology
13: Human Biology
13.1: Muscle Contraction
13.2: Skin
13.3: Nails and Hair
13.4: Neuron
13.5: Nerve Impulse
13.6: Central Nervous System
13.7: Peripheral Nervous System
13.8: Senses
13.9: Drugs and the Nervous System
13.10: Nervous System Diseases
13.11: Human Body

7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1612813.12: Endocrine Glands
13.13: Hormone
13.14: Hormone Regulation
13.15: Endocrine System Diseases
13.16: Heart
13.17: Blood Vessels
13.18: Circulatory System
13.19: Cardiovascular Diseases
13.20: Blood
13.21: Respiratory System
13.22: Homeostasis
13.23: Respiratory System Organs
13.24: Breathing
13.25: Regulation of Breathing
13.26: Respiratory System Disorders
13.27: Digestive System Organs
13.28: Digestive System
13.29: Small Intestine
13.30: Large Intestine
13.31: Digestive System Diseases
13.32: Food and Nutrients
13.33: Skeletal System
13.34: Balanced Eating
13.35: Excretory System
13.36: Urinary System
13.37: Kidneys
13.38: Excretory System Diseases
13.39: Innate Immune System
13.40: Inflammatory Response
13.41: Lymphatic System
13.42: Humoral Response
13.43: Cell-Mediated Response
13.44: Bones
13.45: Immunity
13.46: Allergies
13.47: Autoimmune Disease
13.48: Immunodeficiency
13.49: HIV AIDS
13.50: Carcinogens and Cancer
13.51: Air Pollution and Illness
13.52: Bioterrorism
13.53: Male Reproductive Organs
13.54: Male Reproductive Development
13.55: Bone Growth
13.56: Sperm
13.57: Female Reproductive Organs
13.58: Female Reproductive Development
13.59: Egg Cells
13.60: Menstrual Cycle
13.61: Fertilization

8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1612813.62: Embryo Growth
13.63: Prenatal Development
13.64: The Placenta
13.65: Pregnancy
13.66: Joints
13.67: Birth to Adulthood
13.68: Adulthood
13.69: STIs
13.70: Bacterial STIs
13.71: Viral STIs
13.72: Skeletal Diseases
13.73: Muscles
13.74: Skeletal Muscles
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/16395Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Introduction to Biology
1.1: Carbohydrates
1.2: Proteins
1.3: Lipids
1.4: Nucleic Acids
1.5: Biochemical Reactions
1.6: Energy and Biochemical Reactions
1.7: Types of Biochemical Reactions
1.8: Enzymes
1.9: Enzyme Function
1.10: Water and Life
1.11: Scientific Method
1.12: Acids and Bases
1.13: Experiment
1.14: Scientific Theories
1.15: Characteristics of Life
1.16: Principles of Biology
1.17: Interdependence of Living Things
1.18: Organization of Living Things
1.19: Evolution of Life
1.20: Significance of Carbon
This page titled 1: Introduction to Biology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

1.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82691.1: Carbohydrates
Sugar. Does this look like biological energy?
As a child, you may have been told that sugar is bad fo r you. Well, that's not exactly true. Essentially, carb ohydrates are made of sugar, from a single sugar molecule t o thousands of sugar
molecules attached together. Why? One reason is to store e nergy. But that does not mean you should eat it by the spoon ful.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are the most common type of organic compound. A carbohydrate is an organic compound such as sugar or starch, and is used to store energy. Like most organic compounds,
carbohydrates are built of small, repeating units that form bon ds with each other to make a larger molecule. In the case of ca rbohydrates, the small repeating units are called monosac charides.
Carbohydrates contain only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Monosaccharides and Disaccharides
A monosaccharide is a simple sugar such as fructose or glucose. Fructose is found in fruits, whereas glucose generally results fr om the digestion of other carbohydrates. Glucose (C H O)
is used for energy by the cells of most organisms, and is a product of photosynthesis.
The general formula for a monosaccharide is:
(CH O),
where n can be any number greater than two. For example, in glucose n is 6, and the formula is:
C H O.
Another monosaccharide, fructose, has the same chemical form ula as glucose, but the atoms are arranged differently. Mo lecules with the same chemical formula but with atoms i n a different
arrangement are called isomers. Compare the glucose and fructose molecules in Figure below. Can you identify their differences? The only d ifferences are the positions of some of the
atoms. These differences affect the properties of the two monos accharides.
Sucrose Molecule. This sucrose molecule is a disaccharide. It is made up of two monosaccharides: glucose on the left and fructose on the right.
If two monosaccharides bond together, they form a carb ohydrate called a disaccharide. An example of a disaccharide is sucrose (table sugar), wh ich consists of the monosaccharides glucose
and fructose (Figure above). Monosaccharides and disaccharides are also called simple sugars. They provide the major source of energy to living cells
Polysaccharides
A polysaccharide is a complex carbohydrate that forms when simple sugars bin d together in a chain. Polysaccharides may contain ju st a few simple sugars or thousands of them. Complex
carbohydrates have two main functions: storing energy and forming structures of living things. Some examples of complex carbohydrates and their functions are shown in Table below.
Which type of complex carbohydrate does your own body use t o store energy?6 12 6
2 n
6 12 6

1.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8269Name Function Example
Starch Used by plants to store energy.
A potato stores starch in underground tubers.
Glycogen Used by animals to store energy.
A human stores glycogen in liver cells.
Cellulose Used by plants to form rigid walls around cells.
Plants use cellulose for their cell walls.
Chitin Used by some animals to form an external skeleton.
A housefly uses chitin for its exoskeleton.
Biofuels: From Sugar to Energy
For years there's been buzz, both positive and negative, about generating ethanol fuel from corn. Is this a goo d idea? Is it necessary? These questions need to be discussed. However, the Bay
Area of California is rapidly becoming a world center for t he next generation of green fuel alternatives. The Joint BioEnergy Institute is developing methods to isolate biofuels from the
sugars in cellulose.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Organic Molecules Carbohydrates | Cell Biology | Bi oc
Organic Molecules Carbohydrates | Cell Biology | Bi oc
Watch on

1.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8269As you view Biofuels: Beyond Ethanol, focus on these concepts:
1. the use of "cellulosic biomass,"
2. what is meant by "directed evolution."
Summary
Carbohydrates are organic compounds used to store ener gy.
A monosaccharide is a simple sugar, such as fructose or glucos e.
Complex carbohydrates have two main functions: storing energy and forming structures of living things.
Review
1. What is a carbohydrate?
2. List three facts about glucose.
3. Assume that you are trying to identify an unknown organic molecule. It contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen an d is found in the cell walls of a newly discovered plant spe cies.
What type of organic compound is it? Why?
K QED
Biofuels: Beyond Ethanol | KQED QUEST
Biofuels: Beyond Ethanol | KQED QUEST
Watch on

1.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82694. Compare and contrast the structures and functions of simple sugars and complex carbohydrates.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saccharose.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons;Mariana
Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saccharose.svg;
CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC

1.1.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8269
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
1.1: Carbohydrates is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Libre Texts.

1.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82701.2: Proteins
You may have been told proteins are good for you. Do these look good to you?
Proteins as food. To you, these may not look appetizing (or they might), but they do provide a nice supply of amino acids, the
building blocks of proteins. Proteins have many impo rtant roles, from transporting, signaling, receiving, and catalyzing to storing,
defending, and allowing for movement. Where do you ge t the amino acids needed so your cells can make their own proteins? If
you cannot make it, you must eat it.
Proteins
A protein is an organic compound made up of small molecules called amino acids. There are 20 different amino acids commonly
found in the proteins of living organisms. Small protei ns may contain just a few hundred amino acids, whereas large proteins may
contain thousands of amino acids. The largest known pr oteins are titins, found in muscle, which are composed from over 27,000
amino acids.

1.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8270
General Structure of Amino Acids. This model shows the general structure of all amino acids. Only the side chain, R, varies
from one amino acid to another. For example, in the amino acid glycine, the side chain is simply hydrogen (H). In glutamic
acid, in contrast, the side chain is CH
CH
COOH. Variable side chains give amino acids different chemical prope rties. The order of amino acids, together with the
properties of the amino acids, determines the shape of the protein, and the shape of the protein determines the function of
the protein. KEY: H = hydrogen, N = nitrogen, C = carbon, O = oxygen, R = variable side chain
Protein Structure
When amino acids bind together, they form a long chai n called a polypeptide. A protein consists of one or more polypeptide
chains. A protein may have up to four levels of stru cture. The lowest level, a protein’s primary structure, is its sequence of amino
acids. Higher levels of protein structure are describ ed in Figure below. The complex structures of different proteins g ive them
unique properties, which they need to carry out their va rious jobs in living organisms.
Protein Structure. The structure of a protein starts with its sequence of amino acids. What determines the secondary
structure of a protein? What are two types of secondary protein struc ture?
Functions of Proteins
Proteins play many important roles in living things. Some proteins help cells keep their shape (structural proteins), some, such a s
connective and motor proteins, make up muscle tissu es, and some transport items in and out of cells (tra nsport proteins). Some
proteins act as signals, and other proteins receive those signals. Enzymes are proteins that speed up chemical reactions in cells.
Other proteins are antibodies, which bind to foreign substances such as bacteria and target them for destruction. Still other protein s
carry messages or transport materials. For example, h uman red blood cells contain a protein called hemoglobin, which binds with
oxygen. Hemoglobin allows the blood to carry oxygen fro m the lungs to cells throughout the body. A model of the hemoglobin
molecule is shown in Figure below.2

1.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8270
Hemoglobin Molecule. This model represents the protein hemoglobin. The purple part of the molecule contains iron. The
iron binds with oxygen molecules.
Proteins and Diet
Proteins in the diet are necessary for life. Dietary pr oteins are broken down into their component amino ac ids when food is
digested. Cells can then use the components to build n ew proteins. Humans are able to synthesize all but eight of the twenty
common amino acids. These eight amino acids, called essential amino acids, must be consumed in foods. Like dietary
carbohydrates and lipids, dietary proteins can also be broke n down to provide cells with energy.
Science Friday: The Medical Wonders of Worm Spit
How useful is worm spit? It turns out that worm spit, als o known as silk, is a very useful material in medici ne. In this video by
Science Friday, Dr. David Kaplan describes how silk is used in a variety of medical applications.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
P roteins
P roteins
Watch on

1.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8270Summary
Proteins are organic compounds made up of amino acids.
A protein may have up to four levels of structure. The co mplex structures of different proteins give them uniqu e properties.
Enzymes are proteins that speed up biochemical reactions in cells. Antibodies are prot eins that target pathogens for destruction.
Review
1. Proteins are made out of ____________.
2. What determines the primary structure of a protein?
3. State two functions of proteins.
4. What are enzymes?
Sc iF ri
The Medical Wonders of Worm Spit
The Medical Wonders of Worm Spit
Watch on

1.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82705. Describe the role of hemoglobin.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:YassineMrabet/Wikimedia
Commons;Image copyright ynse, 2014
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AminoA
cidball.svg; http://www.shutterstock.com
License: License from Shutterstock; CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:YassineMrabet/Wikimedia
Commons;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AminoA
cidball.svg; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on image
from the National Human Genome
Research Institute;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; ck 12
foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Image copyright ynse,
2014;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; CK12 Foundation
License: License from Shutterstock; CC
BY-NC 3.0
1.2: Proteins is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82711.3: Lipids
Oil. Does it mix with water? No. Biologically, why is this important?
Oil is a lipid. The property of chemically not being a ble to mix with water gives lipids some very important biological functio ns.
Lipids form the outer membrane of cells. Why?
Lipids
A lipid is an organic compound such as fat or oil. Organisms use lipids to store en ergy, but lipids have other important roles as
well. Lipids consist of repeating units called fatty ac ids. Fatty acids are organic compounds that have the general formul a
CH (CH) COOH, where n usually ranges from 2 to 28 and is always an even nu mber. There are two types of fatty acids: saturated
fatty acids and unsaturated fatty acids.
Saturated Fatty Acids
In saturated fatty acids, carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. This causes the molecules to form
straight chains, as shown in Figure below. The straight chains can be packed together ve ry tightly, allowing them to store energy in
a compact form. This explains why saturated fatty acid s are solids at room temperature. Animals use saturated fatty acids to store
energy.
Fatty Acids. Saturated fatty acids have straight chains, like the three fatty acids shown in the upper left. Unsaturated fatty
acids have bent chains, like all the other fatty acids in the figure.
Unsaturated Fatty Acids
In unsaturated fatty acids, some carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydro gen atoms as possible. Instead, they are bonded to
other groups of atoms. Wherever carbon binds with the se other groups of atoms, it causes chains to bend (see Figure above). The
bent chains cannot be packed together very tightly, so unsaturated fatty acids are liquids at room temperature. Plants use
unsaturated fatty acids to store energy. Some examples are s hown in Figure below.3 2 n

1.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8271
These plant products all contain unsaturated fatty acids.
Types of Lipids
Lipids may consist of fatty acids alone, or they may contain other molecules as well. For example, some lipids contain alcohol or
phosphate groups. They include
1. triglycerides: the main form of stored energy in animals.
2. phospholipids: the major components of cell membranes.
3. steroids: serve as chemical messengers and have other r oles.
Triglyceride Molecule. The left part of this triglyceride mole cule represents glycerol. Each of the three long chains on the
right represents a different fatty acid. From top to bottom, the fatty acids are palmitic acid, oleic acid, and alpha-linolenic
acid. The chemical formula for this triglyceride is C
H
O
. KEY:H=hydrogen, C=carbon, O=oxygen
Lipids and Diet
Humans need lipids for many vital functions, such as st oring energy and forming cell membranes. Lipids can also supply cells with
energy. In fact, a gram of lipids supplies more than twice as much energy as a gram of carbohydrates or p roteins. Lipids are
necessary in the diet for most of these functions. Alth ough the human body can manufacture most of the lip ids it needs, there are
others, called essential fatty acids, that must be consumed in food. Essential fatty acid s include omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids.
Both of these fatty acids are needed for important biolo gical processes, not just for energy.
Although some lipids in the diet are essential, exces s dietary lipids can be harmful. Because lipids are v ery high in energy, eating
too many may lead to unhealthy weight gain. A high-fa t diet may also increase lipid levels in the blood. This, in turn, can increase
the risk for health problems such as cardiovascular disease. The dietary lipids of most concern are satu rated fatty acids, trans fats,
and cholesterol. For example, cholesterol is the lipi d mainly responsible for narrowing arteries and causi ng the disease
atherosclerosis.55

1.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8271Summary
Organisms use lipids to store energy. There are two type s of fatty acids: saturated fatty acids and unsaturated fa tty acids.
Animals use saturated fatty acids to store energy. Plants use unsat urated fatty acids to store energy.
Phospholipids are the major components of cell membranes.
Excess dietary lipids can be harmful.
Review
1. What is a lipid? Give three examples.
2. Butter is a fat that is a solid at room temperature. What type of fatty acid does butter contain? How do you kno w?
3. Explain why molecules of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids have different shapes.
c a ssiope ia proje c t
Lipids.m4v
Lipids.m4v
Watch on

1.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82714. Which lipid is the main component of cell membranes?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Wolfgang Schaefer;Seeds:
Lebensmittelfotos; Olives: Steve Jurvetson;
Nuts: Petr Kratochvil
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Fat_tr
iglyceride_shorthand_formula.PNG;
Seeds: pixabay.com/en/barley-graincereals-whole-wheat-74247/; Olives:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jurvetson/454
873761/; Nuts:
http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/viewimage.php?image=424&#38; picture=nuts
License: Public Domain; Seeds: Public
Domain; Olives: CC BY 2.0; Nuts: Public
Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;CK-12 Foundation - Joy
Sheng;By Smokefoot - Own work, Public
Domain,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...90004;W
olfgang Schaefer
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By Smokefoot
- Own work; Public Domain;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=11990004;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Fat_tr
iglyceride_shorthand_formula.PNG
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3] Credit: Seeds: Lebensmittelfotos; Olives:
Steve Jurvetson; Nuts: Petr
Kratochvil;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;Wolfgang Schaefer
Source: Seeds: pixabay.com/en/barleygrain-cereals-whole-wheat-74247/; Olives:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jurvetson/454
873761/; Nuts:
http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/viewimage.php?image=424&#38; picture=nuts
; CK-12 Foundation; eeds:
pixabay.com/en/barley-grain-cerealswhole-wheat-74247/; Olives:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jurvetson/454
873761/; Nuts:
http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/viewimage.php?image=424&#38; picture=nuts

1.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8271commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Fat_tr
iglyceride_shorthand_formula.PNG
License: Seeds: Public Domain; Olives:
CC BY 2.0; Nuts: Public Domain; CC BYNC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Wolfgang Schaefer;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;CK-12 Foundation - Joy Sheng
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Fat_tr
iglyceride_shorthand_formula.PNG; CK12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
1.3: Lipids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83371.4: Nucleic Acids
You may have heard that something is "encoded in your DNA." What does that mean?
Nucleic acids. Essentially the "instructions" or "blu eprints" of life. Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is the u nique blueprints to
make the proteins that give you your traits. Half of these blueprints come from your mother, and half from your father. Therefore,
every person that has ever lived - except for identical t wins - has his or her own unique set of blueprints - or instru ctions - or DNA.
Nucleic Acids
A nucleic acid is an organic compound, such as DNA or RNA, that is built of small units called nucleotides. Many nucleotides
bind together to form a chain called a polynucleotide. The nucleic acid DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) consists of two
polynucleotide chains. The nucleic acid RNA (ribonucleic acid) consists of just one polynucleotid e chain.
Structure of Nucleic Acids
Each nucleotide consists of three smaller molecules:
1. sugar
2. phosphate group
3. nitrogen base
If you look at Figure below, you will see that the sugar of one nucleotide binds to the phosphate group of the next nucleotide.
These two molecules alternate to form the backbone of the nucleotide chain. This backbone is known as the sugar-phosphate
backbone.
The nitrogen bases in a nucleic acid stick out from th e backbone. There are four different types of bases: cytosine (C), adenine (A),
guanine (G), and either thymine (T) in DNA, or uracil (U) in RNA. In DNA, bonds form between bases on the two nucle otide
Stu dy.com
DNA: Chemical Structure of Nucleic A
DNA: Chemical Structure of Nucleic A
Watch on

1.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8337chains and hold the chains together. Each type of ba se binds with just one other type of base: cytosine a lways binds with guanine,
and adenine always binds with thymine. These pairs of bases are called complementary base pairs.
Nucleic Acid. Sugars and phosphate groups form the backbone of a polynucleotide chai n. Hydrogen bonds between
complementary bases hold two polynucleotide chains together.
The binding of complementary bases allows DNA molecules to take their well-known shape, called a double helix, which is shown
in Figure below. A double helix is like a spiral staircase. T he double helix shape forms naturally and is very s trong, making the two
polynucleotide chains difficult to break apart.
DNA Molecule. Bonds between complementary bases help form the double helix of a DNA molecule. The letters A, T, G, and
C stand for the bases adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine. The sequence of these f our bases in DNA is a code that
carries instructions for making proteins. Shown is how the DNA winds into a chrom osome.

1.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8337Roles of Nucleic Acids
DNA is also known as the hereditary material or genetic information. It is found in genes, and its sequence o f bases makes up a
code. Between "starts" and "stops," the code carries inst ructions for the correct sequence of amino acids in a protein (see Figure
below). DNA and RNA have different functions relating to t he genetic code and proteins. Like a set of blueprin ts, DNA contains
the genetic instructions for the correct sequence of amino acids in proteins. RNA uses the information in DNA to assemble the
correct amino acids and help make the protein. The in formation in DNA is passed from parent cells to daughter cells whenever
cells divide. The information in DNA is also passed fro m parents to offspring when organisms reproduce. This is how inherited
characteristics are passed from one generation to the ne xt.
The letters G, U, C, and A stand for the bases in RNA. Each group of three bases makes up a code word, and each code
word represents one amino acid (represented here by a single letter, such as V, H, or L). A string of code words specifies the
sequence of amino acids in a protein.
Summary
DNA and RNA are nucleic acids. Nucleic acids are built of smal l units called nucleotides.
The bases of DNA are adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine. In RNA, thymine is replaced by uracil.
In DNA, A always binds to T, and G always binds to C.
The shape of the DNA molecule is known as a double helix.
DNA contains the genetic instructions for the correct seque nce of amino acids in proteins. RNA uses the information i n DNA to
assemble the correct amino acids and help make the prot ein.
Review
1. Identify the three parts of a nucleotide.
2. What is DNA?
3. What are complementary base pairs? Give an example.
4. Describe the shape of DNA.
R icoch e tScie n ce
Nucleic Acids
Nucleic Acids
Watch on

1.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83375. How are DNA and RNA related to proteins?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Marianna Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;Madeleine Price Ball, modified
by CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Genetic
_code.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;Image copyright Denis
Vrublevski, 2014
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Marianna Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Madeleine Price Ball, modified by
CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Genetic
_code.svg
License: Public Domain
1.4: Nucleic Acids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83381.5: Biochemical Reactions
Understanding chemistry is essential to fully understand biology. Why?
A general understanding of chemistry is necessary to u nderstand biology. Essentially, our cells are just thousands of chemicals —
made of elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrog en, phosphorus and sulfur — in just the right combina tions. And these
chemicals combine through chemical reactions.
Chemical Reactions
The element chlorine (Cl) is a greenish poison. Woul d you eat chlorine? Of course not, but you often eat a compound containing
chlorine. In fact, you probably eat this chlorine co mpound just about every day. Do you know what it is? It ’s table salt. Table salt is
sodium chloride (NaCl), which forms when chlorine and s odium (Na) combine in certain proportions. How does ch lorine, a toxic
green chemical, change into harmless white table salt? It happens in a chemical reaction.
A chemical reaction is a process that changes some chemical substances int o others. A substance that starts a chemical reactio n is
called a reactant, and a substance that forms as a result of a chemical reaction is called a product. During a chemical reaction, the
reactants are used up to create the products.
An example of a chemical reaction is the burning of methane. In this chemical reaction, the reactants ar e methane (CH) and
oxygen (O), and the products are carbon dioxide (CO) and water (H O). A chemical reaction involves the breaking and forming
of chemical bonds. When methane burns, bonds break in the methane and oxygen molecules, and new bonds form in the molecules
of carbon dioxide and water.
Chemical Equations
A chemical reaction can be represented by a chemical equation. For example, the burning of methane can be represe nted by the
chemical equation
CH + 2O → CO + 2H O
The arrow in a chemical equation separates the reacta nts from the products and shows the direction in which the reaction proceeds.
If the reaction could occur in the opposite directi on as well, two arrows pointing in opposite directions would be used. The number
2 in front of O and H O shows that two oxygen molecules and two water molecules are involved in the reaction. (With no nu mber
in front of a chemical symbol, just one molecule is invol ved.)
Conservation of Matter
In a chemical reaction, the quantity of each element does not change; there is the same amount of each e lement in the products as
there was in the reactants. This is because matter is al ways conserved. The conservation of matter is reflect ed in a reaction’s
chemical equation. The same number of atoms of each el ement appears on each side of the arrow. For example, i n the chemical
equation above, there are four hydrogen atoms on eac h side of the arrow. Can you find all four of them o n each side of the
equation?4
2 2 2
4 2 2 2
2 2

1.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8338Further Reading
Energy and Biochemical Reactions
Types of Biochemical Reactions
Summary
A chemical reaction is a process that changes some chemi cal substances into others. During a chemical reaction, the r eactants
are used up to create the products.
In a chemical reaction, matter is always conserved.
Review
1. Define a chemical reaction.
2. Describe the roles of reactants and products in chemica l reactions.
3. How does a chemical equation show that matter is always conserved in a chemical reaction?
4. Knowing that water (H O) forms from hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O), write a chem ical equation for the formation of water
from these two elements.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
1.5: Biochemical Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
How to speed up chemical reactions
How to speed up chemical reactions
Watch on
2+2

1.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83391.6: Energy and Biochemical Reactions
What is energy? Where does your energy come from? Can energy be recycled?
This team of ants is breaking down a dead tree. A clas sic example of teamwork. And all that work takes energy. In fact, each
chemical reaction - the chemical reactions that allo w the cells in those ants to do the work - needs energy to get started. And all that
energy comes from the food the ants eat. Whatever ea ts the ants gets their energy from the ants. Energy passes through an
ecosystem in one direction only.
Chemical Reactions and Energy
Chemical reactions always involve energy. Energy is a property of matter that is defined as the abili ty to do work. When methane
burns, for example, it releases energy in the form of heat an d light. Other chemical reactions absorb energy rather th an release it.
Exothermic Reactions
A chemical reaction that releases energy (as heat) is called an exothermic reaction. This type of reaction can be represented by a
general chemical equation:
Reactants → Products + Heat
In addition to methane burning, another example of an exothermic reaction is chlorine combining with so dium to form table salt.
This reaction also releases energy.
Endothermic Reaction
A chemical reaction that absorbs energy is called an endothermic reaction. This type of reaction can also be represented by a
general chemical equation:
Reactants + Heat → Products
Did you ever use a chemical cold pack? The pack cool s down because of an endothermic reaction. When a tub e inside the pack is
broken, it releases a chemical that reacts with water inside the pack. This reaction absorbs heat energy an d quickly cools down the
pack.
Activation Energy
All chemical reactions need energy to get started. Ev en reactions that release energy need a boost of ene rgy in order to begin. The
energy needed to start a chemical reaction is calle d activation energy. Activation energy is like the push a child needs to start
going down a playground slide. The push gives the ch ild enough energy to start moving, but once she start s, she keeps moving
without being pushed again. Activation energy is illustr ated in Figure below.

1.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8339
Activation Energy. Activation energy provides the “push” needed to start a chemical reaction. Is the chemical reaction in
this figure an exothermic or endothermic reaction?
Why do all chemical reactions need energy to get st arted? In order for reactions to begin, reactant mole cules must bump into each
other, so they must be moving, and movement requires e nergy. When reactant molecules bump together, they ma y repel each other
because of intermolecular forces pushing them apart. Overcoming these forces so the molecules can come together and react also
takes energy.
As you view Activation energy, focus on these concepts:
1. the role of activation energy,
2. what an energy diagram demonstrates.
Summary
Chemical reactions always involve energy. A chemical reac tion that releases energy is an exothermic reaction, and a chemical
reaction that absorbs energy is an endothermic reaction. The energy needed to start a chemical reaction is the act ivation energy.

1.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8339Review
1. What is an exothermic reaction?
2. What is the general chemical equation for an endoth ermic reaction?
3. What is the activation energy?
4. Why do all chemical reactions require activation energ y?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
1.6: Energy and Biochemical Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83401.7: Types of Biochemical Reactions
What do you get when you cross biology and chemistry?
Hummingbirds, with their tiny bodies and high levels of activity, have the highest metabolic rates of any animals — roughly a
dozen times that of a pigeon and a hundred times th at of an elephant. The metabolic rate, or rate of met abolism, has to do with the
amount of energy the organism uses. And that energy is used to drive the chemical reactions in cells — or the biochemical
reactions. And, of course, it is all the biochemical reactio ns that allow the cells function properly, and maintain lif e.
Biochemical Reactions
Biochemical reactions are chemical reactions that take place inside the cells of living things. The field of biochemistry
demonstrates that knowledge of chemistry as well as biolo gy is needed to understand fully the life processes of organisms at the
level of the cell. The sum of all the biochemical re actions in an organism is called metabolism. It includes both exothermic and
endothermic reactions.
Types of Biochemical Reactions
Exothermic reactions in organisms are called catabolic reactions. These reactions break down molecules into smaller u nits and
release energy. An example of a catabolic reaction i s the breakdown of glucose, which releases energy that cells need to carry out
life processes. Endothermic reactions in organisms are called anabolic reactions. These reactions build up bigger molecules from
smaller ones. An example of an anabolic reaction is th e joining of amino acids to form a protein. Which ty pe of reactions—
catabolic or anabolic—do you think occur when your body digests food?
V a n y a L oroch
SECOND SERIES: what are biochemic
SECOND SERIES: what are biochemic
Watch on

1.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8340Summary
Biochemical reactions are chemical reactions that ta ke place inside the cells of organisms.
Review
1. What are biochemical reactions?
2. What is metabolism?
3. Describe catabolic reactions?
4. What is an example of a biochemical reaction?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
1.7: Types of Biochemical Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83411.8: Enzymes
What is a biological catalyst?
This super fast train can obviously reach great speed s. And there's a lot of technology that helps this tr ain go fast. Speaking of
helping things go fast brings us to enzymes. Life c ould not exist without enzymes. Essentially, enzymes ar e biological catalysts that
speed up biochemical reactions.
Enzymes
Enzymes and Biochemical Reactions
Most chemical reactions within organisms would be impossib le under the conditions in cells. For example, the body temperature of
most organisms is too low for reactions to occur quic kly enough to carry out life processes. Reactants may also be present in such
low concentrations that it is unlikely they will meet a nd collide. Therefore, the rate of most biochemical re actions must be
increased by a catalyst. A catalyst is a chemical that speeds up chemical reactions. In o rganisms, catalysts are called enzymes.
Essentially, enzymes are biological catalysts.
Like other catalysts, enzymes are not reactants in the reactions they control. They help the reactants int eract but are not used up in
the reactions. Instead, they may be used over and ov er again. Unlike other catalysts, enzymes are usually h ighly specific for
particular chemical reactions. They generally catalyz e only one or a few types of reactions.
Enzymes are extremely efficient in speeding up reac tions. They can catalyze up to several million reac tions per second. As a result,
the difference in rates of biochemical reactions wit h and without enzymes may be enormous. A typical bioche mical reaction might
take hours or even days to occur under normal cellular con ditions without an enzyme, but less than a second with an enzy me.

1.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8341As you view Enzymes, focus on these concepts:
1. the role of enzymes in nature,
2. other uses of enzymes.
Importance of Enzymes
Enzymes are involved in most of the biochemical reac tions that take place in organisms. About 4,000 such re actions are known to
be catalyzed by enzymes, but the number may be even higher. Enzymes allow reactions to occur at the rate necessary for life.
In animals, an important function of enzymes is to help digest food. Digestive enzymes speed up reactions that break down large
molecules of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats into sm aller molecules the body can use. Without digestive e nzymes, animals would
not be able to break down food molecules quickly enough t o provide the energy and nutrients they need to survive.
Science Friday: Stained Glass Conservation
Stained glass from the Middle Ages is often hundreds o f years old. Unfortunately, many of these relics are in need of cleaning and
maintenance. In this video by Science Friday, conservator M ary Higgins discusses the methods used to protect the st ained glass.
Science Friday: So Flashy - The Chemistry Behind a Firefly’s Glow
Fireflies are glowing insects that generate their own light. But how do they generate this light? In this c lip by Science Friday,
researcher Sarah Sander discusses the mechanism that firefl ies generate their own light.
Am fe pEn zym e s
Enzymes
Enzymes
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Stained Glass Conservation
Stained Glass Conservation
Watch on

1.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8341https://soundcloud.com/scifri/so-flashy-the-chemistry- behind-a-fireflys-glow
Summary
Enzymes are biological catalysts. They speed up biochemical reactions.
Enzymes are involved in most of the chemical reactions tha t take place in organisms.
Review
1. What are enzymes?
2. Are enzymes reactants? Explain your answer.
3. What happens to an enzyme after a biochemical reacti on?
4. Explain why organisms need enzymes to survive.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
1.8: Enzymes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83421.9: Enzyme Function
Do cells have one enzyme with lots of functions, or many enzymes, each with just one function?
Enzymes. Vital proteins necessary for life. So how do en zymes work? How do they catalyze just one specific bio chemical reaction?
In a puzzle, only two pieces will fit together properl y. Understanding that is one of the main steps in unde rstanding how enzymes
work.
Enzyme Function
How do enzymes speed up biochemical reactions so dramatically? Like all catalysts, enzymes work by lowering the activation
energy of chemical reactions. Activation energy is the ene rgy needed to start a chemical reaction. This is illu strated in Figure
below. The biochemical reaction shown in the figure r equires about three times as much activation energy without the enzyme as it
does with the enzyme.
Am oe ba Siste rs
Enzymes (Updated)
Enzymes (Updated)
Watch on

1.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8342
The reaction represented by this graph is a combustion reaction inv olving the reactants glucose (C H O) and oxygen (O).
The products of the reaction are carbon dioxide (CO) and water (H O). Energy is also released during the reaction. The
enzyme speeds up the reaction by lowering the activation energy needed for the reaction to start. Compare the activation
energy with and without the enzyme.
Enzymes generally lower activation energy by reducing the energy needed for reactants to come together and react. For example:
Enzymes bring reactants together so they don’t have to expen d energy moving about until they collide at random. Enz ymes bind
both reactant molecules (called the substrate), tightly and specifically, at a site on the enzyme mole cule called the active site
(Figure below).
By binding reactants at the active site, enzymes also position reactants correctly, so they do not have to overcome
intermolecular forces that would otherwise push them apart. This allows the molecules to interact with less energy.
Enzymes may also allow reactions to occur by different pathwa ys that have lower activation energy.
The active site is specific for the reactants of the biochemical reaction the enzyme catalyzes. Similar t o puzzle pieces fitting
together, the active site can only bind certain substra tes.
This enzyme molecule binds reactant molecules—called substrate—at its active site, forming an enzyme-substrate complex.
This brings the reactants together and positions them correctly so the reaction can occur. After the reaction, the products
are released from the enzyme’s active site. This frees up the enzy me so it can catalyze additional reactions.
The activities of enzymes also depend on the temperature, ionic conditions, and the pH of the surroundings. Some enzymes work
best at acidic pHs, while others work best in neutral environme nts.
Digestive enzymes secreted in the acidic environment (l ow pH) of the stomach help break down proteins into smaller
molecules. The main digestive enzyme in the stomach is pepsin, which works best at a pH of about 1.5. These enzymes would6 12 6 2
2 2

1.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8342not work optimally at other pHs. Trypsin is another enzyme in the digestive system, which breaks protein chains in fo od into
smaller parts. Trypsin works in the small intestine, which is n ot an acidic environment. Trypsin's optimum pH is about 8.
Biochemical reactions are optimal at physiological te mperatures. For example, most biochemical reactions work best at the
normal body temperature of 98.6˚F. Many enzymes lose function at lower and higher tem peratures. At higher temperatures, an
enzyme’s shape deteriorates. Only when the temperature come s back to normal does the enzyme regain its shape and norma l
activity.
Summary
Enzymes work by lowering the activation energy needed to s tart biochemical reactions.
The activities of enzymes depend on the temperature, i onic conditions, and the pH of the surroundings.
Review
1. How do enzymes speed up biochemical reactions?
2. Where is the active site located? Explain the role of the active site?
3. Complete this sentence: The activities of enzymes de pends on the __________, __________ conditions, and the __________ of
the surroundings.
4. Distinguish between the conditions needed for the proper f unctioning of pepsin and trypsin.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jerry Crimson Mann (Wikimedia:
Mcy jerry);Hana Zavadska;Laura Guerin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Allosteri
c_competitive_inhibition_3.svg; CK-12
Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska;Jerry Crimson
Mann (Wikimedia: Mcy jerry)
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Allosteri
c_competitive_inhibition_3.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin;Jerry Crimson Mann
(Wikimedia: Mcy jerry)
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Allosteri
c_competitive_inhibition_3.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
1.9: Enzyme Function is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83431.10: Water and Life
Dihydrogen oxide, or dihydrogen monoxide. Does this chemical sound dangerous?
Another name for this compound is… water. Water can create some absolutely beautiful sights. Iguassu Falls is the largest series of
waterfalls on the planet, located in Brazil, Argentina, and Paraguay. And water is necessary for life. The impor tance of water to life
cannot be emphasized enough. All life needs water. Lif e started in water. Essentially, without this simple t hree atom molecule, life
would not exist.
Water
Water, like carbon, has a special role in living things. It is needed by all known forms of life. Water is a simple molecule,
containing just three atoms. Nonetheless, water’s struc ture gives it unique properties that help explain why it is vital to all living
organisms.
Water, Water Everywhere
Water is a common chemical substance on planet Earth. In fact, Earth is sometimes called the "water planet " because almost 75%
of its surface is covered with water. If you look at Figure below, you will see where Earth’s water is found. The te rm water
generally refers to its liquid state, and water is a liquid over a wide range of temperatures on Earth. Ho wever, water also occurs on
Earth as a solid (ice) and as a gas (water vapor).

1.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8343
Most of the water on Earth consists of saltwater in the oceans. Wha t percent of Earth’s water is fresh water? Where is most
of the fresh water found?
Structure and Properties of Water
No doubt, you are already aware of some of the proper ties of water. For example, you probably know that water is tasteless and
odorless. You also probably know that water is transparen t, which means that light can pass through it. This is important for
organisms that live in the water, because some of them nee d sunlight to make food.
Chemical Structure of Water
To understand some of water’s properties, you need to know more about its chemical structure. As you have se en, each molecule of
water consists of one atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen. The oxygen atom in a water molecule attrac ts negatively-charged
electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms do. As a result, the oxygen atom has a slightly negative c harge, and the hydrogen
atoms have a slightly positive charge. A difference i n electrical charge between different parts of the sa me molecule is called
polarity, making water a polar molecule. The diagram in Figure below shows water’s polarity.
Water Molecule. This diagram shows the positive and negative parts of a water molecule. It also depicts how a charge, such
as on an ion (Na or Cl, for example) can interact with a water molec ule.

1.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8343Opposites attract when it comes to charged molecules. In the case of water, the positive (hydrogen) end of one water molecule is
attracted to the negative (oxygen) end of a nearby water molecule. Because of this attraction, weak bonds form between adjacent
water molecules, as shown in Figure below. The type of bond that forms between molecule s is called a hydrogen bond. Bonds
between molecules are not as strong as bonds within mol ecules. There are just many more hydrogen bonds in wat er (between water
molecules) than there are covalent bonds within a mo lecule. The hydrogen bonds may not be strong, but in water they are strong
enough to hold together nearby molecules.
Hydrogen Bonding in Water Molecules. Hydrogen bonds form between nearby wate r molecules. How do you think this
might affect water’s properties?
Properties of Water
Hydrogen bonds between water molecules explain some of water’s properties. For example, hydrogen bonds explain why water
molecules tend to stick together. Have you ever watch ed water drip from a leaky faucet or from a melting icicle? If you have, then
you know that water always falls in drops rather than as separate molecules. The dew drops in Figure below are another example
of water molecules sticking together.
Droplets of Dew. Drops of dew cling to a spider web in this picture. Can you think o f other examples of water forming
drops? (Hint: What happens when rain falls on a newly waxed car?)
Hydrogen bonds cause water to have a relatively high bo iling point of 100°C (212°F). Because of its high boili ng point, most water
on Earth is in a liquid state rather than in a gaseo us state. Water in its liquid state is needed by all living things. Hydrogen bonds
also cause water to expand when it freezes. This, in tu rn, causes ice to have a lower density (mass/volume) th an liquid water. The
lower density of ice means that it floats on water. For e xample, in cold climates, ice floats on top of the wate r in lakes. This allows
lake animals such as fish to survive the winter by staying in the water under the ice.

1.10.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8343Water and Life
The human body is about 70% water (not counting the wa ter in body fat, which varies from person to person). Th e body needs all
this water to function normally. Just why is so much wat er required by human beings and other organisms? Wate r can dissolve
many substances that organisms need, and it is necessa ry for many biochemical reactions. The examples bel ow are among the most
important biochemical processes that occur in livin g things, but they are just two of many ways that water is involved in
biochemical reactions.
Photosynthesis—In this process, cells use the energy in sunlight to change carbon dioxide and water to glucose and oxygen.
Water is a reactant in this process. The reactions of phot osynthesis can be represented by the chemical equation
6CO + 6H O + Energy → C H O + 6O.
Cellular respiration—In this process, cells break down glucose in the presence of oxygen and release c arbon dioxide, water (a
product), and energy. The reactions of cellular respirat ion can be represented by the chemical equation
C H O + 6O → 6CO + 6H O + Energy.
Water is involved in many other biochemical reactio ns. As a result, just about all life processes depend on water. Clearly, life as we
know it could not exist without water.
Summary
Water is needed by all known forms of life.
Due to the difference in the distribution of charge, water is a polar molecule.
Hydrogen bonds hold adjacent water molecules together.
Water is involved in many biochemical reactions. As a res ult, just about all life processes depend on water.
Review
1. Where is most of Earth’s water found?
2. What percent of Earth’s water is fresh water?
3. What is polarity? Describe the polarity of water.
4. How could you demonstrate to a child that solid water is less d ense than liquid water?
5. Explain how water’s polarity is related to its boiling poi nt.2 2 6 12 6 2
6 12 6 2 2 2
TED-Ed
What would happen if you didn ’t drink
What would happen if you didn ’t drink
Watch on

1.10.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83436. Explain why metabolism in organisms depends on water.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flickr:devra
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/minicooper93
402/6181554829/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Flickr:devra;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/minicooper93
402/6181554829/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
1.10: Water and Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13811.11: Scientific Method
Chances are you've heard of the scientific method. What exactly is the scientific method?
Is it a precise and exact way that all science must be done? Or is it a series of steps that most scientists generally follow, but may be
modified for the benefit of an individual investigation?
The Scientific Method
There are basic methods of gaining knowledge that are common to all of science. At the heart of science i s the scientific
investigation, which is done by following the scientific method. A scientific investigation is a plan for asking questions and
testing possible answers. It generally follows the steps list ed in Figure below.
Steps of a Scientific Investigation. A scientific investigation typica lly has these steps. Scientists often develop their own steps
they follow in a scientific investigation. Shown here is a simplifica tion of how a scientific investigation is done.
Making Observations
A scientific investigation typically begins with observa tions. You make observations all the time. Let’s say yo u take a walk in the
woods and observe a moth, like the one in Figure below, resting on a tree trunk. You notice that the moth has spots on its wings
that look like eyes. You think the eye spots make the moth look like the face of an owl.

1.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1381
Does this moth remind you of an owl?
Asking a Question
Observations often lead to questions. For example, you might ask yourself why the moth has eye spots that mak e it look like an
owl’s face. What reason might there be for this observatio n?
Forming a Hypothesis
The next step in a scientific investigation is forming a hypothesis. A hypothesis is a possible answer to a scientific question, but it
isn’t just any answer. A hypothesis must be based on sci entific knowledge, and it must be logical. A hypothes is also must be
falsifiable. In other words, it must be possible to make observations that would disprove the hypothesis if i t really is false. Assume
you know that some birds eat moths and that owls prey on other birds. From this knowledge, you reason that ey e spots scare away
birds that might eat the moth. This is your hypothesis.
Testing the Hypothesis
To test a hypothesis, you first need to make a pred iction based on the hypothesis. A prediction is a statement that tells what will
happen under certain conditions. It can be expressed in the form: If A occurs, then B will happen. Based o n your hypothesis, you
might make this prediction: If a moth has eye spots on its wings, then birds will avoid eating it.
Next, you must gather evidence to test your predictio n. Evidence is any type of data that may either agree or disagr ee with a
prediction, so it may either support or disprove a h ypothesis. Evidence may be gathered by an experiment. Assume that you gather
evidence by making more observations of moths with ey e spots. Perhaps you observe that birds really do avoid eating moths with
eye spots. This evidence agrees with your prediction.
Drawing Conclusions
Evidence that agrees with your prediction supports yo ur hypothesis. Does such evidence prove that your hy pothesis is true? No; a
hypothesis cannot be proven conclusively to be true. T his is because you can never examine all of the poss ible evidence, and
someday evidence might be found that disproves the hypothesis. Nonetheless, the more evidence that supports a hypothesis, the
more likely the hypothesis is to be true.
Communicating Results
The last step in a scientific investigation is commu nicating what you have learned with others. This is a very important step
because it allows others to test your hypothesis. If o ther researchers get the same results as yours, they add support to the
hypothesis. However, if they get different results, they may disprove the hypothesis.
When scientists share their results, they should desc ribe their methods and point out any possible problem s with the investigation.
For example, while you were observing moths, perhaps y our presence scared birds away. This introduces an error i nto your
investigation. You got the results you predicted (the birds avoided the moths while you were observing them), but not for the reason
you hypothesized. Other researchers might be able to thi nk of ways to avoid this error in future studies.
As you view The Scientific Method, focus on these concepts:
1. the relationship between evidence, conclusions and t heories,
2. the "ground rules" of scientific research,
3. the steps in a scientific procedure,

1.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13814. the meaning of the "replication of results,"
5. the meaning of "falsifiable," and
6. the outcome when the scientific method is not followed.
Discovering the Scientific Method
A summary video of the scientific method, using the id entification of DNA structure as an example, is shown in this video by MIT
students:
KQED: Why I Do Science
Dan Costa, Ph.D. is a professor of Biology at the Universit y of California, Santa Cruz, and has been studying mar ine life for well
over 40 years. He is a leader in using satellite tags, time and depth recorders and other sophisticated ele ctronic tags to gather
information about the amazing depths to which elepha nt seals dive, their migration routes and how they us e oceanographic features
to hunt for prey as far as the international dateline an d the Alaskan Aleutian Islands.
F re e Sch ool
The Steps of the Scienti  c Method fo
The Steps of the Scienti  c Method fo
Watch on

1.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1381Science Friday: A Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses for Squid Ink
Squid ink is commonly thought of as a defensive mecha nism used by squids, but could there be other uses? In this video by
Science Friday, Dr. Stephanie Bush talks about possible othe r functions of squid ink.
Science Friday: No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Mantas
Mantas are an example of filter feeders that obtain fo od as they swim through the water. How do these filters work? In this video
by Science Friday, Dr. Misty Paig-Tran discusses the mechanisms used by manta rays.
K QED
Why I Do Science: Dan Costa - KQED
Why I Do Science: Dan Costa - KQED
Watch on
Sc iF ri
A Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses f
A Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses f
Watch on
Sc iF ri
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
Watch on

1.11.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1381Further Reading
Experiment
What is a Scientist?
Summary
At the heart of science is the scientific investigation, whi ch is done by following the scientific method. A scienti fic investigation
is a plan for asking questions and testing possible answers.
A scientific investigation typically begins with observat ions. Observations often lead to questions.
A hypothesis is a possible logical answer to a scientific question, ba sed on scientific knowledge.
A prediction is a statement that tells what will happen under certain conditions.
Evidence is any type of data that may either agree or disa gree with a prediction, so it may either support or dispro ve a
hypothesis. Conclusions may be formed from evidence.
The last step in a scientific investigation is the commu nication of results with others.
Review
1. Outline the steps of a scientific investigation.
2. What is a scientific hypothesis? What characteristics must a hypothesis have to be usef ul in science?
3. Give an example of a scientific question that could be in vestigated with an experiment. Then give an example of a question that
could not be investigated.
4. Can a hypothesis be proven true? Why or why not?
5. Why do scientists communicate their results?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flickr:OakleyOriginals;Cover
Image. Oceanography, V olume 25, No. 3.
Sept.2012
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oakleyorigina
ls/4536342259/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska;Brett and Sue
Coulstock/Red Moon Sanctuary
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/redmoonsanct
uary/7710449444/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:OakleyOriginals;Cover
Image. Oceanography, V olume 25, No. 3.
Sept.2012
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oakleyorigina
ls/4536342259/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 1.11: Scientific Method is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83441.12: Acids and Bases
Acids and bases. Why are these important in biology?
It comes back to a number of biological processes. For example, enzymes work best at specific levels of acid s or bases. Take your
stomach, a very acidic environment. The enzymes that work in that environment could not work in your mout h. What would your
food taste like if your mouth was also a very acidic en vironment?
Acids and Bases
Water is the main ingredient of many solutions. A solution is a mixture of two or more substances that has the same composition
throughout. Some solutions are acids and some are ba ses. To understand acids and bases, you need to know more about pure water.
In pure water (such as distilled water), a tiny fractio n of water molecules naturally breaks down to form ion s. An ion is an
electrically charged atom or molecule. The breakdown of water is represented by the chemical equation
2 H O → H O + OH
The products of this reaction are a hydronium ion (H O) and a hydroxide ion (OH). The hydroxide ion, whic h has a negative
charge, forms when a water molecule gives up a positive ly charged hydrogen ion (H). The hydronium ion, which has positive
charge, forms when another water molecule accepts the hydro gen ion.
Acidity and pH
The concentration of hydronium ions in a solution i s known as acidity. In pure water, the concentration of hydronium ions is very
low; only about 1 in 10 million water molecules natur ally breaks down to form a hydronium ion. As a result, p ure water is
essentially neutral. Acidity is measured on a scale c alled pH, as shown in Figure below. Pure water has a pH of 7, so the point of
neutrality on the pH scale is 7.2 3+ 3+ +

1.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8344
Acidity and the pH Scale
Water has a pH of 7, so this is the point of neutrality on the pH scale. Acids have a pH less than 7, and bases have a pH
greater than 7. Approximate pHs of examples are shown.
Acids
If a solution has a higher concentration of hydronium ions than pure water, it has a pH lower than 7. A solut ion with a pH lower
than 7 is called an acid. As the hydronium ion concentration increases, the pH value decreases. Therefore, the more acidic a
solution is, the lower its pH value is. Did you ever tas te vinegar? Like other acids, it tastes sour. Stronger acids can be harmful to
organisms. For example, stomach acid would eat through th e stomach if it were not lined with a layer of mucus. Strong acids can
also damage materials, even hard materials such as glass.
Bases
If a solution has a lower concentration of hydronium i ons than pure water, it has a pH higher than 7. A soluti on with a pH higher
than 7 is called a base. Bases, such as baking soda, have a bitter taste. Lik e strong acids, strong bases can harm organisms and
damage materials. For example, lye can burn the skin, and bleach can remove the color from clothing.
Acids and Bases in Organisms
Acids and bases are important in living things because most enzymes can do their job only at a certain leve l of acidity. Cells secrete
acids and bases to maintain the proper pH for enzyme s to work. For example, every time you digest food, acids and bases are at
work in your digestive system. Consider the acidic envi ronment of the stomach. The acidic environment helps with the digestion of
food. The enzyme pepsin, which helps break down protei ns in the stomach can only function optimally in the low pH environment.
The stomach secretes a strong acid that allows pepsin to work, and the stomach to do its job. However, when stoma ch contents
enter the small intestine, the acid must be neutraliz ed. This is because enzymes in the small intestine n eed a basic environment in
order to work. An organ called the pancreas secretes a stron g base into the small intestine, and this base neutralizes t he acid.

1.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8344Summary
A solution is a mixture of two or more substances that has the same composition throughout. Some solutions are acids, s ome are
bases.
Pure water has a pH of 7, so the point of neutrality on the pH scale is 7.
Acids have a higher concentration of hydronium ions than pure water, and a pH lower than 7.
Bases have a lower concentration of hydronium ions than pu re water, and a pH higher than 7.
Acids and bases are important in living organisms because most enzymes function best at a specific pH.
Review
1. What is the pH of a neutral solution?
2. Distinguish between an acid and a base.
3. Describe an example of an acid or a base that is involve d in human digestion.
4. Assume that you test an unknown solution and find that it has a pH of 7.2. What type of solution is it? How do you know?
5. Are the following acids or bases?
a. milk
b. coffee
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Acids, Bases, and pH
Acids, Bases, and pH
Watch on
th e n e wboston
Biology Lecture - 5 - Why are Acids a
Biology Lecture - 5 - Why are Acids a
Watch on

1.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8344c. soap
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska and Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
1.12: Acids and Bases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13781.13: Experiment
So what exactly is an experiment?
At first you may picture a science laboratory with microscopes and chemicals and people in white la b coats. But do all experiments
have to be done in a lab? And do all scientists have to wear l ab coats?
Experiments
Figure below shows a laboratory experiment involving plants. An experiment is a special type of scientific investigation that is
performed under controlled conditions, usually in a laboratory.
A laboratory experiment studying plant growth. What might this experi ment involve?
Some experiments can be very simple, but even the sim plest can contribute important evidence that helps s cientists better
understand the natural world.

1.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1378As many different types of experiments are possible, an experiment must be designed to produce data that can help confirm or
reject the hypothesis.
Variables
An experiment generally tests how one variable is affected by another. The affected variable is call ed the dependent variable. In
the plant experiment shown above, the dependent varia ble is plant growth. The variable that affects the d ependent variable is called
the independent variable. In the plant experiment, the independent variable could be fertilizer—some plants will get fertilizer,
others will not. The scientists change the amount of th e independent variable (the fertilizer) to observe the effects on the dependent
variable (plant growth). An experiment needs to be ru n simultaneously in which no fertilizer is given to t he plant. This would be
known as a control experiment. In any experiment, other factors that might affect t he dependent variable must be controlled. In
the plant experiment, what factors do you think should be co ntrolled? (Hint: What other factors might affect plant growth?)
Sample Size and Repetition
The sample in an experiment or other investigation co nsists of the individuals or events that are studie d, and the size of the sample
(or sample size) directly affects the interpretation of the result s. Typically, the sample is much smaller than all such individuals or
events that exist in the world. Whether the results b ased on the sample are true in general cannot be known for certain. However,
the larger the sample is, the more likely it is that the re sults are generally true.
Similarly, the more times that an experiment is repea ted (which is known as repetition) and the same results obtained, the more
likely the results are valid. This is why scientific exper iments should always be repeated.
Super Microscopes
Microscopes are arguably one of the most important to ols of the biologist. They allow the visualization of sm aller and smaller
biological organisms and molecules. With greatly ma gnified powers, these instruments are becoming incre asingly important in
modern day research.
R e ge n ts T u tor
Gummy Bear Experiment
Gummy Bear Experiment
Watch on

1.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1378
In this experiment, a scientist is conducting research (and taking notes) while looking through a microscope.
Science Friday: The Lollipop Hypothesis
Ever wondered how many licks it takes to reach the ce nter of a lollipop? Mathematicians at NYU’s applied math ematics lab have
designed experiments to determine this. Find out in this vi deo by Science Friday.
SciSh ow
The Times and T roubles of the Scien
The Times and T roubles of the Scien
Watch on
R a ch e l Spla wn
Science Inquiry
Science Inquiry
Watch on

1.13.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1378Science Friday: No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Mantas
Mantas are an example of filter feeders that obtain fo od as they swim through the water. How do these filters work? In this video
by Science Friday, Dr. Misty Paig-Tran discusses the experiment s she performed to understand these filters.
Summary
An experiment is a special type of scientific investiga tion that is performed under controlled conditions, usu ally in a laboratory.
An experiment generally tests how one variable is affected b y another.
The sample size in an experiment directly affects the in terpretation of the results.
Repetition is the repeating of an experiment, validatin g the results.
Review
1. What is an experiment?
2. Compare the dependent variable to the independent varia ble.
Sc iF ri
The Lollipop Hypothesis
The Lollipop Hypothesis
Watch on
Sc iF ri
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
Watch on

1.13.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13783. Identify the independent and dependent variables in the fo llowing experiment: A scientist grew bacteria on gel in her lab. She
wanted to find out if the bacteria would grow faster on gel A or gel B. She placed a few bacteria on gel A and a few on gel B.
After 24 hours, she observed how many bacteria were present on each type of gel.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Eric Schmelz, U.S. Department of
Agriculture;NIAID
Source: Research;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usdagov/8424
943726/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/niaid/561341
0129/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Eric Schmelz, U.S. Department of
Agriculture
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usdagov/8424
943726/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: NIAID;Eric Schmelz, U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/niaid/561341
0129/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usdagov/8424
943726/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 1.13: Experiment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13841.14: Scientific Theories
Theory vs. theory. Is a scientific theory different from the everyday use of the word theory?
A scientific theory is accepted as a scientific truth, supported by evidence collected by many scientists. The theory of evolution by
natural selection is a classic scientific theory.
Scientific Theories
With repeated testing, some hypotheses may eventuall y become scientific theories. Keep in mind, a hypothesis is a possible answer
to a scientific question. A scientific theory is a broad explanation for events that is widely accep ted as true. To become a theory, a
hypothesis must be tested over and over again, and it must be sup ported by a great deal of evidence.
People commonly use the word theory to describe a guess about how or why something happen s. For example, you might say, “I
think a woodchuck dug this hole in the ground, but it ’s just a theory.” Using the word theory in this way is different from the way it
is used in science. A scientific theory is more like a fact than a guess because it is so well-supported. The re are several well-known
theories in biology, including the theory of evolution, cell theory, and germ theory.
As you view Know the Difference (Between Hypothesis and Theory), focus on these concepts:
1. the controversy surrounding the words ‘‘hypothesis’’ a nd ‘‘theory’’,
2. the scientific use of the words ‘‘hypothesis’’ and ‘‘theor y’’,
3. the criteria for a ‘‘hypothesis,’’
4. the National Academy of Sciences definition of ‘‘theory’ ’, and
TED-Ed
What’ s the difference between a scie
What’ s the difference between a scie
Watch on

1.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13845. the meaning of the statement, ‘‘theories are the bedrock of our understanding of nature’’.
The Theory of Evolution
The theory of evolution by natural selection is a s cientific theory. Evolution is a change in the characteristics of living things over
time. Evolution occurs by a process called natural selection. In natural selection, some living things produce mo re offspring than
others, so they pass more genes to the next generatio n than others do. Over many generations, this can lea d to major changes in the
characteristics of living things. The theory of evolu tion by natural selection explains how living things are changing today and how
modern living things have descended from ancient li fe forms that no longer exist on Earth. No evidence has been identified that
proves this theory is incorrect. More on the theory of ev olution will be presented in additional concepts.
The Cell Theory
The cell theory is another important scientific the ory of biology. According to the cell theory, the cell is the smallest unit of
structure and function of all living organisms, all living organisms are made up of at least one cell, a nd living cells always come
from other living cells. Once again, no evidence has b een identified that proves this theory is incorrect. More on the cell theory will
be presented in additional concepts.
The Germ Theory
The germ theory of disease, also called the pathogenic theory of me dicine, is a scientific theory that proposes that m icroorganisms
are the cause of many diseases. Like the other scienti fic theories, lots of evidence has been identified th at supports this theory, and
no evidence has been identified that proves the theor y is incorrect.
Further Reading
A Scientific View of the World
Summary
With repeated testing, some hypotheses may eventually beco me scientific theories. A scientific theory is a broad explanation for
events that is widely accepted as true.
Evolution is a change in species over time. Evolution occur s by natural selection.
The cell theory states that all living things are mad e up of cells, and living cells always come from other living cells.
The germ theory proposes that microorganisms are the caus e of many diseases.
OSUbiology
Know the Difference (Between Hypot
Know the Difference (Between Hypot
Watch on

1.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1384Review
1. Contrast how the term theory is used in science and in everyday language.
2. Explain how a hypothesis could become a theory.
3. Describe the evidence that proves the cell theory is inc orrect.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Gregory Podgorniak
Source:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/Wikipedia/co
mmons/2/29/Comte%27s_Theory_of_Scien
ce.png
License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 1.14: Scientific Theories is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

1.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13801.15: Characteristics of Life
What do a bacterium and a whale have in common?
Do they share characteristics with us? All living organ isms, from the smallest bacterium to the largest whal e, share certain
characteristics of life. Without these characteristics, there is no life.
Characteristics of Life
Look at the duck decoy in Figure below. It looks very similar to a real duck. Of cour se, real ducks are living things. What about the
decoy duck? It looks like a duck, but it is actually made of wood. The decoy duck doesn’t have all the ch aracteristics of a living
thing. What characteristics set the real ducks apart from the decoy duck? What are the characteristics of living things?
This duck decoy looks like it’s alive. It even fools real ducks. Why i sn’t it a living thing?
To be classified as a living thing, an object must have al l six of the following characteristics:
1. It responds to the environment.
2. It grows and develops.
3. It produces offspring.
4. It maintains homeostasis.
5. It has complex chemistry.
6. It consists of cells.
Response to the Environment
All living things detect changes in their environment and respond to them. What happens if you step on a rock? Nothing; the rock
doesn’t respond because it isn’t alive. But what if you think you are stepping on a rock and actually step on a turtle shell? The turtle
is likely to respond by moving—it may even snap at you!

1.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1380Growth and Development
All living things grow and develop. For example, a plant seed may look like a lifeless pebble, but under the right conditions it will
grow and develop into a plant. Animals also grow and develop. Look at the animals in Figure below. How will the tadpoles change
as they grow and develop into adult frogs?
Tadpoles go through many changes to become adult frogs.
Reproduction
All living things are capable of reproduction. Reproduction is the process by which living things give rise to off spring.
Reproducing may be as simple as a single cell divid ing to form two daughter cells. Generally, however, it is much more
complicated. Nonetheless, whether a living thing is a huge wha le or a microscopic bacterium, it is capable of reproduc tion.
Keeping Things Constant
All living things are able to maintain a more-or-less constant internal environment. They keep things rel atively stable on the inside
regardless of the conditions around them. The proce ss of maintaining a stable internal environment is ca lled homeostasis. Human
beings, for example, maintain a stable internal body temperature. If you go outside when the air temperature is below freezing, your
body doesn’t freeze. Instead, by shivering and other m eans, it maintains a stable internal temperature.
Complex Chemistry
All living things—even the simplest life forms—have a complex chemistry. Living things consist of large, com plex molecules, and
they also undergo many complicated chemical changes to stay alive. Thousands (or more) of these chemic al reactions occur in each
cell at any given moment. Metabolism is the accumulated total of all the biochemical re actions occurring in a cell or organism.
Complex chemistry is needed to carry out all the function s of life.
Cells
All forms of life are built of at least one cell. A cell is the basic unit of the structure and function of living things. Living things may
appear very different from one another on the outsi de, but their cells are very similar. Compare the human cells on the left in
Figure below and onion cells on the right in Figure below. How are they similar?
Human Cells (left). Onion Cells (right). If you looked at cells under a microscope, this is what you might see.

1.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1380Summary
All living things detect changes in their environment and respond to them.
All living things grow and develop.
All living things are capable of reproduction, the proce ss by which living things give rise to offspring.
All living things are able to maintain a constant intern al environment through homeostasis.
All living things have complex chemistry.
All forms of life are built of cells. A cell is the basic un it of the structure and function of living things.
Review
1. List the six characteristics of all living things.
2. Define homeostasis.
3. What is a cell?
4. Making the next generation is known as ____________.
Am oe ba Siste rs
Characteristics of Life
Characteristics of Life
Watch on

1.15.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13805. Assume that you found an object that looks like a dead t wig. You wonder if it might be a stick insect. How could you det ermine
if it is a living thing?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Human cells: Image copyright
Sebastian Kaulitzki, 2014; Onion cells:
Umberto Salvagnin;Rodney_X/Alamy
Stock Photo;Tadpole: Dan Century; Frog:
Gábor Kovács
Source: Human cells:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Onion cells:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/3839
720754;
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/05/h
ow-venus-flytrap-got-its-taste-meat;
Tadpoles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dancentury/5
886475898/; Frog:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/21923568@
N00/234866027/
License: Human cells: Used under license
from Shutterstock.com; Onion cells: CC
BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Peter Shanks
(Flickr:BotheredByBees)
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/botheredbybe
es/3152335109/;
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:A
nimal_cell_structure_en.svg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Tadpole: Dan Century; Frog: Gábor
Kovács
Source: Tadpoles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dancentury/5
886475898/; Frog:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/21923568@
N00/234866027/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4] Credit: Human cells: Image copyright
Sebastian Kaulitzki, 2014; Onion cells:
Umberto Salvagnin;Tadpole: Dan Century;
Frog: Gábor Kovács
Source: Human cells:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Onion cells:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/3839
720754; Tadpoles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dancentury/5
886475898/; Frog:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/21923568@
N00/234866027/

1.15.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1380License: Human cells: Used under license
from Shutterstock.com; Onion cells: CC
BY 2.0
This page titled 1.15: Characteristics of Life is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13831.16: Principles of Biology
Reproduction, homeostasis, evolution, metabolism, heredity. What controls characteristics of life?
Characteristics of life are controlled by genes, which are passed from parents to offspring, and are locat ed on chromosomes, like
the one shown here, that are found in every cell. The gene theory is one of the unifying principles of biology.
Unifying Principles of Biology
Four unifying principles form the basis of biology. Whe ther biologists are interested in ancient life, the life of bacteria, or how
humans could live on the moon, they base their overall un derstanding of biology on these four principles:
1. cell theory
2. gene theory
3. homeostasis
4. evolution
The Cell Theory
According to the cell theory, all living things are made up of cells, which is the structural unit of living organisms, and living cells
always come from other living cells. In fact, each livi ng thing begins life as a single cell. Some living thi ngs, such as bacteria,
remain single-celled. Other living things, including plants and animals, grow and develop into many cells. Your own body is made
up of an amazing 100 trillion cells! But even you—like all other living things—began life as a single cell.
Tiny diatoms and whale sharks are all made of cells. Diatoms are about 20 µm in diameter and are made up of one cell,
whereas whale sharks can measure up to 12 meters in length and are made up of billions of cells.

1.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1383The Gene Theory
The gene theory is the idea that the characteristics of living orga nisms are controlled by genes, which are passed from parents to
their offspring. A gene is a segment of DNA that has the instructions to enco de a protein. Genes are located on larger structures,
called chromosomes, that are found inside every cell. Chromosomes, in t urn, contain large molecules known as DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid). Molecules of DNA are encoded with i nstructions that tell cells what to do.
Homeostasis
Homeostasis, which is maintaining a stable internal environment or keeping things constant, is not just a characteri stic of living
things. It also applies to nature as a whole. Consider the concentration of oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere. Ox ygen makes up 21% of
the atmosphere, and this concentration is fairly con stant. What keeps the concentration of oxygen constan t? The answer is living
things. Most living things need oxygen to survive, and when they breathe, they remove oxygen from the atmos phere. On the other
hand, many living things, including plants, give off ox ygen when they make food, and this adds oxygen to the atmosphere. The
concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere is maintaine d mainly by the balance between these two processes.
Evolution
Evolution is a change in the characteristics of living things over time. Evolution occurs by a process called natur al selection. In
natural selection, some living things produce more of fspring than others, so they pass more genes to the n ext generation than others
do. Over many generations, this can lead to major chan ges in the characteristics of living things. Evolut ion explains how living
things are changing today and how modern living things have descended from ancient life forms that no longer exist on Earth.
TED-Ed
The wacky history of cell theory - Lau
The wacky history of cell theory - Lau
Watch on
Arm a n ds W e bsite R e vie ws
Homeostasis
Homeostasis
Watch on

1.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1383As living things evolve, they generally become better suited for their environment. This is because they evolve adaptations. An
adaptation is a characteristic that helps a living thing surviv e and reproduce in a given environment. Look at the mole in Figure
below. It has tentacles around its nose that it uses to sense things by touch. The mole lives underground i n the soil, where it is
always dark. However, by using its touch organ, it can detect even tiny food items in the soil in total da rkness. The touch organ is
an adaptation because it helps the mole survive in its dark, underground environment.
This mole uses its star-shaped nose organ to sense food by touch in the da rk. The mole’s very large front claws are also an
adaptation for its life in the soil. Can you explain why?
TED-Ed: How a Few Scientists Transformed the Way We Think About Disease
Tien Nguyen describes the work of several scientists who hel ped us arrive at the new idea of germ theory.
Summary
The cell theory states that all living things are mad e up of cells, and living cells always come from other living cells.
The gene theory states that the characteristics of living t hings are controlled by genes.
Homeostasis is maintaining a constant internal environmen t.
Evolution is a change in species over time.
Review
1. Identify four unifying principles of modern biology.
2. How are genes related to chromosomes?
3. Define homeostasis.
TED-Ed
How a few scientists transformed the
How a few scientists transformed the
Watch on

1.16.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13834. How are adaptations related to evolution?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flickr:gordonramsaysubmissions
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/54397539@
N06/5153972000/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: (a) Mary Ann Tiffany, San Diego
State University; (b)
Flickr:istolethetv;Human cells: Image
copyright Sebastian Kaulitzki, 2014; Onion
cells: Umberto
Salvagnin;Flickr:gordonramsaysubmissions
Source: (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diatoms
.png; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Whale_
Shark_diagonal.jpg; Human cells:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Onion cells:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/3839
720754;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/54397539@
N06/5153972000/
License: (A) CC BY 2.5; (B) CC BY 2.0;
Human cells: License from Shutterstock;
Onion cells: CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit:
Flickr:gordonramsaysubmissions;Human
cells: Image copyright Sebastian Kaulitzki,
2014; Onion cells: Umberto Salvagnin
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/54397539@
N06/5153972000/; Human cells:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Onion cells:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/3839
License: CC BY 2.0; (Human Cells)
License from Shutterstock; (Onion Cells)
CC BY 2.0
This page titled 1.16: Principles of Biology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13821.17: Interdependence of Living Things
What other species do you need to survive?
Species cannot live alone. All life needs other life t o survive. Here surgeon fish are feeding on the algae g rowth on this turtle shell,
a classic example of two species needing each other. This is an example of a symbiotic relationship.
Interdependence of Living Things
All living things depend on their environment to supp ly them with what they need, including food, water, and shelter. Their
environment consists of physical factors—such as so il, air, and temperature—and also of other organisms. An organism is an
individual living thing. Many living things interact with other organisms in their environment. In fact, th ey may need other
organisms in order to survive. This is known as interdependence. For example, living things that cannot make their own food must
eat other organisms for food. Other interactions betwe en living things include symbiotic relationships an d competition for
resources.
Symbiosis
Symbiosis is a close relationship between organisms of different species in which at least one of the organisms benefi ts. The other
organism may also benefit, it may be unaffected by t he relationship, or it may be harmed by the relatio nship. Figure below shows
an example of symbiosis. The birds in the picture ar e able to pick out food from the fur of the deer. T he deer won't eat the birds. In
fact, the deer knowingly lets the birds rest on it. What, i f anything, do you think the deer gets out of the relation ship?
A flock of starlings looks out, before searching for parasites on a red deer stag.
Competition
Competition is a relationship between living things that depend on the same resources. The resources may be food, water, or
anything else they both need. Competition occurs when ever the two species try to get the same resources in the same place and at
the same time. The two organisms are likely to come i nto conflict, and the organism better able to obtain that resource will "win"

1.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1382out over the other organism. What makes an organism be tter able to obtain a resource? They may be any of countless reasons, but
each is considered an adaptation that makes an organism mor e fit to live in their environment.
Summary
All living things depend on their environment to supply th em with what they need, including food, water, and shelter.
Symbiosis is a close relationship between organisms of diffe rent species in which at least one of the organisms benefits.
Competition is a relationship between living things that depend on the same resources.
Review
1. What is meant by interdependence?
2. Describe an example of a way that you depend on other l iving things.
3. Compare and contrast symbiosis and competition.
Cra sh Cou rse
Community Ecology: Feel the Love Community Ecology: Feel the Love Watch on
M a rk Drollin ge r
Symbiosis
Symbiosis
Watch on

1.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13824. Give three examples of resources organisms may compete fo r.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Godrick,
2014;Laura Guerin
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; CK12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Godrick, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
This page titled 1.17: Interdependence of Living Things is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82661.18: Organization of Living Things
What does 'Organization of Living Things' mean?
We know it all starts with the cell. And for some spec ies it ends with the cell. But for others, the cells come together to form tissues,
tissues form organs, organs form organ systems, and organ syst ems combine to form an organism.
Levels of Organization
The living world can be organized into different lev els. For example, many individual organisms can be orga nized into the
following levels:
Cell: Basic unit of structure and function of all living thi ngs.
Tissue: Group of cells of the same kind.
Organ: Structure composed of one or more types of tissues. The tis sues of an organ work together to perform a specific
function. Human organs include the brain, stomach, kidney, and liver. Plant organs include roots, stems, and leaves.
Organ system: Group of organs that work together to perform a certain func tion. Examples of organ systems in a human
include the skeletal, nervous, and reproductive systems.
Organism: Individual living thing that may be made up of one or more organ systems.
Examples of these levels of organization are shown in Figure below.
An individual mouse is made up of several organ systems. The system shown here is the digestive system, which breaks
down food into a form that cells can use. One of the organs of the digestiv e system is the stomach. The stomach, in turn,
consists of different types of tissues. Each type of tissue is made up of cells of the same type.

1.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8266There are also levels of organization above the individua l organism. These levels are illustrated in Figure below.
Organisms of the same species that live in the same area make up a population. For example, all of the goldfish living in the
same area make up a goldfish population.
All of the populations that live in the same area make up a community. The community that includes the goldfish population
also includes the populations of other fish, coral, and oth er organisms.
An ecosystem consists of all the living things (biotic factors) in a given area, together with the nonliving environm ent (abiotic
factors). The nonliving environment includes water, sunlight, soil, and other physical factors.
A group of similar ecosystems with the same general type of physical environment is called a biome.
The biosphere is the part of Earth where all life exists, including a ll the land, water, and air where living things can be found.
The biosphere consists of many different biomes.
This picture shows the levels of organization in nature, from the indivi dual organism to the biosphere.
Diversity of Life
Life on Earth is very diverse. The diversity of livin g things is called biodiversity. A measure of Earth’s biodiversity is the number
of different species of organisms that live on Earth. At least 10 million different species live on Earth today. They are commonly
grouped into six different kingdoms. Examples of organis ms within each kingdom are shown in Figure below.

1.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8266
Diversity of life from Archaebacteria to Plants and Animals.
0:00

1.18.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8266Summary
Many individual organisms can be organized into the followin g levels: cells, tissues, organs, and organs systems.
An ecosystem consists of all the populations in a given a rea, together with the nonliving environment.
The biosphere is the part of Earth where all life exists.
The diversity of living things is called biodiversity.
Review
1. Describe the levels of organization of a complex, mul ticellular organism such as a mouse, starting with the c ell.
2. Explain how a population differs from a community.
3. What is an ecosystem?
4. Give three examples of the nonliving environment.0:00

1.18.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82665. What is biodiversity?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Tsutomu Takasu;Archaebacteria:
NASA; Bacteria: De Wood and Chris
Pooley/Agricultural Research Service,
USDA; Protist: Image copyright
MichaelTaylor, 2014; Fungus: Tony
Hisgett; Plant: Mauro Guanandi; Animal:
Elma
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flickr__tpower1978_-_Toray_PPO_Tennis.jpg;
Archaebacteria:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Halobac
teria.jpg; Bacteria:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Campyl
obacter.jpg; Protist:
http://www.shutterstock.com/; Fungus:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/hisgett/40865
03406/; Plant:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mauroguanan
di/2194637211/; Animal:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/24710622@
N05/3230447306/
License: (Archaebactera, Bacteria) Public
Domain; (Protist) License from
Shutterstock; (Fungus, Plant, Animal) CC
BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);Bruce Wetzel and Harry
Schaefer/National Cancer Institute; Mike
Seyfang; Umberto Salvagnin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Organiz
ation_levels_mouse.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SEM_bl
ood_cells.jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikeblogs/31
01400087/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/2865
288013/
License: Public Domain; Public Domain;
CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.0

1.18.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8266
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Archaebacteria: NASA; Bacteria:
De Wood and Chris Pooley/Agricultural
Research Service, USDA; Protist: Image
copyright MichaelTaylor, 2014; Fungus:
Tony Hisgett; Plant: Mauro Guanandi;
Animal: Elma
Source: Archaebacteria:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Halobac
teria.jpg; Bacteria:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Campyl
obacter.jpg; Protist:
http://www.shutterstock.com/; Fungus:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/hisgett/40865
03406/; Plant:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mauroguanan
di/2194637211/; Animal:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/24710622@
N05/3230447306/
License: (Archaebactera, Bacteria) Public
Domain; (Protist) License from
Shutterstock; (Fungus, Plant, Animal) CC
BY 2.0
1.18: Organization of Living Things is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82671.19: Evolution of Life
Are dinosaurs evidence of past life forms?
Evolution can be described as a change in species over time. Dinosaur fossils are significant evidence of evoluti on and of past life
on Earth.
Evolution of Life
The diversity of life on Earth today is the result of evolution. Life began on Earth at least 3.5 to 4 b illion years ago, and it has been
evolving ever since. At first, all living things on Eart h were simple, single-celled organisms. Much later, t he first multicellular
organisms evolved, and after that, Earth’s biodiversi ty greatly increased. Figure below shows a timeline of the history of life on
Earth.

1.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8267
This timeline shows the history of life on Earth. In the entire span of t he time, humans are a relatively new addition.
Today, the most accepted theory of life on Earth is evolution, and there is a vast amount of evidence sup porting this theory.
However, this wasn’t always the case.
Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
The idea of evolution has been around for centuries. In fact, it goes all the way back to the ancient Gr eek philosopher Aristotle.
However, evolution is most often associated with Charles Darwin. Darwin published a book on evolution in 1859 ti tled On the
Origin of Species. In the book, Darwin stated the theory of evolution by natural selection. He also presented a great deal of
evidence that evolution occurs.
Evolution is a change in the characteristics of living things over time. As described by Darwin, evolution occurs by a process
called natural selection. In natural selection, some members of a species, being better adapted or suited to their environment,
produce more offspring than others, so they pass "adv antageous traits" to their offspring. Over many gene rations, this can lead to
major changes in the characteristics of the species. Evo lution explains how living things are changing today and how modern living
things have descended from ancient life forms that no longer exist on Earth. As living things evolve, they generally become better
suited for their environment. This is because they ev olve adaptations. An adaptation is a trait that helps an organism survive and
reproduce in a given environment.
Asa pSCIEN CE
The Evolution of Life on Earth
The Evolution of Life on Earth
Watch on

1.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8267Despite all the evidence Darwin presented, his theory wa s not well-received at first. Many people found it ha rd to accept the idea
that humans had evolved from an ape-like ancestor, an d they saw evolution as a challenge to their religiou s beliefs. Look at the
cartoon in Figure below. Drawn in 1871, it depicts Darwin himself as an a pe. The cartoon reflects how many people felt about
Darwin and his theory during his own time. Darwin had act ually expected this type of reaction to his theory and had waited a long
time before publishing his book for this reason. It was only when another scientist, named Alfred Russel Wall ace, developed
essentially the same theory of evolution that Darwin put h is book into print.
Charles Darwin’s name is linked with the theory of evolution. This cartoo n from the 1870s makes fun of both Darwin and
his theory.
Although Darwin presented a great deal of evidence for evolution in his book, he was unable to explain how ev olution occurs.
That’s because he knew nothing about genes. As a resul t, he didn’t know how characteristics are passed from p arents to offspring,
let alone how they could change over time.
Evolutionary Theory After Darwin
Since Darwin’s time, scientists have gathered even mor e evidence to support the theory of evolution. Some o f the evidence comes
from fossils, and some comes from studies that show how s imilar living things are to one another. By the 1930s, scientists had also
learned about genes. As a result, they could finally ex plain how characteristics of organisms could pass from one generation to the
next and change over time.
Using modern technology, scientists can now directly com pare the genes of living species. The more genes diff erent species share
in common, the more closely related the species are p resumed to be. Consider humans and chimpanzees. They sh are about 98% of
their genes. This means that they shared a common ance stor in the not-too-distant past. This is just one of m any pieces of evidence
that show we are part of the evolution of life on Earth.
Misconceptions About Evolution
Today, evolution is still questioned by some people. Often, people who disagree with the theory of evolution do not really
understand it. For example, some people think that the t heory of evolution explains how life on Earth first began. In fact, the theory
explains only how life changed after it first appear ed. Some people think the theory of evolution means that humans evolved from
modern apes. In fact, the theory suggests humans and m odern apes have a common ancestor that lived severa l million years ago.
These and other misconceptions about evolution contri bute to the controversy that still surrounds this fun damental principle of
biology.
TED-Ed
Myths and misconceptions about evo
Myths and misconceptions about evo
Watch on

1.19.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8267Summary
Life began on Earth at least 3.5 to 4 billion years ago, and it has been evolving ever since.
Darwin stated the theory of evolution by natural selectio n, presenting a great deal of evidence to support his th eory.
Evolution is a change in the characteristics of living t hings over time. Evolution occurs by natural selection.
Characteristics of organisms are passed from one genera tion to the next through their genes.
Review
1. What is evolution?
2. What is natural selection?
3. Briefly, explain the theory of evolution.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Editorial
_cartoon_depicting_Charles_Darwin_as_an
_ape_%281871%29.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);Hana Zavadska
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Timelin
e_evolution_of_life.svg; CK-12
Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Editorial
_cartoon_depicting_Charles_Darwin_as_an
_ape_%281871%29.jpg
License: Public Domain
1.19: Evolution of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82681.20: Significance of Carbon
Carbon. Element number six. Right in the middle of the first row of the Periodic Table. So what?
Carbon is the most important element to life. Withou t this element, life as we know it would not exist. As yo u will see, carbon is
the central element in compounds necessary for life.
The Significance of Carbon
A compound found mainly in living things is known as an organic compound. Organic compounds make up the cells and other
structures of organisms and carry out life processes. Carbon is the main element in organic compounds, so ca rbon is essential to life
on Earth. Without carbon, life as we know it could not ex ist.
Compounds
A compound is a substance that consists of two or more elements. A compound has a unique composition that is always t he same.
The smallest particle of a compound is called a mole cule. Consider water as an example. A molecule of water always contains on e
atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen. The composit ion of water is expressed by the chemical formula H O. A model of a
water molecule is shown in Figure below. Water is not an organic compound.
A water molecule always has this composition, one atom of oxyge n and two atoms of hydrogen.
What causes the atoms of a water molecule to “stick” tog ether? The answer is chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force that
holds molecules together. Chemical bonds form when s ubstances react with one another. A chemical reaction is a process that
changes some chemical substances into others. A chemi cal reaction is needed to form a compound. Another c hemical reaction is
needed to separate the substances in a compound.
Carbon
Why is carbon so basic to life? The reason is carbon’ s ability to form stable bonds with many elements, in cluding itself. This
property allows carbon to form a huge variety of very large and complex molecules. In fact, there are nearl y 10 million carbonbased compounds in living things! However, the millio ns of organic compounds can be grouped into just fo ur major types:
carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. You can compare the four types in Table below. Each type is also described
below.2

1.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8268Type of Compound Examples Elements Functions Monomer
Carbohydrates sugars, starchescarbon, hydrogen,
oxygenprovides energy to cells,
stores energy, forms
body structuresmonosaccharide
Lipids fats, oilscarbon, hydrogen,
oxygenstores energy, forms cell
membranes, carries
messages
Proteins enzymes, antibodiescarbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen, sulfurhelps cells keep their
shape, makes up
muscles, speeds up
chemical reactions,
carries messages and
materialsamino acid
Nucleic Acids DNA, RNAcarbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphoruscontains instructions for
proteins, passes
instructions from parents
to offspring, helps make
proteinsnucleotide
Carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids are large molecules (macromolecules) built from smaller mole cules (monomers) through
dehydration reactions. In a dehydration reaction, water is r emoved as two monomers are joined together.
Further Reading
Elements and Compounds
Summary
Carbon is the main element in organic compounds. Carbon c an form stable bonds with many elements, including itsel f.
There are four major types of organic compounds: carbohydr ates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids.
Review
1. What is a compound?
2. Explain why carbon is essential to all known life on Eart h.
3. What are the four main types of organic compounds?
4. Which type(s) of organic compounds provide energy?
5. Which organic compound stores genetic information?
B e Sm a rt
The Recipe For Life…
The Recipe For Life…
Watch on

1.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/82686. Examples of proteins include ____________.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
1.20: Significance of Carbon is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Cell Biology
2.1: Cell Organization
2.2: Diffusion
2.3: Osmosis
2.4: Passive Transport
2.5: Active Transport
2.6: Sodium-Potassium Pump
2.7: Exocytosis and Endocytosis
2.8: Autotrophs and Heterotrophs
2.9: Glucose and ATP
2.10: Chloroplast
2.11: Parts of the Cell
2.12: Leaves and Photosynthesis
2.13: Photosynthesis
2.14: Calvin Cycle
2.15: Photosynthesis Summary
2.16: Chemosynthesis
2.17: Cellular Respiration
2.18: Glycolysis
2.19: Krebs Cycle
2.20: Electron Transport
2.21: Fermentation
2.22: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
2.23: Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration
2.24: Cell Division
2.25: Cell Cycle
2.26: Chromosomes
2.27: Mitosis
2.28: Reproduction
2.29: Meiosis
2.30: Gametogenesis
2.31: Genetic Variation
2.32: Life Cycle
2.33: Phospholipid Bilayer
2.34: Membrane Proteins
2.35: Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton
2.36: Nucleus
2.37: Ribosomes and Mitochondria
2.38: Cell Structure
2.39: Plant Cell Structure

2This page titled 2: Cell Biology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

2.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83552.1: Cell Organization
Why be organized?
It can be said organization leads to efficiency. And in you, cells are organized into tissues, which are organized into o rgans, which
are organized into organ systems, which form you. And it can be said that the human body is a very organized and efficient system.
Organization of Cells
Biological organization exists at all levels in organ isms. It can be seen at the smallest level, in the molecu les that made up such
things as DNA and proteins, to the largest level, in an organism such as a blue whale, the largest mammal on Earth. Similarly,
single celled prokaryotes and eukaryotes show order in the way their cells are arranged. Single-celled orga nisms such as an amoeba
are free-floating and independent-living. Their singl e-celled "bodies" are able to carry out all the pro cesses of life, such as
metabolism and respiration, without help from other cells. Some single-celled organisms, such as bacteria, can group together and
form a biofilm. A biofilm is a large grouping of many bacteria that sticks to a surface and makes a protective coati ng over itself.
Biofilms can show similarities to multicellular organi sms. Division of labor is the process in which one grou p of cells does one job
(such as making the "glue" that sticks the biofilm to the surface), while another group of cells does anot her job (such as taking in
nutrients). Multicellular organisms carry out their life processes through division of labor. They have specialized cells that do
specific jobs. However, biofilms are not considered mu lticellular organisms and are instead called colonia l organisms. The
difference between a multicellular organism and a co lonial organism is that individual organisms from a colony or biofilm can, if
separated, survive on their own, while cells from a multicel lular organism (e.g., liver cells) cannot.
Colonial algae of the genus
Volvox
Colonial Organisms
Colonial organisms were probably one of the first evolutionary steps to wards multicellular organisms. Algae of the genus Volvox
are an example of the border between colonial organisms and multicellular organisms.
Each Volvox, shown in the Figure above, is a colonial organism. It is made up of between 1,0 00 to 3,000 photosynthetic algae that
are grouped together into a hollow sphere. The spher e has a distinct front and back end. The cells have e yespots, which are more
developed in the cells near the front. This enables the colon y to swim towards light.

2.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8355Origin of Multicellularity
The oldest known multicellular organism is a red alg ae Bangiomorpha pubescens, fossils of which were found in 1.2 billion-yearold rock. As the first organisms were single-celled, these organisms had to evolve into multicellular organisms.
Scientists think that multicellularity arose from co operation between many organisms of the same species. The Colonial Theory
proposes that this cooperation led to the developme nt of a multicellular organism. Many examples of coop eration between
organisms in nature have been observed. For example, a certain species of amoeba (a single-celled protist) groups together during
times of food shortage and forms a colony that move s as one to a new location. Some of these amoebas the n become slightly
differentiated from each other. Volvox, shown in the Figure above, is another example of a colonial organism. Most scien tists
accept that the Colonial Theory explains how multicellul ar organisms evolved.
Multicellular organisms are organisms that are made up of more than one ty pe of cell and have specialized cells that are group ed
together to carry out specialized functions. Most life that you can see without a microscope is multicellular. As discussed earlier,
the cells of a multicellular organism would not survi ve as independent cells. The body of a multicellula r organism, such as a tree or
a cat, exhibits organization at several levels: tissue s, organs, and organ systems. Similar cells are grouped into tissues, groups of
tissues make up organs, and organs with a similar function ar e grouped into an organ system.
Levels of Organization in Multicellular Organisms
The simplest living multicellular organisms, sponges, are m ade of many specialized types of cells that work tog ether for a common
goal. Such cell types include digestive cells, tubul ar pore cells, and epidermal cells. Though the diff erent cell types create a large,
organized, multicellular structure — the visible spon ge — they are not organized into true interconnecte d tissues. If a sponge is
broken up by passing it through a sieve, the sponge will reform on the other side. However, if the sponge’ s cells are separated from
each other, the individual cell types cannot survive alone. Simpler colonial organisms, such as members of the genus Volvox, as
shown in the Figure above, differ in that their individual cells are fr ee-living and can survive on their own if separated from the
colony.
This roundworm, a multicellular organism, was stained to highlight the nucle i of all the cells in its body (red dots).
A tissue is a group of connected cells that have a similar function within an organism. More complex organisms suc h as jellyfish,
coral, and sea anemones have a tissue level of organiz ation. For example, jellyfish have tissues that have separate protective,
digestive, and sensory functions.
Even more complex organisms, such as the roundworm s hown in the Figure above, while also having differentiated cells and
tissues, have an organ level of development. An organ is a group of tissues that has a specific function o r group of functions.
Organs can be as primitive as the brain of a flatworm (a group of nerve cells), as large as the stem of a sequoia (up to 90 meters, or
300 feet, in height), or as complex as a human liver.
The most complex organisms (such as mammals, trees, and flowers) have organ systems. An organ system is a group of organs
that act together to carry out complex related func tions, with each organ focusing on a part of the task. An example is the human
digestive system, in which the mouth ingests food, the st omach crushes and liquifies it, the pancreas and gall b ladder make and
release digestive enzymes, and the intestines absorb nutrien ts into the blood.

2.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8355Summary
Single-celled organisms are able to carry out all the proce sses of life without help from other cells.
Multicellular organisms carry out their life processes t hrough division of labor. They have specialized cells t hat do specific jobs.
The Colonial Theory proposes that cooperation among cells of the same species led to the development of a mult icellular
organism.
Multicellular organisms, depending on their complexity, may be organized from cells to tissues, organs, and organ systems.
Review
1. What is a multicellular organism?
2. What is a cell feature that distinguishes a colonial org anism from a multicellular organism?
3. What is the difference between a cell and a tissue?
Am oe ba Siste rs
Biological Levels in Biology: The Wo
Biological Levels in Biology: The Wo
Watch on

2.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83554. Describe the top two levels of organization of an organi sm.
Image Reference Reference
[Figure 1]Credit: The Evolution of Self-Fertile
Hermaphroditism: The Fog Is Clearing.
PLoS Biol 3(1): e30.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030030
Source: biology.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?
request=slideshow&#38; type=figure&#38
; doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0030030&#38;
id=20204
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: Dr. Ralf Wagner;Patrick J. Lynch,
medical illustrator; C. Carl Jaffe, MD,
cardiologist
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:V olvox_
aureus_3_Ansichten.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_m
yocardium_diagram.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0; CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: The Evolution of Self-Fertile
Hermaphroditism: The Fog Is Clearing.
PLoS Biol 3(1): e30.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030030
Source: biology.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?
request=slideshow&#38; type=figure&#38
; doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0030030&#38;
id=20204
License: CC BY 2.5
2.1: Cell Organization is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83562.2: Diffusion
What will eventually happen to these dyes?
They will all blend together. The dyes will move throu gh the water until an even distribution is achieved. The process of moving
from areas of high amounts to areas of low amounts is calle d diffusion.
Passive Transport
Probably the most important feature of a cell’s phosp holipid membranes is that they are selectively permeable or semipermeable.
A membrane that is selectively permeable has contro l over what molecules or ions can enter or leave the cell, as shown in the
Figure below. The permeability of a membrane is dependent on the organization and characteristics of the mem brane lipids and
proteins. In this way, cell membranes help maintain a state of homeostasis within cells (and tissues, organs, and organ systems) so
that an organism can stay alive and healthy.
A selectively permeable membrane allows certain molecules thro ugh, but not others.
Transport Across Membranes
The molecular make-up of the phospholipid bilayer li mits the types of molecules that can pass through it. For example,
hydrophobic (water-hating) molecules, such as carbon dioxide (CO) and oxygen (O), can easily pass through the lipid b ilayer,
but ions such as calcium (Ca) and polar molecules suc h as water (H O) cannot. The hydrophobic interior of the phosph olipid
bilayer does not allow ions or polar molecules throu gh because these molecules are hydrophilic, or water loving. In addition, large2 2
2+2

2.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8356molecules such as sugars and proteins are too big to pass through the bilayer. Transport proteins within the membrane allow these
molecules to pass through the membrane, and into or out of the cell. This way, polar molecules avoid cont act with the nonpolar
interior of the membrane, and large molecules are moved through large pores.
Every cell is contained within a membrane punctuated with transport proteins that act as channels or pumps to let in or force out
certain molecules. The purpose of the transport pro teins is to protect the cell's internal environment and to keep its balance of salts,
nutrients, and proteins within a range that keeps the cel l and the organism alive.
There are three main ways that molecules can pass thr ough a phospholipid membrane. The first way requires no energy input by
the cell and is called passive transport. The second way requires that the cell uses energy to pull in or p ump out certain molecules
and ions and is called active transport. The third wa y is through vesicle transport, in which large molecul es are moved across the
membrane in bubble-like sacks that are made from piece s of the membrane.
Passive transport is a way that small molecules or ions move across th e cell membrane without input of energy by the cell. The
three main kinds of passive transport are diffusion, os mosis, and facilitated diffusion.
Diffusion
Diffusion is the movement of molecules from an area of high c oncentration of the molecules to an area with a lower concentration.
The difference in the concentrations of the molecul es in the two areas is called the concentration gradient. Diffusion will continue
until this gradient has been eliminated. Since diffus ion moves materials from an area of higher concentra tion to the lower, it is
described as moving solutes "down the concentration gr adient." The end result of diffusion is an equal co ncentration, or
equilibrium, of molecules on both sides of the membrane.
If a molecule can pass freely through a cell membrane, it wi ll cross the membrane by diffusion (see the Figure below).
Molecules move from an area of high concentration to an area of lower co ncentration until an equilibrium is met. The
molecules continue to cross the membrane at equilibrium, but at equal rat es in both directions.
R icoch e tScie n ce
Diffusion
Diffusion
Watch on

2.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8356Summary
The cell membrane is selectively permeable, allowing only certain substances to pass through.
Passive transport is a way that small molecules or ions mov e across the cell membrane without input of energy by the cell. The
three main kinds of passive transport are diffusion, os mosis, and facilitated diffusion.
Diffusion is the movement of molecules from an area of h igh concentration of the molecules to an area with a lower
concentration.
Review
1. Define semipermeable.
2. What is diffusion?
3. What is a concentration gradient?
4. What is meant by passive transport?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Julo (Wikimedia);Oak Ridge
National Laboratory;Hana Zavadska, based
on image by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BloodPr
essure.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fatmous
e.jpg; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Pidalka44/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on image by
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg);User:Pidalka44/Wikimedia
Commons;LadyofHats
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
2.2: Diffusion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83572.3: Osmosis
Saltwater Fish vs. Freshwater Fish?
Fish cells, like all cells, have semi-permeable membranes. Even tually, the concentration of "stuff" on either side of them will even
out. A fish that lives in salt water will have somewhat salty water inside itself. Put it in the freshwater, and the freshwater will,
through osmosis, enter the fish, causing its cells to swel l, and the fish will die. What will happen to a freshwater fi sh in the ocean?
Osmosis
Imagine you have a cup that has 100ml water, and you add 15g of table sugar to the water. The sug ar dissolves and the mixture that
is now in the cup is made up of a solute (the sugar) that is dissolved in the solvent (the water). The mixture of a solute in a solvent
is called a solution.
Imagine now that you have a second cup with 100ml of water, and you add 45 grams of table sugar to the water. Just like the first
cup, the sugar is the solute, and the water is the solven t. But now you have two mixtures of different solute con centrations. In
comparing two solutions of unequal solute concentratio n, the solution with the higher solute concentration i s hypertonic, and the
solution with the lower solute concentration is hypotonic. Solutions of equal solute concentration are isotonic. The first sugar
solution is hypotonic to the second solution. The sec ond sugar solution is hypertonic to the first.
You now add the two solutions to a beaker that has bee n divided by a selectively permeable membrane, with p ores that are too
small for the sugar molecules to pass through, but are big enough for the water molecules to pass through. Th e hypertonic solution
is on one side of the membrane and the hypotonic so lution on the other. The hypertonic solution has a lo wer water concentration
than the hypotonic solution, so a concentration grad ient of water now exists across the membrane. Water m olecules will move from
the side of higher water concentration to the side of lower concentration until both solutions are isotoni c. At this point, equilibrium
is reached.
Osmosis is the diffusion of water molecules across a selectiv ely permeable membrane from an area of higher conce ntration to an
area of lower concentration. Water moves into and out of cells by osmosis. If a cell is in a hypertonic solution, the solution has a
lower water concentration than the cell cytosol, and wa ter moves out of the cell until both solutions are i sotonic. Cells placed in a
hypotonic solution will take in water across their membrane u ntil both the external solution and the cytosol are isot onic.
A cell that does not have a rigid cell wall, such as a red blood cell, will swell and lyse (burst) when place d in a hypotonic solution.
Cells with a cell wall will swell when placed in a hypot onic solution, but once the cell is turgid (firm), the tough cell wall prevents
any more water from entering the cell. When placed i n a hypertonic solution, a cell without a cell wall will lose water to the
environment, shrivel, and probably die. In a hypert onic solution, a cell with a cell wall will lose water too. The plasma membrane
pulls away from the cell wall as it shrivels, a process called plasmolysis. Animal cells tend to do best in an isotonic environ ment,
plant cells tend to do best in a hypotonic environment. This is demonstrated in the Figure below.

2.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8357
Unless an animal cell (such as the red blood cell in the top panel) has an adaptati on that allows it to alter the osmotic uptake
of water, it will lose too much water and shrivel up in a hypertonic envi ronment. If placed in a hypotonic solution, water
molecules will enter the cell, causing it to swell and burst. Plant cell s (bottom panel) become plasmolyzed in a hypertonic
solution, but tend to do best in a hypotonic environment. Water is stored in the central vacuole of the plant cell.
Osmotic Pressure
When water moves into a cell by osmosis, osmotic pre ssure may build up inside the cell. If a cell has a ce ll wall, the wall helps
maintain the cell’s water balance. Osmotic pressure is the main cause of support in many plants. When a plant cell is in a
hypotonic environment, the osmotic entry of water rai ses the turgor pressure exerted against the cell wall un til the pressure prevents
more water from coming into the cell. At this point th e plant cell is turgid (see the Figure below). The effects of osmotic pressures
on plant cells are shown in the Figure below.
The central vacuoles of the plant cells in this image are full of wa ter, so the cells are turgid.
The action of osmosis can be very harmful to organisms, especially ones without cell walls. For example, if a saltwater fish (whose
cells are isotonic with seawater), is placed in fresh wat er, its cells will take on excess water, lyse, and the fis h will die. Another
example of a harmful osmotic effect is the use of table salt to kill slugs and snails.
Controlling Osmosis
Organisms that live in a hypotonic environment such a s freshwater, need a way to prevent their cells from tak ing in too much water
by osmosis. A contractile vacuole is a type of vacuole that removes excess water from a cell. Freshwater protists, such as the
paramecium shown in the Figure below, have a contractile vacuole. The vacuole is surrounded by several canals, which absorb
water by osmosis from the cytoplasm. After the canals fill with water, the water is pumped into the vacuole. When the vacuole is
full, it pushes the water out of the cell through a pore.

2.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8357
The contractile vacuole is the star-like structure within the parame cia.
Summary
Osmosis is the diffusion of water.
In comparing two solutions of unequal solute concentrati on, the solution with the higher solute concentration is h ypertonic, and
the solution with the lower concentration is hypotonic. Solutions of equal solute concentration are isotonic.
A contractile vacuole is a type of vacuole that removes excess water from a cell.
Review
1. What is osmosis? What type of transport is it?
2. How does osmosis differ from diffusion?
3. What happens to red blood cells when placed in a hypoton ic solution?
Am oe ba Siste rs
Osmosis and Water P otential (Updat
Osmosis and Water P otential (Updat
Watch on

2.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83574. What will happen to a salt water fish if placed in fresh water?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright
Lebendkulturen.de, 2014;Hana Zavadska,
based on image by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg);By LadyofHats (did it myself
based on [1], [2],[3] and [4].) [Public
domain], via Wikimedia
Commons;OpenStax College
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; CK12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:0307_O
smosis.jpg
License: License from Shutterstock; CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);User:Pidalka44/Wikimedia
Commons;Hana Zavadska, based on image
by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Osmotic
_pressure_on_blood_cells_diagram.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turgor_
pressure_on_plant_cells_diagram.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png; CK-12
Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit:
Flickr:fickleandfreckled;User:Pidalka44/Wi
kimedia Commons;Hana Zavadska, based
on image by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/fickleandfrec
kled/7980692858/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png; CK-12
Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0; Public Domain; CC
BY-NC 3.0

2.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8357
[Figure 4]Credit: Image copyright
Lebendkulturen.de,
2014;User:Pidalka44/Wikimedia
Commons;Hana Zavadska, based on image
by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png; CK-12
Foundation
License: License from Shutterstock; Public
Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
2.3: Osmosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83582.4: Passive Transport
Can you help me move?
Often a large truck might be needed if you are movin g a large piece of furniture. Just as a truck is neede d to help move furniture
from one location to another, a cell needs help movi ng things as well, or facilitating the diffusion pro cess. This would be the job of
a special type of protein.
Facilitated Diffusion
What happens if a substance needs assistance to move across or through the plasma membrane? Facilitated diffusion is the
diffusion of solutes through transport proteins in t he plasma membrane. Facilitated diffusion is a type of passive transport. Even
though facilitated diffusion involves transport prot eins, it is still passive transport because the solute is moving down the
concentration gradient.
Small nonpolar molecules can easily diffuse across the cell membrane. However, due to the hydrophobic nature of the lipids that
make up cell membranes, polar molecules (such as water) and ions cannot do so. Instead, they diffuse across the membrane through
transport proteins. A transport protein completely spans the membrane, and allows certain m olecules or ions to diffuse across the
membrane. Channel proteins, gated channel proteins, and carrier proteins are three types of transport p roteins that are involved in
facilitated diffusion.
A channel protein, a type of transport protein, acts like a pore in t he membrane that lets water molecules or small ions through
quickly. Water channel proteins (aquaporins) allow wat er to diffuse across the membrane at a very fast rat e. Ion channel proteins
allow ions to diffuse across the membrane.
A gated channel protein is a transport protein that opens a "gate," allowing a molecule to pass through the membrane. Gated
channels have a binding site that is specific for a given molecule or ion. A stimulus causes the "gate" to open or shut. The stimulus
may be chemical or electrical signals, temperature, or mechanical force, depending on the type of gated channel. For example, the
sodium gated channels of a nerve cell are stimulate d by a chemical signal which causes them to open and a llow sodium ions into
the cell. Glucose molecules are too big to diffuse th rough the plasma membrane easily, so they are moved across the membrane
through gated channels. In this way glucose diffuses very quickly across a cell membrane, which is importan t because many cells
depend on glucose for energy.
A carrier protein is a transport protein that is specific for an ion, molecule, or group of substances. Carrier proteins "carry" the ion
or molecule across the membrane by changing shape aft er the binding of the ion or molecule. Carrier prote ins are involved in
passive and active transport. A model of a channel protein and carrier proteins is shown in the Figure below.

2.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8358
Facilitated diffusion through the cell membrane. Channel proteins and carrier proteins are shown (but not a gated-channel
protein). Water molecules and ions move through channel proteins. O ther ions or molecules are also carried across the cell
membrane by carrier proteins. The ion or molecule binds to the active site of a carrier protein. The carrier protein chang es
shape, and releases the ion or molecule on the other side of the membrane. The carrier protein then returns to its original
shape.
Ion Channels
Ions such as sodium (Na), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), a nd chloride (Cl), are important for many cell functi ons. Because they
are charged (polar), these ions do not diffuse throug h the membrane. Instead they move through ion chann el proteins where they
are protected from the hydrophobic interior of the membrane. Ion channels allow the formation of a concentration gradient
between the extracellular fluid and the cytosol. Ion channels are very specific, as they allow only certa in ions through the cell
membrane. Some ion channels are always open, others ar e "gated" and can be opened or closed. Gated ion cha nnels can open or
close in response to different types of stimuli, such as electrical or chemical signals.
Summary
Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion of solutes through transport proteins in the plasma membrane. Channel p roteins, gated
channel proteins, and carrier proteins are three types of transport proteins that are involved in facilitated d iffusion.
Review
1. What is facilitated diffusion?
2. What is a transport protein? Give three examples.
3. Assume a molecule must cross the plasma membrane into a cell. The molecule is very large. How will it be transported into the
cell?
4. Explain how carrier proteins function?+ + 2+ Stu dy.com
P assive T ransport in Cells: Simple an
P assive T ransport in Cells: Simple an
Watch on

2.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83585. Explain the role of ion channels. Why are ion channels necessary?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on image by
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg);User:Pidalka44/Wikimedia
Commons;Hana Zavadska, based on image
by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Semiper
meable_membrane.png
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
2.4: Passive Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83592.5: Active Transport
Need to move something really heavy?
If you did, it would take a lot of energy. Sometimes, mo ving things into or out of the cell also takes energ y. How would the cell
move something against a concentration gradient? It s tarts by using energy.
Active Transport
In contrast to facilitated diffusion, which does not require energy and carries molecules or ions down a concentration gradient,
active transport pumps molecules and ions against a concentration gradient. Sometimes an organism needs to transport something
against a concentration gradient. The only way this can be done is through active transport, which uses e nergy in the form of ATP
(adenosine triphosphate) that is produced by cellular respiration. In active transport, the particles move across a cell membrane
from a lower concentration to a higher concentration. Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumping molecule s and
ions across membranes "uphill" - against a concentratio n gradient.
The active transport of small molecules or ions across a cell membrane is generally carried out by transport pr oteins that are
found in the membrane.
Larger molecules such as starch can also be actively tran sported across the cell membrane by processes called end ocytosis and
exocytosis.
Homeostasis and Cell Function
Homeostasis refers to the balance, or equilibrium, within the ce ll or a body. It is an organism’s ability to keep a constant internal
environment. Keeping a stable internal environment r equires constant adjustments as conditions change in side and outside the cell.
The adjusting of systems within a cell is called home ostatic regulation. Because the internal and extern al environments of a cell are
constantly changing, adjustments must be made contin uously to stay at or near the set point (the normal l evel or range).
Homeostasis is a dynamic equilibrium rather than an unc hanging state. The cellular processes discussed in bo th the Diffusion and
DrB ru ce F orcie a
Diffusion, Osmosis, Active T ransport
Diffusion, Osmosis, Active T ransport
Watch on

2.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8359Active Transport concepts all play an important role in homeostatic regulation. You will learn more about homeostasis in o ther
concepts.
Summary
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumpi ng molecules and ions across membranes against a concen tration
gradient.
Active transport processes help maintain homeostasis.
Review
1. What is active transport?
2. Explain how cell transport helps an organism maintain ho meostasis.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Oak Ridge National
Laboratory;Hana Zavadska, based on image
by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...embrane
-en.svg)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fatmous
e.jpg; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
2.5: Active Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83602.6: Sodium-Potassium Pump
What is this incredible object?
Would it surprise you to learn that it is a human c ell? The image represents an active human nerve cell. How nerve cells function
will be the focus of another concept. However, active t ransport processes play a significant role in the func tion of these cells.
Specifically, it is the sodium-potassium pump that is act ive in the axons of these nerve cells.
The Sodium-Potassium Pump
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumping molecul es and ions across membranes "uphill" - against a
concentration gradient. To move these molecules again st their concentration gradient, a carrier protein i s needed. Carrier proteins
can work with a concentration gradient (during passiv e transport), but some carrier proteins can move solut es against the
concentration gradient (from low concentration to hi gh concentration), with an input of energy. In activ e transport, as carrier
proteins are used to move materials against their co ncentration gradient, these proteins are known as pump s. As in other types of
cellular activities, ATP supplies the energy for most active transport. One way ATP powers active transport is b y transferring a
phosphate group directly to a carrier protein. This may cause the carrier protein to change its shape, wh ich moves the molecule or
ion to the other side of the membrane. An example of this type of active transport system, as shown in th e Figure below, is the
sodium-potassium pump, which exchanges sodium ions for potassium ions across the plasma membrane of animal cells.
The sodium-potassium pump system moves sodium and potassium ions against larg e concentration gradients. It moves two
potassium ions into the cell where potassium levels are high, and pumps three sodi um ions out of the cell and into the
extracellular fluid.
As is shown in the Figure above, three sodium ions bind with the protein pump inside t he cell. The carrier protein then gets energy
from ATP and changes shape. In doing so, it pumps the three sodium ions out of the cell. At that point, two potassium ions from
outside the cell bind to the protein pump. The potass ium ions are then transported into the cell, and the process repeats. The

2.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8360sodium-potassium pump is found in the plasma membrane of almost every human cell and is common to all cell ular life. It helps
maintain cell potential and regulates cellular volume.
The Electrochemical Gradient
The active transport of ions across the membrane cau ses an electrical gradient to build up across the pl asma membrane. The
number of positively charged ions outside the cell i s greater than the number of positively charged ions in the cytosol. This results
in a relatively negative charge on the inside of the membrane, and a positive charge on the outside. This difference in charges
causes a voltage across the membrane. V oltage is elect rical potential energy that is caused by a separati on of opposite charges, in
this case across the membrane. The voltage across a m embrane is called membrane potential. Membrane potential is very
important for the conduction of electrical impulses alo ng nerve cells.
Because the inside of the cell is negative compared to outside the cell, the membrane potential favors t he movement of positively
charged ions (cations) into the cell, and the movemen t of negative ions (anions) out of the cell. So, the re are two forces that drive
the diffusion of ions across the plasma membrane—a che mical force (the ions' concentration gradient), and a n electrical force (the
effect of the membrane potential on the ions’ movem ent). These two forces working together are called an electrochemical
gradient, and will be discussed in detail in "Nerve Cells" and "Nerve Impulses" concepts.
Summary
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumpi ng molecules and ions across membranes against a concen tration
gradient.
The sodium-potassium pump is an active transport pump that exchanges sodium ions for potassium ions.
Review
1. What is active transport?
2. What type of protein is involved in active transport?
3. Describe how the sodium-potassium pump functions.
T e a ch e r's P e t
Active T ransport
Active T ransport
Watch on

2.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83604. What is the electrochemical gradient?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Scheme
_sodium-potassium_pump-en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Scheme
_sodium-potassium_pump-en.svg
License: Public Domain
2.6: Sodium-Potassium Pump is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83612.7: Exocytosis and Endocytosis
What does a cell "eat"?
Is it possible for objects larger than a small molec ule to be engulfed by a cell? Of course it is. This image depicts a cancer cell
being attacked by a cell of the immune system. Cells of the immune system consistently destroy pathogens by essentially "eating"
them.
Vesicle Transport
Some molecules or particles are just too large to pas s through the plasma membrane or to move through a t ransport protein. So
cells use two other active transport processes to move these macromolecules (large molecules) into or out of th e cell. Vesicles or
other bodies in the cytoplasm move macromolecules o r large particles across the plasma membrane. There ar e two types of vesicle
transport, endocytosis and exocytosis (illustrated in the Figure below). Both processes are active transport processes, requiring
energy.
Illustration of the two types of vesicle transport, exocytosis and e ndocytosis.
Endocytosis and Exocytosis
Endocytosis is the process of capturing a substance or particle f rom outside the cell by engulfing it with the cell me mbrane. The
membrane folds over the substance and it becomes co mpletely enclosed by the membrane. At this point a mem brane-bound sac, or
vesicle, pinches off and moves the substance into the cyto sol. There are two main kinds of endocytosis:
Phagocytosis, or cellular eating, occurs when the dissolved materials enter the cell. T he plasma membrane engulfs the solid
material, forming a phagocytic vesicle.
Pinocytosis, or cellular drinking, occurs when the plasma membrane folds inward to form a ch annel allowing dissolved
substances to enter the cell, as shown in the Figure below. When the channel is closed, the liquid is encirc led within a pinocytic

2.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8361vesicle.
Transmission electron microscope image of brain tissue that shows pi nocytotic vesicles. Pinocytosis is a type of endocytosis.
Exocytosis describes the process of vesicles fusing with the pla sma membrane and releasing their contents to the out side of the
cell, as shown in the Figure below. Exocytosis occurs when a cell produces substa nces for export, such as a protein, or when the
cell is getting rid of a waste product or a toxin. Ne wly made membrane proteins and membrane lipids are m oved on top the plasma
membrane by exocytosis.
Illustration of an axon releasing dopamine by exocytosis.

2.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8361Summary
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumpi ng molecules and ions across membranes against a concen tration
gradient.
Endocytosis is the process of capturing a substance or parti cle from outside the cell by engulfing it with the cell m embrane, and
bringing it into the cell.
Exocytosis describes the process of vesicles fusing with t he plasma membrane and releasing their contents to the outs ide of the
cell.
Both endocytosis and exocytosis are active transport pr ocesses.
Review
1. What is the difference between endocytosis and exocy tosis?
2. Why is pinocytosis a form of endocytosis?
Ca rpe N octu m
Cell Membrane, Exocitosis & Endocit
Cell Membrane, Exocitosis & Endocit
Watch on

2.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83613. Are vesicles involved in passive transport? Explain.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on image by
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...um_pu
mp-en.svg)
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;Hana Zavadska, based on
image by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...um_pu
mp-en.svg)
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Louisa Howard, Miguel MarinPadilla;Hana Zavadska, based on image by
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...um_pu
mp-en.svg)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Junction
al_complex_and_pinocytotic_vesicles__embryonic_brain-TEM.jpg; CK-12
Foundation
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Image copyright Andrea Danti,
2014;Hana Zavadska, based on image by
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
(commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...um_pu
mp-en.svg)
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; CK12 Foundation
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
2.7: Exocytosis and Endocytosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83622.8: Autotrophs and Heterotrophs
Name one major difference between a plant and an animal.
There are many differences, but in terms of energy, i t all starts with sunlight. Plants absorb the energy fr om the sun and turn it into
food. You can sit in the sun for hours and hours. You wil l feel warm, but you're not going to absorb any ener gy. You have to eat to
obtain your energy.
Autotrophs vs. Heterotrophs
Living organisms obtain chemical energy in one of two ways.
Autotrophs, shown in Figure below, store chemical energy in carbohydrate food molecules they build themselves. Food is
chemical energy stored in organic molecules. Food pr ovides both the energy to do work and the carbon to b uild bodies. Because
most autotrophs transform sunlight to make food, we c all the process they use photosynthesis. Only three groups of organisms plants, algae, and some bacteria - are capable of this life-giving energy transform ation. Autotrophs make food for their own use, but
they make enough to support other life as well. Almost all other organisms depend absolutely on these thre e groups for the food
they produce. The producers, as autotrophs are also known, begin food chains which feed all life.
Heterotrophs cannot make their own food, so they must eat or abso rb it. For this reason, heterotrophs are also known as
consumers. Consumers include all animals and fungi and many protists and bacteria. They may consume autotrophs or other
heterotrophs or organic molecules from other organi sms. Heterotrophs show great diversity and may appear far more fascinating
than producers. But heterotrophs are limited by our u tter dependence on those autotrophs that originally made our food. If plants,
algae, and autotrophic bacteria vanished from earth, animals, fungi, and other heterotrophs would soon disa ppear as well. All life
requires a constant input of energy. Only autotrophs can transform that ultimate, solar source into the chemical energy in food that
powers life, as shown in Figure below.

2.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8362
Photosynthesis provides over 99 percent of the energ y for life on earth. A much smaller group of autotro phs - mostly bacteria in
dark or low-oxygen environments - produce food using the chemical energy stored in inorganic molecules su ch as hydrogen
sulfide, ammonia, or methane. While photosynthesis tr ansforms light energy to chemical energy, this alterna te method of making
food transfers chemical energy from inorganic to or ganic molecules. It is therefore called chemosynthesis, and is characteristic of
the tubeworms shown in Figure below. Some of the most recently discovered chemosynthe tic bacteria inhabit deep ocean hot water
vents or “black smokers.” There, they use the energy in gases from the Earth’s interior to produce food for a variety of unique
heterotrophs: giant tube worms, blind shrimp, giant white crabs, and armored snails. Some scientists think tha t chemosynthesis may
support life below the surface of Mars, Jupiter's moon, Europa, and other planets as well. E cosystems based on chemosynthesis
may seem rare and exotic, but they too illustrate the abso lute dependence of heterotrophs on autotrophs for food.
A food chain shows how energy and matter flow from producers to consumers. Matter is recycled, but energy must keep
flowing into the system. Where does this energy come from? Though this food c hains "ends" with decomposers, do
decomposers, in fact, digest matter from each level of the food chai n?

2.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8362
Tubeworms deep in the Galapagos Rift get their energy from chemosynthetic bacteria living within their tissues. No
digestive systems needed!
Making and Using Food
The flow of energy through living organisms begins with photosynthesis. This process stores energy from sunl ight in the chemical
bonds of glucose. By breaking the chemical bonds in g lucose, cells release the stored energy and make the ATP (also known as
adenosine triphosphate, an energy-carrying molecule) they need. The process in which glucose is broken down and ATP is made is
called cellular respiration.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are like two sides of the same coin. This is apparent from Figure below. The products of
one process are the reactants of the other. Together, the two processes store and release energy in livi ng organisms. The two
processes also work together to recycle oxygen in Earth’s a tmosphere.
This diagram compares and contrasts photosynthesis and cellular respirati on. It also shows how the two processes are
related.
Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is often considered to be the single mo st important life process on Earth. It changes light energy into chemical
energy and also releases oxygen. Without photosynthe sis, there would be no oxygen in the atmosphere. Photo synthesis involves
many chemical reactions, but they can be summed up in a s ingle chemical equation:
6CO + 6H O + Light Energy → C H O + 6O.
Photosynthetic autotrophs capture light energy from the sun and absorb carbon dioxide and water from their environment. Using
the light energy, they combine the reactants to prod uce glucose and oxygen, which is a waste product. They st ore the glucose,
usually as starch, and they release the oxygen into the atmo sphere.2 2 6 12 6 2

2.8.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8362Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration actually “burns” glucose for ene rgy. However, it doesn’t produce light or intense heat a s some other types of
burning do. This is because it releases the energy i n glucose slowly, in many small steps. It uses the energy that is released to form
molecules of ATP. Cellular respiration involves many che mical reactions, which can be summed up with this chemical eq uation:
C H O + 6O → 6CO + 6H O + Chemical Energy (in ATP)
Cellular respiration occurs in the cells of all living things. It takes place in the cells of both autotrophs and heterotrophs. All of them
burn glucose to form ATP.
Summary
Autotrophs store chemical energy in carbohydrate food mo lecules they build themselves. Most autotrophs make their "fo od"
through photosynthesis using the energy of the sun.
Heterotrophs cannot make their own food, so they must eat or absorb it.
Chemosynthesis is used to produce food using the chemical energy stored in inorganic molecules.
Review
1. Compare autotrophs to heterotrophs, and describe the re lationship between these two groups of organisms.
2. Name and describe the two types of food making processes found among autotrophs. Which is quantitatively more im portant to
life on earth?6 12 6 2 2 2
M a rk Drollin ge r
Autotroph and Heterotroph
Autotroph and Heterotroph
Watch on

2.8.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83623. Describe the flow of energy through a typical food chai n (describing "what eats what"), including the original sour ce of that
energy and its ultimate form after use.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin, using structure by
User:Mysid/Wikimedia Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation (structure
available at
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ATP_str
ucture.svg)
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: (a) Corey Leopold; (b)
Flickr:*higetiger (c) Courtesy of NASA
Source: (a)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/cleopold73/2
669714872/; (b)
www.flickr.com/photos/higetiger/27590958
53; (c)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cyanoba
cteria_guerrero_negro.jpg
License: (A): CC BY 2.0; (B): CC BY 2.0;
(C): Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Courtesy of the NOAA Okeanos
Explorer Program, Galapagos Rift
Expedition 2011;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaphotolib/
9664056402/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.8: Autotrophs and Heterotrophs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.8.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8362

2.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83662.9: Glucose and ATP
Need lots of energy?
To run a marathon, probably. Where does this extra ene rgy come from? Carbohydrate loading is a strategy u sed by endurance
athletes to maximize the storage of energy, in the f orm of glycogen, in the muscles. Glycogen forms an en ergy reserve that can be
quickly mobilized to meet a sudden need for glucose, which is then turned into ATP through the process of cellular res piration.
Glucose and ATP
Energy-Carrying Molecules
You know that the fish you had for lunch contained pr otein molecules. But do you know that the atoms in th at protein could easily
have formed the color in a dragonfly’s eye, the hear t of a water flea, and the whiplike tail of a Euglena before they hit your plate as
sleek fish muscle? Food consists of organic (carbon-co ntaining) molecules which store energy in the chemic al bonds between their
atoms. Organisms use the atoms of food molecules to b uild larger organic molecules including proteins, DNA, an d fats (lipids) and
use the energy in food to power life processes. By brea king the bonds in food molecules, cells release energy to build new
compounds. Although some energy dissipates as heat at e ach energy transfer, much of it is stored in the newly made molecules.
Chemical bonds in organic molecules are a reservoir of the energy used to make them. Fueled by the energ y from food molecules,
cells can combine and recombine the elements of lif e to form thousands of different molecules. Both th e energy (despite some loss)
and the materials (despite being reorganized) pass f rom producer to consumer – perhaps from algal tails, t o water flea hearts, to
dragonfly eye colors, to fish muscle, to you!
The process of photosynthesis, which usually begins the flow of energy through life, uses many different kind s of energy-carrying
molecules to transform sunlight energy into chemical energy and build food. Some carrier molecules hold energy briefly, quickly
shifting it like a hot potato to other molecules. Th is strategy allows energy to be released in small, con trolled amounts. An example
starts in chlorophyll, the green pigment present in most plants, which hel ps convert solar energy to chemical energy. When a
chlorophyll molecule absorbs light energy, electrons are excited and "jump" to a higher energy level. Th e excited electrons then
bounce to a series of carrier molecules, losing a li ttle energy at each step. Most of the "lost" energy powers some small cellular
task, such as moving ions across a membrane or buildin g up another molecule. Another short-term energy car rier important to
photosynthesis, NADPH, holds chemical energy a bit longer but soon "spends" it to help to build sugar.
Two of the most important energy-carrying molecules are glucose and adenosine triphosphate, commonly referred to as ATP.
These are nearly universal fuels throughout the living wor ld and are both key players in photosynthesis, as shown below.

2.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8366Glucose
A molecule of glucose, which has the chemical formula C H O, carries a packet of chemical energy just the right size for
transport and uptake by cells. In your body, glucose is the "deliverable" form o f energy, carried in your blood through capillaries to
each of your 100 trillion cells. Glucose is also the carb ohydrate produced by photosynthesis, and as such is the n ear-universal food
for life.
Glucose is the energy-rich product of photosynthesis, a universal food for l ife. It is also the primary form in which your
bloodstream delivers energy to every cell in your body.
ATP
ATP molecules store smaller quantities of energy, but e ach releases just the right amount to actually do work within a cell. Muscle
cell proteins, for example, pull each other with the e nergy released when bonds in ATP break open (discussed b elow). The process
of photosynthesis also makes and uses ATP - for energy to build glucose! ATP, then, is the useable form of e nergy for your cells.
ATP is commonly referred to as the "energy currency" of th e cell.
Why do we need both glucose and ATP?
Why don’t plants just make ATP and be done with it? I f energy were money, ATP would be a quarter. Enough mo ney to operate a
parking meter or washing machine. Glucose would be a te n dollar bill – much easier to carry around in your wallet, but too large to
do the actual work of paying for parking or washing. J ust as we find several denominations of money useful, or ganisms need
several "denominations" of energy – a smaller quant ity for work within cells, and a larger quantity for stable storage, transport, and
delivery to cells. (Actually a glucose molecule would be about $9.50, as under the proper conditions, up t o 38 ATP are produced for
each glucose molecule.)
Let’s take a closer look at a molecule of ATP. Althou gh it carries less energy than glucose, its structu re is more complex. The "A" in
ATP refers to the majority of the molecule, adenosi ne, a combination of a nitrogenous base and a five-car bon sugar. The "TP"
indicates the three phosphates, linked by bonds which hold the energy actually used by cells. Usually, onl y the outermost bond
breaks to release or spend energy for cellular work.
An ATP molecule, shown in Figure below, is like a rechargeable battery: its energy ca n be used by the cell when it breaks apart
into ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and phosphate, and then the "worn-out battery" ADP can be recharged using new energy to
attach a new phosphate and rebuild ATP. The materials are recyclable, but recall that energy is not!
How much energy does it cost to do your body’s work? A s ingle cell uses about 10 million ATP molecules per s econd, and recycles
all of its ATP molecules about every 20-30 seconds.6 12 6

2.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8366
An arrow shows the bond between two phosphate groups in an ATP molecule. When this bond brea ks, its chemical energy
can do cellular work. The resulting ADP molecule is recycled when new energ y attaches another phosphate, rebuilding ATP.
Summary
Glucose is the carbohydrate produced by photosynthesis. E nergy-rich glucose is delivered through your blood to e ach of your
cells.
ATP is the usable form of energy for your cells.
Review
1. The fact that all organisms use similar energy-carrying molecules shows one aspect of the grand "Unity of Life." Name two
universal energy-carrying molecules, and explain why most organisms need both carriers rather than just one.
2. A single cell uses about 10 million ATP molecules per s econd. Explain how cells use the energy and recycle the mate rials in
ATP.

2.9.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83663. ATP and glucose are both molecules that organisms u se for energy. They are like the tank of a tanker truck t hat delivers gas to a
gas station and the gas tank that holds the fuel for a car. W hich molecule is like the tank of the delivery truck, and wh ich is like
the gas tank of the car? Explain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AlphaD-Glucopyranose.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin, using structure by
User:Mysid/Wikimedia Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation (structure
available at
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ATP_str
ucture.svg)
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.9: Glucose and ATP is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83682.10: Chloroplast
What do pancakes and chloroplasts have in common?
The chloroplast is the site of photosynthesis. Part of the photosynthesis reactions occur in an internal membrane within the
organelle. The chloroplast contains many of these in ternal membranes, making photosynthesis very efficient. These internal
membranes stack on top of each other, just like a stack of panc akes.
Stages of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis occurs in two stages, which are shown in Figure below.
1. Stage I is called the light reactions. This stage uses water and changes light energy from the sun into chemical en ergy stored in
ATP and NADPH (another energy-carrying molecule). This stage a lso releases oxygen as a waste product.
2. Stage II is called the Calvin cycle. This stage combines carbon from carbon dioxide in the ai r and uses the chemical energy in
ATP and NADPH to make glucose.
The two stages of photosynthesis are the light reactions and the Calvin cy cle. Do you see how the two stages are related?
Before you read about these two stages of photosynth esis in greater detail, you need to know more about th e chloroplast, where the
two stages take place.

2.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8368The Chloroplast
Chloroplasts: Theaters for Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis, the process of turning the energy of sunlight into ‘‘food,’’ is divided into two basic sets of reaction s, known as the
light reactions and the Calvin cycle, which uses carbon dioxide. As yo u study the details in other concepts, refer frequent ly to the
chemical equation of photosynthesis: 6CO + 6H O + Ligh t Energy → C H O + 6O. Photosynthesis occurs in the chl oroplast,
an organelle specific to plant cells.
If you examine a single leaf of a Winter Jasmine leaf, shown in Figure below, under a microscope, you will see within each cell
dozens of small green ovals. These are chloroplasts, the organelles which conduct photosynthesis in plant s and algae. Chloroplasts
closely resemble some types of bacteria and even contain their own circular DNA and ribosomes. In fact, the endosymbiotic
theory holds that chloroplasts were once independently liv ing bacteria (prokaryotes). So when we say that photosynthesis occu rs
within chloroplasts, we speak not only of the organell es within plants and algae, but also of some bacteri a – in other words,
virtually all photosynthetic autotrophs.
High power microscopic photo of the upper part of a Winter Jasmine le af. Viewed under a microscope, many green
chloroplasts are visible.
Each chloroplast contains neat stacks called grana (singular, granum). The grana consist of sac-like membranes, known as
thylakoid membranes. These membranes contain photosystems, which are groups of molecules that include chlorophyll, a green
pigment. The light reactions of photosynthesis occur in the thylakoid membranes. Th e stroma is the space outside the thylakoid
membranes, as shown in Figure below. This is where the reactions of the Calvin cyc le take place. In addition to enzymes, two
basic types of molecules - pigments and electron carriers – are key players in this process and are also found in the thylakoid
membranes.
A chloroplast consists of thylakoid membranes surrounded by strom a. The thylakoid membranes contain molecules of the
green pigment chlorophyll.2 2 6 12 6 2

2.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8368Electron carrier molecules are usually arranged in electron transport chains (ETCs). These accept and pass along energy-carrying
electrons in small steps (Figure below). In this way, they produce ATP and NADPH, which tempo rarily store chemical energy.
Electrons in transport chains behave much like a ball bouncing down a set of stairs – a little energy is l ost with each bounce.
However, the energy “lost” at each step in an electron transport chain accomplishes a little bit of work, wh ich eventually results in
the synthesis of ATP.
This figure shows the light reactions of photosynthesis. This stage o f photosynthesis begins with photosystem II (so named
because it was discovered after photosystem I). Find the two electr ons (2 e
) in photosystem II, and then follow them through the electron transport chai n (also called the electron transfer chain) to
the formation of NADPH. Where do the hydrogen ions (H
) come from that help make ATP?
Further Reading
Leaves and Photosynthesis
Summary
Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast, an organelle s pecific to plant cells.
The light reactions of photosynthesis occur in the thy lakoid membranes of the chloroplast.
Electron carrier molecules are arranged in electron transport c hains that produce ATP and NADPH, which temporarily store
chemical energy.+
0:00

2.10.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8368Review
1. Describe the chloroplast's role in photosynthesis.
2. Explain how the structure of a chloroplast (its membr anes and thylakoids) makes its function (the chemical r eactions of
photosynthesis) more efficient.
3. Describe electron carriers and the electron transpor t chain.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Jubal Harshaw,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 4]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.10: Chloroplast is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14392.11: Parts of the Cell
What do a bacterial cell and one of your cells have in common?
There are many different types of cells, but they all have certain parts in common. As this image of human blood shows, cells come
in different shapes and sizes. The shapes and sizes di rectly influence the function of the cell. Yet, all cells - cells from the smallest
bacteria to those in the largest whale - do some similar function s, so they do have parts in common.
Common Parts of Cells
Discovery of Cells
The first time the word cell was used to refer to these tiny units of life was in 1665 by a British scientist named Robert Hooke.
Hooke was one of the earliest scientists to study livin g things under a microscope. The microscopes of his day were not very
strong, but Hooke was still able to make an important discovery. When he looked at a thin slice of cork un der his microscope, he
was surprised to see what looked like a honeycomb. Hooke made the drawing in the Figure below to show what he saw. As you
can see, the cork was made up of many tiny units, which Hooke cal led cells.
Cork Cells. This is what Robert Hooke saw when he looked at a thin slice of cork unde r his microscope. What type of
material is cork? Do you know where cork comes from?
Soon after Robert Hooke discovered cells in cork, Anton van Leeuwenhoek in Holland made other important discov eries using a
microscope. Leeuwenhoek made his own microscope lenses, and he was so good at it that his microscope was more powerful th an
other microscopes of his day. In fact, Leeuwenhoek’s micros cope was almost as strong as modern light microscopes.
Using his microscope, Leeuwenhoek discovered tiny animals such as rotifers. Leeuwenhoek also discovered human blood cells. He
even scraped plaque from his own teeth and observed it under the microscope. What do you think Leeuwenhoe k saw in the plaque?
He saw tiny living things with a single cell that he n amed animalcules (“tiny animals”). Today, we call Leeuwenhoek’s animal cules
bacteria.
The Cell Theory
The Cell Theory is one of the fundamental theories o f biology. For two centuries after the discovery of th e microscope by Robert
Hooke and Anton van Leeuwenhoek, biologists found cells everywhere. Biologists in the early part of the 19 cent ury suggested
that all living things were made of cells, but the rol e of cells as the primary building block of life was not discovered until 1839
when two German scientists, Theodor Schwann, a zoologist (studies animals), and Matthias Jakob Schleiden, a bot anist (studies
plants), suggested that cells were the basic unit of st ructure and function of all life. Later, in 1858, the German doctor Rudolf
Virchow observed that cells divide to produce more c ells. He proposed that all cells arise only from other cells. The collective
observations of all three scientists form the Cell The ory, which states that:
all organisms are made up of one or more cells,th

2.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1439a o ga s s a e ade up o o e o o e ce s,
all the life functions of an organism occur within cells,
all cells come from preexisting cells.
Cell Diversity
Cells with different functions often have different shapes. The cells pictured in the Figure below are just a few examples of the
many different shapes that cells may have. Each typ e of cell in the figure has a shape that helps it do its job. For example, the job of
the nerve cell is to carry messages to other cells. The nerve cell has many long extensions that reach out i n all directions, allowing
it to pass messages to many other cells at once. Do yo u see the tail-like projections on the algae cells? Algae live in water, and their
tails help them swim. Pollen grains have spikes that hel p them stick to insects such as bees. How do you think t he spikes help the
pollen grains do their job? (Hint: Insects pollinate flowers.)
As these pictures show, cells come in many different shapes. How are the s hapes of these cells related to their functions?
Four Common Parts of a Cell
Although cells are diverse, all cells have certain par ts in common. The parts include a plasma membrane, cy toplasm, ribosomes,
and DNA.
1. The plasma membrane (also called the cell membrane) is a thin coat of lipids that surrounds a cell. It forms th e physical
boundary between the cell and its environment, so you can think of it as the ‘‘skin’’ of the cell.
2. Cytoplasm refers to all of the cellular material inside the p lasma membrane, other than the nucleus. Cytoplasm is ma de up of a
watery substance called cytosol, and contains other cell structures such as ribosomes.
3. Ribosomes are structures in the cytoplasm where proteins are made.
4. DNA is a nucleic acid found in cells. It contains the geneti c instructions that cells need to make proteins.
These parts are common to all cells, from organisms as different as bacteria and human beings. How did all known organisms come
to have such similar cells? The similarities show that all li fe on Earth has a common evolutionary history.
Summary
Cells come in many different shapes. Cells with different fu nctions often have different shapes.
Although cells comes in diverse shapes, all cells have certa in parts in common. These parts include the plasma me mbrane,
cytoplasm, ribosomes, and DNA.
Review
1. Who coined the term cell, in reference to the tiny structures seen in living orga nisms?
2. Who identified animalcules? What are animalcules?
3. What are the three main parts of the cell theory?
4. List the four parts common to all cells.
5. What are the cell structures where proteins are made?

2.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14396. What is the role of DNA?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Nerve cell: WA Lee et al.; Blood
cell: Courtesy of National Institute of
Health; Bacteria: TJ Kirn, MJ Lafferty,
CMP Sandoe, and RK Taylor; Algae: EF
Smith and PA Lefebvre; Pollen: L Howard
and C Daghlian; Illustrations: Image
copyright Alila Medical Media, 2014
Source: Nerve cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GFPneu
ron.png; Blood cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Redbloo
dcells.jpg; Bacteria:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/bacteriaSEM/s
ource/1.html; Algae:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/algaeSEM/sour
ce/1.html; Pollen:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/botanicalPollen
SEM/source/10.html; Illustrations:
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: (Nerve cel) CC BY 2.5; (Blood
cell) Public Domain; (Bacteria) Public
Domain; (Algae) Public Domain; (Pollen)
Public Domain; (Illustrations) License from
Shutterstock
[Figure 2]Credit: Cork cell: Robert Hooke,
Micrographia,1665; Tree branch:
OpenClips
Source: Cork cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Rober
tHookeMicrographia1665.jpg; Tree
branch: pixabay.com/en/birch-branchleaves-plant-nature-155882/
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3] Credit: Nerve cell: WA Lee et al.; Blood
cell: Courtesy of National Institute of
Health; Bacteria: TJ Kirn, MJ Lafferty,
CMP Sandoe, and RK Taylor; Algae: EF
Smith and PA Lefebvre; Pollen: L Howard
and C Daghlian; Illustrations: Image
copyright Alila Medical Media, 2014
Source: Nerve cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GFPneu
ron.png; Blood cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Redbloo
dcells.jpg; Bacteria:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/bacteriaSEM/s
ource/1.html; Algae:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/algaeSEM/sour

2.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1439ce/1.html; Pollen:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/botanicalPollen
SEM/source/10.html; Illustrations:
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: (Nerve cel) CC BY 2.5; (Blood
cell) Public Domain; (Bacteria) Public
Domain; (Algae) Public Domain; (Pollen)
Public Domain; (Illustrations) License from
Shutterstock
This page titled 2.11: Parts of the Cell is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/84222.12: Leaves and Photosynthesis
Oxygen — the oxygen that we breath — is just a waste product of what reaction?
Every split second that sunlight hits that leaf, phot osynthesis is initiated, bringing energy into the e cosystem. It could be said that
this is one of the most important - if not the absolutely most important - biochemical reactions. And it all start s with the leaf.
Factories for Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is the process that uses energy from the sun, toget her with carbon dioxide and water, to make glucose and oxygen.
The primary role of photosynthesis is to make the ca rbohydrate, suggesting that oxygen, which is released back into the
atmosphere, is just a waste product.
You can think of a single leaf as a photosynthesis factory. A factory has specialized machines to produc e a product. It’s also
connected to a transportation system that supplies i t with raw materials and carries away the finished pro duct. In all these ways, a
leaf resembles a factory. The cross section of a leaf in Figure below lets you look inside a leaf “factory.”
There’s more to a leaf than meets the eye. Can you identify the funct ions of each of the labeled structures in the diagram?
A leaf consists of several different kinds of specializ ed tissues that work together to make food by photosyn thesis. The major
tissues are mesophyll, veins, and epidermis.
Mesophyll makes up most of the leaf’s interior. This is where photosyn thesis occurs. Mesophyll consists mainly of
parenchymal cells with chloroplasts.
Veins are made primarily of xylem and phloem. They transport water and minerals to the cells of leaves and carry away
dissolved sugar.
The epidermis of the leaf consists of a single layer of tightly-packed d ermal cells. They secrete waxy cuticle to prevent
evaporation of water from the leaf. The epidermis has tiny pores called stomata (singular, stoma) that control transpiration
and gas exchange with the air. For photosynthesis, stomata must control the transpiration of water vapor and the exchange of

2.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422carbon dioxide and oxygen. Stomata are flanked by guard cells that swell or shrink by taking in or losing water throug h
osmosis. When they do, they open or close the stomata (see Figure below).
For photosynthesis, stomata must control the transpiration of water va por and the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen.
Stomata are flanked by guard cells that swell or shrink by taking in or losi ng water through osmosis. When they do, they
open or close the stomata.
We couldn't verify the security of your
connection.
Access to this content has been restricted. Contact your internet service provider for
help.
a Tree in the Sun: Visualizing Photosynthesis from Evan Do dy on Vimeo.
Summary
Specialized cells and tissues in leaves work together to per form photosynthesis.

2.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422Review
1. Explain how a leaf is like a factory.
2. Explain the role of stomata during photosynthesis.
3. What controls the opening of stomata?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: cK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;Zappy's;Doug
Bowman
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/bistrosavage/
35025022/
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
2.12: Leaves and Photosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/84272.13: Photosynthesis
Oxygen has been described as a ‘‘waste product.’’ Is it?
Essentially, oxygen is a waste product of the light reactions of photosynthesis. It is a ‘‘leftover’’ from a neces sary part of the
process. All the oxygen that is necessary to maintain most f orms of life just happens to come about during this process.
Photosynthesis Stage I: The Light Reactions
Chloroplasts Capture Sunlight
Every second, the sun fuses over 600 million tons o f hydrogen into 596 tons of helium, converting over 4 tons of helium (4.3
billion kg) into light and heat energy. Countless ti ny packets of that light energy travel 93 million m iles (150 million km) through
space, and about 1% of the light which reaches the Ea rth’s surface participates in photosynthesis. Light is the source of energy for
photosynthesis, and the first set of reactions which be gin the process requires light – thus the name, light reactions, or lightdependent reactions.
When light strikes chlorophyll (or an accessory pigment) within the chloroplast, it energizes electrons within that molecule. These
electrons jump up to higher energy levels; they have absorbed or captured, and now carry, that energy. High-en ergy electrons are
“excited.” Who wouldn’t be excited to hold the energy for life?
The excited electrons leave chlorophyll to particip ate in further reactions, leaving the chlorophyll “ at a loss”; eventually they must
be replaced. That replacement process also requires l ight, working with an enzyme complex to split water molecules. In this
process of photolysis (“splitting by light”), H O molecules are broken into hydrogen ions, electrons, and oxygen atoms. The
electrons replace those originally lost from chloroph yll. Hydrogen ions and the high-energy electrons from chlorophyll will carry
on the energy transformation after the light reactions a re over.
The oxygen atoms, however, form oxygen gas, which is a waste product of photosynthesis. The oxygen given off supplies most of
the oxygen in our atmosphere. Before photosynthesis e volved, Earth’s atmosphere lacked oxygen altogether, and this highly
reactive gas was toxic to the many organisms living at the time. Something had to change! Most contempora ry organisms rely on
oxygen for efficient respiration. So plants don’t just “rest ore” the air, they also had a major role in creating it!
To summarize, chloroplasts “capture” sunlight energ y in two ways. Light ‘‘excites’’ electrons in pigment m olecules, and light
provides the energy to split water molecules, providing more electrons as well as hydrogen io ns.
Light Energy to Chemical Energy
Excited electrons that have absorbed light energy a re unstable. However, the highly organized electron carrier molecules
embedded in chloroplast membranes order the flow of these electrons, directing them through electron transport chains (ETCs).
At each transfer, small amounts of energy released by the electrons are captured and put to work or stored. Some is also lost as heat
with each transfer, but overall the light reactions a re extremely efficient at capturing light energy an d transforming it into chemical
energy.2

2.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8427Two sequential transport chains harvest the energy of exc ited electrons, as shown in Figure below.
(1) First, they pass down an ETC, which captures their en ergy and uses it to pump hydrogen ions by active tran sport into the
thylakoids. These concentrated ions store potential en ergy by forming a chemiosmotic or electrochemical g radient – a higher
concentration of both positive charge and hydrogen i nside the thylakoid than outside. The gradient forme d by the H ions is known
as a chemiosmotic gradient. Picture this energy buildup of H as a dam holding b ack a waterfall. Like water flowing through a
hole in the dam, hydrogen ions “slide down” their conc entration gradient through a membrane protein which acts as both ion
channel and enzyme. As they flow, the ion channel/en zyme ATP synthase uses their energy to chemically bond a phosphate g roup
to ADP, making ATP.
(2) Light re-energizes the electrons, and they trav el down a second electron transport chain (ETC), event ually bonding hydrogen
ions to NADP to form a more stable energy storage molec ule, NADPH. NADPH is sometimes called “hot hydrogen,” and its
energy and hydrogen atoms will be used to help build suga r in the second stage of photosynthesis.
Membrane architecture: The large colored carrier molecules fo rm electron transport chains which capture small amounts
of energy from excited electrons in order to store it in ATP and NADPH. Follow the energy pathways: light → electrons →
NADPH (blue line) and light → electrons → concentrated H
→ ATP (red line). Note the intricate organization of the chloroplast.
NADPH and ATP molecules now store the energy from excited e lectrons – energy which was originally sunlight – in chemical
bonds. Thus chloroplasts, with their orderly arrangemen t of pigments, enzymes, and electron transport chains, t ransform light
energy into chemical energy. The first stage of photos ynthesis – light-dependent reactions or simply light react ions – is complete.+
AQUAP ROS
Aquarium P hotosynthesis P t 1: The L
Aquarium P hotosynthesis P t 1: The L
Watch on

2.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8427Further Reading
Photosynthesis Summary
Leaves and Photosynthesis
Summary
The light reactions capture energy from sunlight, which they change to chemi cal energy that is stored in molecules of NADPH
and ATP.
The light reactions also release oxygen gas as a waste product.
Review
1. Summarize what happens during the light reactions of photosynthesis.
2. What is the chemiosmotic gradient?
3. Explain the role of the first electron transport chai n in the formation of ATP during the light reactions of ph otosynthesis.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Tameeria/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Thylako
id_membrane.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Tameeria/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Thylako
id_membrane.png
License: Public Domain
2.13: Photosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/84282.14: Calvin Cycle
Other than being green, what do all these fruits and vegetables have in common?
They are full of energy. Energy in the form of gluc ose. The energy from sunlight is briefly held in NADPH an d ATP, which is
needed to drive the formation of sugars such as glucose. And this all happens in the Calvin cycle.
The Calvin Cycle
Making Food “From Thin Air”
You’ve learned that the first, light-dependent stage of photosynthesis uses two of the three reactants, water and light, and produces
one of the products, oxygen gas (a waste product of th is process). All three necessary conditions are required – chlorophyll
pigments, the chloroplast “theater,” and enzyme cata lysts. The first stage transforms light energy into chemi cal energy, stored to
this point in molecules of ATP and NADPH. Look again at the overal l equation below. What is left?
Waiting in the wings is one more reactant, carbon dio xide, and yet to come is the star product, which is fo od for all life – glucose.
These key players perform in the second act of the photos ynthesis drama, in which food is “made from thin air!”
The second stage of photosynthesis can proceed withou t light, so its steps are sometimes called “light-in dependent” or “dark”
reactions (though the term ‘‘dark’’ reactions can be misleading). Many biologists honor the scientist, Melvi n Calvin, who won a
1961 Nobel Prize for working out this complex set of chem ical reactions, naming it the Calvin cycle.
The Calvin cycle has two parts. First carbon dioxide is ‘‘fixed’’. Then ATP and NADPH from the light reactions provide energy to
combine the fixed carbons to make sugar.
Carbon Dioxide is “Fixed”
Why does carbon dioxide need to be fixed? Was it ever b roken?
Life on Earth is carbon-based. Organisms need not onl y energy but also carbon atoms for building bodies. For nearly all life, the
ultimate source of carbon is carbon dioxide (CO), an inor ganic molecule. CO makes up less than 1% of the Earth’s at mosphere.
Animals and most other heterotrophs cannot take in CO dire ctly. They must eat other organisms or absorb organic molecules to
get carbon. Only autotrophs can build low-energy inorg anic CO into high-energy organic molecules like glu cose. This process is
carbon fixation.2 2

2.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8428
Stomata on the underside of leaves take in CO and release water and O. Guard cells close the stomata when water is
scarce. Leaf cross-section (above) and stoma (below).
Plants have evolved three pathways for carbon fixation.
The most common pathway combines one molecule of CO wi th a 5-carbon sugar called ribulose biphosphate (RuB P). The enzyme
which catalyzes this reaction (nicknamed RuBisCo) is the most abundant enzyme on earth! The resultin g 6-carbon molecule is
unstable, so it immediately splits into two 3-carbon molecules. The 3 carbons in the first stable molecul e of this pathway give this
largest group of plants the name “C.”
Dry air, hot temperatures, and bright sunlight slow the C pathway for carbon fixation. This is because stomata, tiny openings
under the leaf which normally allow CO to enter and O to leave, must close to prevent loss of water vapor (Figure above).
Closed stomata lead to a shortage of CO. Two alterna tive pathways for carbon fixation demonstrate biochem ical adaptations to
differing environments.
Plants such as corn solve the problem by using a separ ate compartment to fix CO. Here CO combines with a 3- carbon molecule,
resulting in a 4-carbon molecule. Because the first s table organic molecule has four carbons, this adapt ation has the name C.
Shuttled away from the initial fixation site, the 4-c arbon molecule is actually broken back down into CO, and when enough
accumulates, RuBisCo fixes it a second time! Compartme ntalization allows efficient use of low concentrations of carbon dioxide in
these specialized plants.
Cacti and succulents such as the jade plant avoid water loss by fixing CO only at night. These plants close th eir stomata during the
day and open them only in the cooler and more humid nighttime hours. Leaf structure differs slightly fro m that of C plants, but the
fixation pathways are similar. The family of plants i n which this pathway was discovered gives the pathway it s name, Crassulacean
Acid Metabolism, or CAM (Figure below). All three carbon fixation pathways lead to the Ca lvin cycle to build sugar.
Even chemical reactions adapt to specific environments! Carbon f ixation pathways vary among three groups. Temperate
species (maple tree, left) use the C pathway. C species (corn, cent er) concentrate CO in a separate compartment to lessen
water loss in hot bright climates. Desert plants (jade plant, rig ht) fix CO only at night, closing stomata in the daytime to
conserve water.2 2
2 2
2 2
3 4 2

2.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8428How Does the Calvin Cycle Store Energy in Sugar?
As Melvin Calvin discovered, carbon fixation is the first step of a cycle. Like an electron transport chain, t he Calvin cycle, shown
in Figure below, transfers energy in small, controlled steps. Ea ch step pushes molecules uphill in terms of energy c ontent. Recall
that in the electron transport chain, excited electrons lose energy to NADPH and ATP. In the Calvin cycle, NADPH and ATP
formed in the light reactions lose their stored chemical energy to build glucose.
Use Figure below to identify the major aspects of the process:
the general cycle pattern
the major reactants
the products
Overview of the Calvin Cycle Pathway.
First, notice where carbon is fixed by the enzyme nick named RuBisCo. In C, C, and CAM plants, CO enters the cyc le by joining
with 5-carbon ribulose bisphosphate to form a 6-carbon intermediate, which splits (so quickly that it isn’t even shown!) into two 3carbon molecules.
Now look for the points at which ATP and NADPH (made in the light reactions) add chemical energy (“Reduction” in the diagram)
to the 3-carbon molecules. The resulting “half-sugar s” can enter several different metabolic pathways. One recreates the original 5carbon precursor, completing the cycle. A second combi nes two of the 3-carbon molecules to form glucose, univer sal fuel for life.
The cycle begins and ends with the same molecule, but the process combines carbon and energy to build carb ohydrates – food for
life.
So, how does photosynthesis store energy in sugar? Six “turns” of the Calvin cycle use chemical energy fr om ATP to combine six
carbon atoms from six CO molecules with 12 “hot hydrogen s” from NADPH. The result is one molecule of glucose, C H O.3 4 2
2 6 12 6

2.14.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8428Summary
The reactions of the Calvin cycle add carbon (from ca rbon dioxide in the atmosphere) to a simple five-carbon molecule called
RuBP.
These reactions use chemical energy from NADPH and ATP that were produced in the light reactions.
The final product of the Calvin cycle is glucose.
Review
1. What happens during the carbon fixation step of the Ca lvin cycle?
2. What is special about RuBisCo?
3. What are stomata?
4. Explain what might happen if the third step of the Calvin cycle did not occur. Why?
TED-Ed
Nature' s smallest factory: The Calvin
Nature' s smallest factory: The Calvin
Watch on

2.14.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/84285. What is the main final product of the Calvin cycle? Ho w many turns of the Calvin cycle are needed to produce thi s product?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for the CK-12
Foundation;User:Tameeria/Wikipedia
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Thylako
id_membrane.png
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Top: User:Maksim/Wikimedia
Commons; Bottom: Alex Costa
Source: Top:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leaf_an
atomy.jpg; Bottom:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plant_st
oma_guard_cells.png
License: (Top) Public Domain; (Bottom)
CC BY 2.5
[Figure 4]Credit: Left to right: John Talbot
(Flickr:jbctalbot); Flickr:lobo235; Jill
Robidoux (Flickr:jylcat)
Source: Left to right:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/laserstars/503
948601/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/lobo235/7615
4752/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jylcat/562393
266/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.14: Calvin Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86062.15: Photosynthesis Summary
What is photosynthesis?
The process of using the energy in sunlight to make food (glucose). Is it really as simple as that? Of cou rse not. As you have seen,
photosynthesis includes many steps all conveniently co ndensed into one simple equation. In the five concep ts describing
photosynthesis, this process has been presented in an in troductory fashion. Obviously, much more details could have been included,
though those are beyond the scope of these concepts.
Photosynthesis
The following 10 points summarize photosynthesis.
1. 6CO + 6H O + Light Energy → C H O + 6O
2. Autotrophs store chemical energy in carbohydrate food molecules they build themselves. Most autotrophs make their " food"
through photosynthesis using the energy of the sun.
3. Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast, an organelle specific to plant cells.
4. The light reactions of photosynthesis occur in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast.
5. Electron carrier molecules are arranged in electron transport c hains that produce ATP and NADPH, which temporarily store
chemical energy.
6. The light reactions capture energy from sunlight, which they change to chemi cal energy that is stored in molecules of NADPH
and ATP.2 2 6 12 6 2

2.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86067. The light reactions also release oxygen gas as a waste product.
8. The reactions of the Calvin cycle add carbon (from carbon dioxide in the atmosphere) to a simple five-carb on molecule called
RuBP.
9. The Calvin cycle reactions use chemical energy from NADPH and ATP that were produced in the light reactions.
10. The final product of the Calvin cycle is glucose.
What is photosynthesis?
The process of using the energy in sunlight to make food (glucose). But of course it is much more complex than that simple
statement. Photosynthesis is a multistep biochemical pa thway that uses the energy in sunlight to fix carbon d ioxide, transferring the
energy into carbohydrates, and releasing oxygen in the process.
What is NADPH?
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, an energy carrier molecule produced in the light reactions o f photosynthesis.
NADPH is the reduced form of the electron acceptor NADP. At the end of the light reactions, the en ergy from sunlight is
transferred to NADP, producing NADPH. This energy in NADPH is then use d in the Calvin cycle.
Where do the protons used in the light reactions come from?
The protons used in the light reactions come from pho tolysis, the splitting of water, in which H O molecules are broken into
hydrogen ions, electrons, and oxygen atoms. In addition, t he energy from sunlight is used to pump protons into the thylakoid lumen
during the first electron transport chain, forming a che miosmotic gradient.
How do you distinguish between the Calvin cycle and the Krebs cycle?
The Calvin cycle is part of the light-independent r eactions of photosynthesis. The Calvin cycle uses AT P and NADPH. The Krebs
cycle is part of cellular respiration. This cycle makes ATP a nd NADH.
Do photosynthesis and cellular respiration occur at the same time in a plant?
Yes. Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplasts, whereas cel lular respiration occurs in the mitochondria. Photosy nthesis makes
glucose and oxygen, which are then used as the starting products for cellular respiration. Cellular respirat ion makes carbon dioxide
and water (and ATP), which are the starting products (together with sun light) for photosynthesis.
Common Misconceptions
A common student misconception is that plants photosynthesiz e only during daylight and conduct cellular respiration o nly at
night. Some teaching literature even states this. Though it is true the light reactions can only occur when the sun is out, cellular
respiration occurs continuously in plants, not just at nig ht.
The “dark reactions” of photosynthesis are a misnomer that often leads students to believe that photosynthetic ca rbon fixation
occurs at night. This is not true. It is preferable to u se the term Calvin cycle or light-independent reactions instead of dark
reactions.+
B oze m a n Scie n ce
P hotosynthesis
P hotosynthesis
Watch on

2.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8606Though the final product of photosynthesis is glucose, the glucose is conveniently stored as starch. Starch is appro ximated as
(C H O), where n is in the thousands. Starch is formed by the cond ensation of thousands of glucose molecules.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.15: Photosynthesis Summary is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.6 10 5 n

2.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86092.16: Chemosynthesis
Is it possible to live in temperatures over 175°F?
It is if you're a Pompeii worm. The Pompeii worm, the mo st heat-tolerant animal on Earth, lives in the deep oc ean at super-heated
hydrothermal vents. Covering this deep-sea worm's ba ck is a fleece of bacteria. These microbes contain all the genes necessary for
life in extreme environments.
Chemosynthesis
Why do bacteria that live deep below the ocean’s surface rely on chemica l compounds instead of sunlight for energy to make food?
Most autotrophs make food by photosynthesis, but this is n’t the only way that autotrophs produce food. Some bacteria make food
by another process, which uses chemical energy instead of light energy. This process is called chemosynthesis. In chemosynthesis,
one or more carbon molecules (usually carbon dioxid e or methane, CH) and nutrients is converted into o rganic matter, using the
oxidation of inorganic molecules (such as hydrogen ga s, hydrogen sulfide (H S) or ammonia (NH)) or methane as a source of
energy, rather than sunlight. In hydrogen sulfide che mosynthesis, in the presence of carbon dioxide and ox ygen, carbohydrates
(CH O) can be produced:
CO + O + 4H S → CH O + 4S + 3H O
Many organisms that use chemosynthesis are extremophiles, living in harsh conditions, such as in the absence o f sunlight and a
wide range of water temperatures, some approaching the boiling point. So me chemosynthetic bacteria live around deep-ocean ve nts
known as “black smokers.” Compounds such as hydrogen su lfide, which flow out of the vents from Earth’s interio r, are used by the
bacteria for energy to make food. Consumers that depe nd on these bacteria to produce food for them inclu de giant tubeworms, like
those pictured in Figure below. These organisms are known as chemoautotrophs. Many chemosynthetic microorganisms are
consumed by other organisms in the ocean, and symbiot ic associations between these organisms and respiring heterotrophs are
quite common.
Tubeworms deep in the Galapagos Rift get their energy from chemosynthetic bacteria. Tubeworms have no mouth, eyes or
stomach. Their survival depends on a symbiotic relationship with the bi llions of bacteria that live inside them. These
bacteria convert the chemicals that shoot out of the hydrothermal ve nts into food for the worm.4
2 3
2 2 2 2 2

2.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8609Summary
Chemosynthesis is a process in which some organisms use chemic al energy instead of light energy to produce "food."
Review
1. What is chemosynthesis?
2. Why do bacteria that live deep below the ocean’s surfa ce rely on chemical compounds instead of sunlight for ene rgy to make
food?
3. Describe the habitats of extremophiles?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the NOAA Okeanos
Explorer Program, Galapagos Rift
Expedition 2011;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/noaaphotolib/
9664056402/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
2.16: Chemosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86102.17: Cellular Respiration
Why eat?
Because we're hungry? Not necessarily. But biological ly speaking…we eat to get energy. The food we eat is broken down, the
glucose extracted, and that energy is converted into AT P.
Cellular Respiration
What happens to the energy stored in glucose during photosynthesis? How do living things make use of this stored energy? The
answer is cellular respiration. This process releases the energy in glucose to make ATP (adenosine triphosphate), the molecule
that powers all the work of cells.
Stages of Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration involves many chemical reactions. The reactions can be summed up in this equation:
C H O + 6O → 6CO + 6H O + Chemical Energy (in ATP)
The reactions of cellular respiration can be grouped into three stages: glycolysis (stage 1), the Krebs cycle, also called the citric
acid cycle (stage 2), and electron transport (stage 3). Figure below gives an overview of these three stages, which are further
discussed in the concepts that follow. Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell and does not requ ire oxygen, whereas the
Krebs cycle and electron transport occur in the mitochondria and do require oxygen.6 12 6 2 2 2

2.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8610
Cellular respiration takes place in the stages shown here. The process beg ins with a molecule of glucose, which has six
carbon atoms. What happens to each of these atoms of carbon?
Structure of the Mitochondrion: Key to Aerobic Respiration
The structure of the mitochondrion is key to the proc ess of aerobic (in the presence of oxygen) cellular respiration, e specially the
Krebs cycle and electron transport. A diagram of a mitochondrion is shown in Figure below.
The structure of a mitochondrion is defined by an inner and outer membrane. This structure plays an important role in
aerobic respiration.
As you can see from Figure above, a mitochondrion has an inner and outer membr ane. The space between the inner and outer
membrane is called the intermembrane space. The space enclosed by the inner membrane is called the matrix. The second stage of
cellular respiration, the Krebs cycle, takes place in the matrix. The third stage, electron transport, take s place on the inner
membrane.
0:00

2.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8610Summary
Cellular respiration takes the energy stored in glucose an d transfers it to ATP.
Cellular respiration has three stages: glycolysis, Krebs cycle, and electron transport.
The inner and outer membranes of the mitochondrion p lay an important roles in aerobic respiration.
Review
1. Define cellular respiration.
2. What are the three stages of cellular respiration?
3. Describe the structure of the mitochondrion and discus s the importance of this structure in cellular respirat ion.
4. Assume that a new species of organism has been discovered. Sc ientists have observed its cells under a microscope and
determined that they lack mitochondria. What type of ce llular respiration would you predict that the new species uses? Explain
your prediction.
5. When you exhale onto a cold window pane, water vapor in your breath condenses on the glass. Where does t he water vapor
come from?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
mitochondrion_diagram_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
mitochondrion_diagram_en.svg
License: Public Domain
2.17: Cellular Respiration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86112.18: Glycolysis
How do you slice a molecule of glucose in half?
With sharp knives? Not really. But you essentially sl ice it in half through glycolysis. This is an extre mely important part of cellular
respiration. It happens all the time, both with and withou t oxygen. And in the process, transfers some energy to ATP.
Cellular Respiration Stage I: Glycolysis
The first stage of cellular respiration is glycolysis. It does not require oxygen, and it does not take p lace in the mitochondrion - it
takes place in the cytosol of the cytoplasm.
When was the last time you enjoyed yogurt on your brea kfast cereal, or had a tetanus shot? These experien ces may appear
unconnected, but both relate to bacteria which do not use oxygen to make ATP. In fact, tetan us bacteria cannot survive if oxygen is
present. However, Lactobacillus acidophilus (bacteria which make yogurt) and Clostridium tetani (bacteria which cause tetanus or
lockjaw) share with nearly all organisms the first sta ge of cellular respiration, glycolysis. Because glyc olysis is universal, whereas
aerobic (oxygen-requiring) cellular respiration is not, mos t biologists consider it to be the most fundamental and primitive pathway
for making ATP.
Splitting Glucose
The word glycolysis means “glucose splitting,” which is exactly what hap pens in this stage. Enzymes split a molecule of gluc ose
into two molecules of pyruvate (also known as pyruvic acid). This occurs in several s teps, as shown in Figure below.

2.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8611
In glycolysis, glucose (C6) is split into two 3-carbon (C3) pyruvate molecules. This releases energy, which is transferred to
ATP. How many ATP molecules are made during this stage of cellular respiration?
Results of Glycolysis
Energy is needed at the start of glycolysis to split the glucose molecule into two pyruvate molecules. Thes e two molecules go on to
stage II of cellular respiration. The energy to spli t glucose is provided by two molecules of ATP. As glyc olysis proceeds, energy is
released, and the energy is used to make four molecu les of ATP. As a result, there is a net gain of two ATP molecules during
glycolysis. During this stage, high-energy electrons are also transferred to molecules of NAD to produce t wo molecules of
NADH, another energy-carrying molecule. NADH is used in stage III o f cellular respiration to make more ATP.
Summary
The first stage of cellular respiration is glycolysis. It does not require oxygen.
During glycolysis, one glucose molecule is split into two py ruvate molecules, using 2 ATP while producing 4 ATP and 2 NADH
molecules.

2.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8611Review
1. What is glycolysis?
2. Describe what happens during glycolysis. How many ATP and NADH molecules are gained during this stage?
3. Defend this statement: ‘‘Glycolysis is a universal and anci ent pathway for making ATP’’.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.18: Glycolysis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86262.19: Krebs Cycle
What type of acid do these fruits contain?
Citric acid. Citric acid is also the first product f ormed in the Krebs cycle, and therefore this acid occ urs in the metabolism of
virtually all living things.
Cellular Respiration Stage II: The Krebs Cycle
Recall that glycolysis, stage I of cellular respiration, produces two molec ules of pyruvate (also known as pyruvic acid). These
molecules enter the matrix of a mitochondrion, where they start the Krebs cycle. The reactions that occur next are shown in Figure
below.
Cra sh Cou rse
A TP & Respiration: Crash Course Bio
A TP & Respiration: Crash Course Bio
Watch on

2.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8626
The Krebs cycle starts with pyruvic acid from glycolys is. Each small circle in the diagram represents one carbon atom. For
example, citric acid is a six carbon molecule, and OAA (oxaloacetate) is a four carbon molecule. Follow wha t happens to the
carbon atoms as the cycle proceeds. In one turn through the cycle, how many molecules are produced of ATP? Ho w many
molecules of NADH and FADH are produced?
Before the Krebs cycle begins, pyruvate, which has thre e carbon atoms, is split apart and combined with an e nzyme known as CoA,
which stands for coenzyme A. The product of this reacti on is a two-carbon molecule called acetyl-CoA. The thir d carbon from
pyruvate combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, which is released as a waste product. High-energy elec trons are also
released and captured in NADH.
Steps of the Krebs Cycle
The Krebs cycle itself actually begins when acetyl-Co A combines with a four-carbon molecule called OAA (oxa loacetate) (see
Figure above). This produces citric acid, which has six carbo n atoms. This is why the Krebs cycle is also called the citric acid
cycle.
After citric acid forms, it goes through a series of reactions that release energy. The energy is captured in molecules of NADH, ATP,
and FADH, another energy-carrying compound. Carbon dioxide is also released as a waste product of these reactions.
The final step of the Krebs cycle regenerates OAA, the molecule that began the Krebs cycle. This molecule is n eeded for the next
turn through the cycle. Two turns are needed because glycolysis produces two pyruvate molecules when it splits glucose.2

2.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8626Results of the Krebs Cycle
After the second turn through the Krebs cycle, the or iginal glucose molecule has been broken down complete ly. All six of its
carbon atoms have combined with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. The energy from its chemical bonds has bee n stored in a total of
16 energy-carrier molecules. These molecules are:
4 ATP (including 2 from glycolysis)
10 NADH (including 2 from glycolysis)
2 FADH
Summary
The Krebs cycle is the second stage of cellular respirati on.
During the Krebs cycle, energy stored in pyruvate is transfer red to NADH and FADH, and some ATP is produced.
Review
1. What is the Krebs cycle?
2. What are the products of the Krebs cycle?
3. Explain why two turns of the Krebs cycle are needed for ea ch molecule of glucose.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Louisa Howard
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mitocho
ndria; _mammalian_lung_-_TEM.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
OSUbiology
OSU presents the Krebs Cycle
OSU presents the Krebs Cycle
Watch on

2.19.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86262.19: Krebs Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86412.20: Electron Transport
Train, truck, boat or plane?
Ways to transport. To make ATP, energy must be ‘‘tran sported’’ - first from glucose to NADH, and then somehow p assed to ATP.
How is this done? With an electron transport chain.
Cellular Respiration Stage III: Electron Transport
Electron transport is the final stage of aerobic respiration. In this sta ge, energy from NADH and FADH, which result from
glycolysis and the Krebs cycle, is transferred to ATP. Can you predict how this ha ppens? (Hint: How does electron transport occur
in photosynthesis?)
Transporting Electrons
High-energy electrons are released from NADH and FADH, and they move along electron transport chains, like those used in
photosynthesis. The electron transport chains are on t he inner membrane of the mitochondrion. As the high-e nergy electrons are
transported along the chains, some of their energy is c aptured. This energy is used to pump hydrogen ions (from NADH and
FADH) across the inner membrane, from the matrix into the intermembrane space. Electron transport in a mi tochondrion is shown
in Figure below.2

2.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8641
Electron-transport chains on the inner membrane of the mitochondrion ca rry out the last stage of cellular respiration.
Making ATP
The pumping of hydrogen ions across the inner membran e creates a greater concentration of the ions in the intermembrane space
than in the matrix. This chemiosmotic gradient causes the ions to flow back across the membrane in to the matrix, where their
concentration is lower. ATP synthase acts as a channel protein, helping the hydrogen ions cross the membrane. It also acts as an
enzyme, forming ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. After passing through the electron transport chain, t he “spent” electrons
combine with oxygen to form water. This is why oxygen is needed; in the absence of oxygen, this process cannot occur.
How much ATP is produced? The two NADH produced in the cyt oplasm produces 2 to 3 ATP each (4 to 6 total) by t he electron
transport system, the 8 NADH produced in the mitochondria produces three ATP each (24 total), and the 2 FADH add s its
electrons to the electron transport system at a lower level than NADH, so they produce two ATP each (4 total). This results in the
formation of 34 ATP during the electron transport stage.
Summary
Electron transport is the final stage of aerobic respirat ion. In this stage, energy from NADH and FADH is transferred to ATP.
During electron transport, energy is used to pump hydrogen ions across the mitochondrial inner membrane, from the matri x into
the intermembrane space.
A chemiosmotic gradient causes hydrogen ions to flow back a cross the mitochondrial membrane into the matrix, throug h ATP
synthase, producing ATP.2
H a n dwritte n T u toria ls
Cellular Respiration 5 - Oxidative P ho
Cellular Respiration 5 - Oxidative P ho
Watch on

2.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8641Review
1. Summarize the overall task of Stage III of aerobic resp iration.
2. Explain the chemiosmotic gradient.
3. What is the maximum number of ATP molecules that can be produced during the electron transport stage of ae robic respiration?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Andrew Ryzhkov
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:OH_orb
5.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.20: Electron Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86422.21: Fermentation
When you combine grapes and yeast, what have you begun to make?
Wine. It may be slightly more complicated than that, but you need to start with grapes and yeast, and allow a natural fermentation
process to occur. Essentially, this is respiration without oxygen.
Anaerobic Respiration: Fermentation
Today, most living things use oxygen to make ATP fro m glucose. However, many living things can also make A TP without oxygen.
This is true of some plants and fungi and also of man y bacteria. These organisms use aerobic respiration when oxygen is present,
but when oxygen is in short supply, they use anaerobic respiration instead. Certain bacteria can only use anaerobic respiration. In
fact, they may not be able to survive at all in the prese nce of oxygen.
An important way of making ATP without oxygen is called fermentation. It involves glycolysis, but not the other two stages of
aerobic respiration. Many bacteria and yeasts carry out fermentation. People use these organisms to make yogurt, bread, wine, and
biofuels. Human muscle cells also use fermentation. This occurs when muscle cells ca nnot get oxygen fast enough to meet their
energy needs through aerobic respiration.
There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fer mentation and alcoholic fermentation. Both types of fermentation are described
below.
Lactic Acid Fermentation
In lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate (also known as pyruvic acid) from glycolysis changes to lactic acid. This is shown in Figure
below. In the process, NAD forms from NADH. NAD, in turn, lets glycolysis continue. This results in additional molecules of
ATP. This type of fermentation is carried out by th e bacteria in yogurt. It is also used by your own musc le cells when you work
them hard and fast.+ +

2.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8642
Lactic acid fermentation produces lactic acid and NAD
. The NAD
cycles back to allow glycolysis to continue so more ATP is made. Each circle represents a carbon atom.
Did you ever run a race and notice that your muscles feel tired and sore afterward? This is because your m uscle cells used lactic
acid fermentation for energy. This causes lactic acid to build up in the muscles. It is the buildup of l actic acid that makes the
muscles feel tired and sore.
Alcoholic Fermentation
In alcoholic fermentation, pyruvate changes to alcohol and carbon dioxide. T his is shown in Figure below. NAD also forms from
NADH, allowing glycolysis to continue making ATP. This ty pe of fermentation is carried out by yeasts and some bacteria. It is used
to make bread, wine, and biofuels.
Alcoholic fermentation produces ethanol and NAD+. The NAD+ allows glycolysis to c ontinue making ATP.
Have your parents ever put corn in the gas tank of t heir car? They did if they used gas containing ethan ol. Ethanol is produced by
alcoholic fermentation of the glucose in corn or ot her plants. This type of fermentation also explains why bread dough rises. Yeasts
in bread dough use alcoholic fermentation and produ ce carbon dioxide gas. The gas forms bubbles in the d ough, which cause the
dough to expand. The bubbles also leave small holes in the bread after it bakes, making the bread light a nd fluffy. Do you see the
small holes in the slice of bread in Figure below?+

2.21.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8642
The small holes in bread are formed by bubbles of carbon dioxide gas. The gas was produced by alcoholic fermentation
carried out by yeast.
Gut Fermentation
Behind every fart is an army of gut bacteria undergo ing some crazy biochemistry. These bacteria break do wn the remains of
digested food through fermentation, creating gas in the process.
Summary
Fermentation is making ATP without oxygen, which involves glycolysis only.
Fermentation recycles NAD, and produces 2 ATPs.
In lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate from glycolysis cha nges to lactic acid. This type of fermentation is carried ou t by the
bacteria in yogurt, and by your own muscle cells.
In alcoholic fermentation, pyruvate changes to alcoh ol and carbon dioxide. This type of fermentation is carri ed out by yeasts
and some bacteria.
Review
1. What is fermentation?
2. Name two types of fermentation.
3. What is the main advantage of aerobic respiration? Of a naerobic respiration?
4. What process produces fuel for motor vehicles from living plant products? What is the waste product of this process?
M ITK 12V ide os
Why We Fart (Science Out Loud S2 E
Why We Fart (Science Out Loud S2 E
Watch on

2.21.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86425. Compare and contrast lactic acid fermentation and alc oholic fermentation. Include examples of organisms that use each type of
fermentation.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Stacy Spensley;Hana Zavadska
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/notahipster/4
093475322/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0
2.21: Fermentation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14382.22: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
How many different types of cells are there?
There are many different types of cells. For example, in you there are blood cells and skin c ells and bone cells and even bacteria.
Here we have drawings of bacteria and human cells. Can you tell which depicts various types of bacteria? Howev er, all cells whether from bacteria, human, or any other organism - wi ll be one of two general types. In fact, all cells o ther than bacteria will be
one type, and bacterial cells will be the other. And it al l depends on how the cell stores its DNA.
Two Types of Cells
There is another basic cell structure that is presen t in many but not all living cells: the nucleus. The nucleus of a cell is a structure
in the cytoplasm that is surrounded by a membrane (t he nuclear membrane) and contains, and protects, most of the cell's DNA.
Based on whether they have a nucleus, there are two bas ic types of cells: prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic c ells. You can watch
animations of both types of cells at the link below.
Prokaryotic Cells
Prokaryotic cells are cells without a nucleus. The DNA in prokaryotic ce lls is in the cytoplasm rather than enclosed within a
nuclear membrane. Prokaryotic cells are found in singl e-celled organisms, such as bacteria, like the one shown in the Figure below.
Organisms with prokaryotic cells are called prokaryotes. They were the first type of organisms to evolve and are still the most
common organisms today.
Prokaryotic Cell. This diagram shows the structure of a typical prokaryo tic cell, a bacterium. Like other prokaryotic cells,
this bacterial cell lacks a nucleus but has other cell parts, includi ng a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, ribosomes, and DNA.
Identify each of these parts in the diagram.
Eukaryotic Cells
Eukaryotic cells are cells that contain a nucleus. A typical eukaryot ic cell is shown in the Figure below. Eukaryotic cells are
usually larger than prokaryotic cells, and they are found mainly in multicellular organisms. Organisms wit h eukaryotic cells are
called eukaryotes, and they range from fungi to people.

2.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1438Eukaryotic cells also contain other organelles beside s the nucleus. An organelle is a structure within the cytoplasm that performs a
specific job in the cell. Organelles called mitochond ria, for example, provide energy to the cell, and org anelles called vacuoles store
substances in the cell. Organelles allow eukaryotic cells to carry out more functions than prokaryotic cells can. This allows
eukaryotic cells to have greater cell specificity th an prokaryotic cells. Ribosomes, the organelle where pro teins are made, are the
only organelles in prokaryotic cells.
Eukaryotic Cell. Compare and contrast the eukaryotic cell shown here wi th the prokaryotic cell. What similarities and
differences do you see?
In some ways, a cell resembles a plastic bag full of Jell-O. Its basic structure is a plasma membrane filled wi th cytoplasm. Like
Jell-O containing mixed fruit, the cytoplasm of the cell also contains various structures, such as a nucleus and other organelles.
Am oe ba Siste rs
P rokaryotic vs. Eukaryotic Cells (Upd
P rokaryotic vs. Eukaryotic Cells (Upd
Watch on

2.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1438Further Reading
Prokaryotes
Protists
Summary
Prokaryotic cells are cells without a nucleus.
Eukaryotic cells are cells that contain a nucleus.
Eukaryotic cells have other organelles besides the nucleus. The only organel les in a prokaryotic cell are ribosomes.
Review
1. What is the cell nucleus?
2. What is the main difference between prokaryotic and eu karyotic cells?
3. Give an example of a prokaryotic cell.
4. Define organelle.0:00

2.22.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14385. What is the advantage of having organelles?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_structure_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);Bruce Wetzel and Harry
Schaefer/National Cancer Institute; Mike
Seyfang; Umberto Salvagnin;Rupali Raju
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Average
_prokaryote_cell-_en.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SEM_bl
ood_cells.jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikeblogs/31
01400087/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/2865
288013/; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; Public Domain;
CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);Bruce Wetzel and Harry
Schaefer/National Cancer Institute; Mike
Seyfang; Umberto Salvagnin;Rupali Raju
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_structure_en.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SEM_bl
ood_cells.jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikeblogs/31
01400087/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/2865
288013/; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; Public Domain;
CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.0
This page titled 2.22: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86432.23: Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration
Why oxygen?
Oxygen is the final electron acceptor at the end of the electron transport chai n of aerobic respiration. In the absence of oxygen, only
a few ATP are produced from glucose. In the presence of oxyge n, many more ATP are made.
The Presence of Oxygen
There are two types of cellular respiration: aerobic and anaerobic. One occurs in the presence of oxygen (aerobic), and one occurs
in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic). Both begin with glycolysis - the splitting of glucose.
Glycolysis is an anaerobic process - it does not need oxygen t o proceed. This process produces a minimal amount of ATP. The
Krebs cycle and electron transport do need oxygen to proceed, a nd in the presence of oxygen, these processes produ ce much more
ATP than glycolysis alone.
Scientists think that glycolysis evolved before the other stages of cellular respirat ion. This is because the other stages need oxygen,
whereas glycolysis does not, and there was no oxygen in E arth’s atmosphere when life first evolved about 3.5 t o 4 billion years
ago. Cellular respiration that proceeds without oxygen i s called anaerobic respiration.
Then, about 2 or 3 billion years ago, oxygen was grad ually added to the atmosphere by early photosynthet ic bacteria
(cyanobacteria). After that, living things could use oxygen to break down glucose and make ATP. Today, mo st organisms make ATP
with oxygen. They follow glycolysis with the Krebs cycle and electron transport to make more ATP than by gly colysis alone.
Cellular respiration that proceeds in the presence of oxyg en is called aerobic respiration.
Aerobic vs. Anaerobic Respiration: A Comparison
Aerobic respiration, which takes place in the presence of oxygen, evolved after oxygen was added to Earth’s atmosphere. This type
of respiration is useful today because the atmospher e is now 21% oxygen. However, some anaerobic organisms t hat evolved before
the atmosphere contained oxygen have survived to the present. Therefore, anaerobic respiration, which takes place without oxygen,
must also have advantages.
Advantages of Aerobic Respiration
A major advantage of aerobic respiration is the amoun t of energy it releases. Without oxygen, organisms can split glucose into just
two molecules of pyruvate. This releases only enough en ergy to make two ATP molecules. With oxygen, organisms can break down
glucose all the way to carbon dioxide. This releases e nough energy to produce up to 38 ATP molecules. Thu s, aerobic respiration
releases much more energy than anaerobic respiration.

2.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8643The amount of energy produced by aerobic respiratio n may explain why aerobic organisms came to dominate life on Earth. It may
also explain how organisms were able to become multicellular and increase in size.
Advantages of Anaerobic Respiration
One advantage of anaerobic respiration, also known as fermentation, is obvious. It lets organisms live in places where there is little
or no oxygen. Such places include deep water, soil, and the digestive tracts of animals such as humans (see Figure below).
E. coli
bacteria are anaerobic bacteria that live in the human digestive trac t.
Another advantage of anaerobic respiration is its speed. It produces ATP very quickly. For example, it lets y our muscles get the
energy they need for short bursts of intense activity (see Figure below). Aerobic respiration, on the other hand, prod uces ATP more
slowly.
The muscles of these hurdlers need to use anaerobic respiration for energ y. It gives them the energy they need for the shortterm, intense activity of this sport.
Summary
Cellular respiration always begins with glycolysis, which c an occur either in the absence or presence of oxygen.
Cellular respiration that proceeds in the absence of oxyg en is anaerobic respiration.
Cellular respiration that proceeds in the presence of oxy gen is aerobic respiration.
Anaerobic respiration evolved prior to aerobic respiratio n.
Aerobic respiration produces much more ATP than anaerob ic respiration.
Anaerobic respiration occurs more quickly than aerobic respiration.
Review
1. Define aerobic and anaerobic respiration.
2. What process is common to both aerobic and anaerobic re spiration?
3. Why do scientists think that glycolysis evolved before the o ther stages of cellular respiration?
4. What is the main advantage of aerobic respiration? Of a naerobic respiration?

2.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/86435. Tanya is on the high school track team and runs the 100-me ter sprint. Marissa is on the cross-country team and runs 5-kilometer
races. Explain which type of respiration the muscle cells in each runner’s legs use.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Julo (Wikimedia);Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BloodPr
essure.jpg; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Mattosaurus/Wikimedia
Commons;Megan Totah
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diverse
_e_Coli.png; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright bikeriderlondon,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
2.23: Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.24.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89212.24: Cell Division
Where do cells come from?
No matter what the cell, all cells come from preexisting cells through the process of cell division. The cell may be the simplest
bacterium or a complex muscle, bone, or blood cell. The cel l may comprise the whole organism, or be just one cell of trillions.
Cell Division
You consist of a great many cells, but like all other organisms, you started life as a single cell. How did you develop from a single
cell into an organism with trillions of cells? The ans wer is cell division. After cells grow to their maximum s ize, they divide into
two new cells. These new cells are small at first, but they grow quickly and eventually divide and produce more new cells. This
process keeps repeating in a continuous cycle.
Cell division is the process in which one cell, called the parent cell, divides to form two new cells, referred to as daughter cells.
How this happens depends on whether the cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic.
Cell division is simpler in prokaryotes than eukary otes because prokaryotic cells themselves are simple r. Prokaryotic cells have a
single circular chromosome, no nucleus, and few other cell structures. Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have m ultiple chromosomes
contained within a nucleus, and many other organelles. All of these cell parts must be duplicated and then separated when the cell
divides. A chromosome is a coiled structure made of DNA and protein, and will be the f ocus of a subsequent concept.
Cell Division in Prokaryotes
Most prokaryotic cells divide by the process of binary fission. A bacterial cell dividing this way is depicted in Figure below.
Binary Fission in a Bacterial Cell. Cell division is relatively si mple in prokaryotic cells. The two cells are dividing by binary
fission. Green and orange lines indicate old and newly-generated bacteria l cell walls, respectively. Eventually the parent cell
will pinch apart to form two identical daughter cells. Left, growth a t the center of bacterial body. Right, apical growth from
the ends of the bacterial body.
Binary fission can be described as a series of steps, although it is actually a continuous process. The st eps are described below and
also illustrated in Figure below. They include DNA replication, chromosome segre gation, and finally the separation into two
daughter cells.
Step 1: DNA Replication. Just before the cell divides, its DNA i s copied in a process called DNA replication. This results in two
identical chromosomes instead of just one. This step is ne cessary so that when the cell divides, each daughter cel l will have its
own chromosome.

2.24.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8921Step 2: Chromosome Segregation. The two chromosomes segregat e, or separate, and move to opposite ends (known as "poles")
of the cell. This occurs as each copy of DNA attaches to differ ent parts of the cell membrane.
Step 3: Separation. A new plasma membrane starts growing into t he center of the cell, and the cytoplasm splits apart, form ing
two daughter cells. As the cell begins to pull apart, the n ew and the original chromosomes are separated. The two daugh ter cells
that result are genetically identical to each other and t o the parent cell. New cell wall must also form around the two ce lls.
Steps of Binary Fission. Prokaryotic cells divide by binary fission. This is also how many single-celled organisms reproduce.
Cell Division in Eukaryotes
Cell division is more complex in eukaryotes than pr okaryotes. Prior to dividing, all the DNA in a eukaryot ic cell’s multiple
chromosomes is replicated. Its organelles are also duplicated. Then, when the cell divides, it occurs in two major steps:
1. The first step is mitosis, a multi-phase process in which the nucleus of the cell divid es. During mitosis, the nuclear membrane
breaks down and later reforms. The chromosomes are also sorted an d separated to ensure that each daughter cell receives a
diploid number (2 sets) of chromosomes. In humans, that nu mber of chromosomes is 46 (23 pairs). Mitosis is described in
greater detail in a subsequent concept.
2. The second major step is cytokinesis. As in prokaryotic ce lls, the cytoplasm must divide. Cytokinesis is the divisi on of the
cytoplasm in eukaryotic cells, resulting in two genetical ly identical daughter cells.
Science Friday: The Axolotl: A Cut Above the Rest
The axolotl is an animal with the incredible ability to regenerate its legs. In this video by Science Friday, Dr. Susan Bryant
discusses the research on how these animals are able to accomplish this amazing feat.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Cell Division
Cell Division
Watch on

2.24.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8921Summary
Cell division is part of the life cycle of virtually all cells. Cell division is the process in which one cell divide s to form two new
cells.
Most prokaryotic cells divide by the process of binary fiss ion.
In eukaryotes, cell division occurs in two major steps: mi tosis and cytokinesis.
Review
1. Describe binary fission.
2. What is mitosis?
3. Contrast cell division in prokaryotes and eukaryote s. Why are the two types of cell division different?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Ed
Uthman
Source: CK-12 Foundation; CK12;
web2.airmail.net/uthman/specimens/images
/tvp.html
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.24: Cell Division is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Sc iF ri
The Axolotl: A Cut Above the Rest
The Axolotl: A Cut Above the Rest
Watch on

2.25.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89222.25: Cell Cycle
What is a cell's life like?
The eukaryotic cell spends most of its "life" in int erphase of the cell cycle, which can be subdivided int o the three phases, G1, S
and G2. During interphase, the cell does what it is supp osed to do. Though cells have many common functions, such as DNA
replication, they also have certain specific function s. That is, during the life of a heart cell, the cel l would obviously perform certain
different activities than a kidney cell or a liver cell.
The Cell Cycle
Cell division is just one of several stages that a ce ll goes through during its lifetime. The cell cycle is a repeating series of events
that include growth, DNA synthesis, and cell division. Th e cell cycle in prokaryotes is quite simple: the cell grows, its DNA
replicates, and the cell divides. In eukaryotes, the cell cycle is more complicated.
The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
The diagram in Figure below represents the cell cycle of a eukaryotic cell. As you can see, the eukaryotic cell cycle has several
phases. The mitotic phase (M) actually includes both mitosis and cytokinesis. T his is when the nucleus and then the cytoplasm
divide. The other three phases (G1, S, and G2) are genera lly grouped together as interphase. During interphase, the cell grows,
performs routine life processes, and prepares to divide. T hese phases are discussed below.
Eukaryotic Cell Cycle. This diagram represents the cell cycle in e ukaryotes. The First Gap, Synthesis, and Second Gap
phases make up interphase (I). The M (mitotic) phase includes mitosis and c ytokinesis. After the M phase, two cells result.

2.25.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8922Interphase
Interphase of the eukaryotic cell cycle can be subdivi ded into the following three phases, which are represented i n Figure above:
Growth Phase 1 (G1): during this phase, the cell grows rapidly, while performing routine metabolic processes. It also makes
proteins needed for DNA replication and copies some of its o rganelles in preparation for cell division. This phase i s sometimes
referred to as Gap 1.
Synthesis Phase (S): during this phase, the cell’s DNA is copied in the process of DNA replication.
Growth Phase 2 (G2): during this phase, the cell makes final preparations to divide. For example, it makes additional proteins
and organelles. This phase is sometimes referred to as Gap 2.
Control of the Cell Cycle
If the cell cycle occurred without regulation, cells might go from one phase to the next before they wer e ready. What controls the
cell cycle? How does the cell know when to grow, synthes ize DNA, and divide? The cell cycle is controlled mainl y by regulatory
proteins. These proteins control the cycle by signal ing the cell to either start or delay the next phase of the cycle. They ensure that
the cell completes the previous phase before moving on. Regulatory proteins control the cell cycle at ke y checkpoints, which are
shown in Figure below. There are a number of main checkpoints.
The G1 checkpoint, just before entry into S phase, makes t he key decision of whether the cell should divide.
The S checkpoint determines if the DNA has been replicated properly.
The mitotic spindle checkpoint occurs at the point in me taphase where all the chromosomes should have aligned at th e mitotic
plate.
Checkpoints in the eukaryotic cell cycle ensure that the cell is ready to pr oceed before it moves on to the next phase of the
cycle.
Cancer and the Cell Cycle
Cancer is a disease that occurs when the cell cycle is no lon ger regulated. This may happen because a cell’s DNA bec omes
damaged. Damage can occur due to exposure to hazards s uch as radiation or toxic chemicals. Cancerous cells generally divide
much faster than normal cells. They may form a mass of abnormal cells called a tumor (see Figure below). The rapidly dividing
cells take up nutrients and space that normal cells need. This can damage tissues and organs and eventually lea d to death.

2.25.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8922
These cells are cancer cells, growing out of control and forming a tumor.
Further Reading
Reproductive Life Cycle
Summary
The cell cycle is a repeating series of events that cells go through. It includes growth, DNA synthesis, and cell divis ion. In
eukaryotic cells, there are two growth phases, and cell divi sion includes mitosis.
The cell cycle is controlled by regulatory proteins at three key checkpoints in the cycle. The proteins signal th e cell to either
start or delay the next phase of the cycle.
Cancer is a disease that occurs when the cell cycle is no longer regulated. Cancer cells grow rapidly and may form a mass of
abnormal cells called a tumor.
Review
1. Identify the phases of the eukaryotic cell cycle.
2. What happens during interphase?
3. Define cancer.
4. Cells go through a series of events that include growth, DNA synthesi s, and cell division. Why are these events best represe nted
by a cycle diagram?
5. Explain how the cell cycle is regulated.
Am oe ba Siste rs
The Cell Cycle (and cancer) [Updated
The Cell Cycle (and cancer) [Updated
Watch on

2.25.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89226. Why is DNA replication essential to the cell cycle?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Ed
Uthman;User:Kelvinsong/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
web2.airmail.net/uthman/specimens/images
/tvp.html;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_cycle.svg
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; CK12
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Ed
Uthman
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
web2.airmail.net/uthman/specimens/images
/tvp.html
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Ed Uthman
Source:
web2.airmail.net/uthman/specimens/images
/tvp.html
License: Public Domain
2.25: Cell Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.26.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89232.26: Chromosomes
How is it assured that every cell in your body has the same DNA?
Chromosomes, like those shown here, must form prior to c ell division, to ensure that each daughter cell recei ves a complete set of
genetic material. Essentially, each new cell receives ha lf of each "X-shaped" chromosome.
Chromosomes
In eukaryotic cells, the nucleus divides before the cell itself divide s. The process in which the nucleus divides is called m itosis.
Before mitosis occurs, a cell’s DNA is replicated. Th is is necessary so that each daughter cell will have a complete copy of the
genetic material from the parent cell. How is the repl icated DNA sorted and separated so that each daughter cell gets a complete set
of the genetic material? To understand how this happens, you need to know more about chromosomes.
Chromosomes are coiled structures made of DNA and proteins. Chromo somes are the form of the genetic material of a cell during
cell division. It is this coiled structure that ensure s proper segregation of the chromosomes during cell d ivision. During other phases
of the cell cycle, DNA is not coiled into chromosomes. Instead, it exists as a grainy material called chromatin.
Chromatids and the Centromere
DNA condenses and coils into the familiar X-shaped for m of a chromosome, shown in Figure below, only after it has replicated.
(You can watch DNA coiling into a chromosome at the li nk below.) Because DNA has already replicated, each chro mosome
actually consists of two identical copies. The two copi es are called sister chromatids. They are attached to one another at a region
called the centromere.
Chromosome. After DNA replicates, it forms chromosomes like the o ne shown here.

2.26.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8923Chromosomes and Genes
The DNA of a chromosome is encoded with genetic instru ctions for making proteins. These instructions are orga nized into units
called genes. Most genes contain the instructions for a single prot ein. There may be hundreds or even thousands of genes on a
single chromosome.
Human Chromosomes
Human cells normally have two sets of chromosomes, one set inheri ted from each parent. There are 23 chromosomes in eac h set,
for a total of 46 chromosomes per cell. Each chromo some in one set is matched by a chromosome of the sa me type in the other set,
so there are actually 23 pairs of chromosomes per c ell. Each pair consists of chromosomes of similar size an d shape that also
contain the same genes, but different alleles (alter nate forms of a gene). The chromosomes in a pair are known as homologous
chromosomes.
Summary
Chromosomes are coiled structures made of DNA and proteins.
Chromosomes form after DNA replicates; prior to replication, DNA exists as chromatin.
Chromosomes contain genes, which code for proteins.
Human cells normally have 46 chromosomes, made up of two sets of chro mosomes, one set inherited from each parent.
Review
1. What are chromosomes? When do they form?
2. Identify the chromatids and the centromere of a chromoso me.
3. Explain how chromosomes are related to chromatin. Why ar e chromosomes important for mitosis?
re d Orbit
What is a Chromosome?
What is a Chromosome?
Watch on

2.26.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89234. How many chromosomes are in a normal human cell?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;User:KES47/Wikimedia
Commons;Zappy's
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
some_en.svg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PLoSBi
ol3.5.Fig7ChromosomesAluFish.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zappy's
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.26: Chromosomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.27.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89242.27: Mitosis
What is meant by the "division of the nucleus"?
What do you think this colorful picture shows? If you guessed that it’s a picture of a cell undergoing c ell division, you are right.
But more specifically, the image is a lung cell stained with fluorescent dyes undergoing mitosis, during early ana phase.
Mitosis and Cytokinesis
During mitosis, when the nucleus divides, the two chromatids that ma ke up each chromosome separate from each other and move
to opposite poles of the cell. This is shown in Figure below.
Mitosis is the phase of the eukaryotic cell cycle that occurs betwee n DNA replication and the formation of two daughter
cells. What happens during mitosis?
Mitosis actually occurs in four phases. The phases are called prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. They are shown in
Figure below and described in greater detail in the following sections.

2.27.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8924
Mitosis in the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle. Mitosis is the multi-phase process i n which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides.
Prophase
The first and longest phase of mitosis is prophase. During prophase, chromatin condenses into chromoso mes, and the nuclear
envelope, or membrane, breaks down. In animal cells, the centrioles near the nucleus begin to separate and move to opp osite poles
(sides) of the cell. As the centrioles move, a spindle starts to form between them. The spindle, shown in Figure below, consists of
fibers made of microtubules.
Spindle. The spindle starts to form during prophase of mitosis. Kinetochor es on the spindle attach to the centromeres of
sister chromatids.
Metaphase
During metaphase, spindle fibers attach to the centromere of each pa ir of sister chromatids (see Figure below). The sister
chromatids line up at the equator, or center, of the cell. This is also known as the metaphase plate. The spi ndle fibers ensure that
sister chromatids will separate and go to different daugh ter cells when the cell divides.

2.27.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8924
Chromosomes, consisting of sister chromatids, line up at the equator or m iddle of the cell during metaphase.
Anaphase
During anaphase, sister chromatids separate and the centromeres divi de. The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the short ening
of the spindle fibers. This is like reeling in a fish b y shortening the fishing line. One sister chromatid move s to one pole of the cell,
and the other sister chromatid moves to the opposit e pole. At the end of anaphase, each pole of the cel l has a complete set of
chromosomes.
Telophase
During telophase, the chromosomes begin to uncoil and form chromati n. This prepares the genetic material for directing the
metabolic activities of the new cells. The spindle also breaks down, and new nuclear membran es (nuclear envelope) form.
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis is the final stage of cell division in eu karyotes as well as prokaryotes. During cytokinesis, the cytoplasm splits in two
and the cell divides. Cytokinesis occurs somewhat differ ently in plant and animal cells, as shown in Figure below. In animal cells,
the plasma membrane of the parent cell pinches inwar d along the cell’s equator until two daughter cells f orm. In plant cells, a cell
plate forms along the equator of the parent cell. Then, a n ew plasma membrane and cell wall form along each side of the cel l plate.
Cytokinesis is the final stage of eukaryotic cell division. It occur s differently in animal (left) and plant (right) cells.

2.27.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8924
The four phases of mitosis. Can you describe what happens in each phase?
Summary
Cell division in eukaryotic cells includes mitosis, in whi ch the nucleus divides, and cytokinesis, in which the cyt oplasm divides
and daughter cells form.
Mitosis occurs in four phases, called prophase, metaphas e, anaphase, and telophase.
Review
1. List the phases of mitosis.
2. What happens during prophase of mitosis?
3. During which phase of mitosis do sister chromatids separa te?
4. Describe what happens during cytokinesis in animal ce lls.
5. If a cell skipped metaphase during mitosis, how mig ht this affect the two daughter cells?
Cra sh Cou rse
Mitosis: Splitting Up is Complicated
Mitosis: Splitting Up is Complicated
Watch on

2.27.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89246. Explain the significance of the spindle fibers in mi tosis.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Kelvinsong/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_cycle.svg
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson and Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) (cell images can be
found at
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Us...fHats/ga
llery2);Zachary
Wilson;User:Kelvinsong/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation; ck 12
foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_cycle.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Courtesy of Nogales group and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Source: http://www.lbl.gov/ScienceArticles/Archive/sabl/2007/Oct/onering.ht
ml
License: Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 7]Credit: User:Kelvinsong/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_cycle.svg
License: Public Domain

2.27.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89242.27: Mitosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.28.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89272.28: Reproduction
One parent or two?
That is the main difference between sexual and asexua l reproduction. Sexual reproduction just means combin ing genetic material
from two parents. Asexual reproduction produces offspring g enetically identical to the one parent.
Reproduction: Asexual vs. Sexual
Cell division is how organisms grow and repair themselves. It is also h ow many organisms produce offspring. For many singlecelled organisms, reproduction is a similar process. The parent cell simply divides to form two daughter cells that are identical to
the parent. In many other organisms, two parents are involved, and the offspring are not identical to the parents. In fact, each
offspring is unique. Look at the family in Figure below. The children resemble their parents, but the y are not identical to them.
Instead, each has a unique combination of characteristics inherited from both parents.
Family Portrait: Mother, Daughter, Father, and Son. Children resemble t heir parents, but they are never identical to them.
Do you know why this is the case?
Reproduction is the process by which organisms give rise to offsp ring. It is one of the defining characteristics of l iving things.
There are two basic types of reproduction: asexual reprodu ction and sexual reproduction.
Asexual Reproduction
Asexual reproduction involves a single parent. It results in offspring that are genetically identical to each other and to the parent.
All prokaryotes and some eukaryotes reproduce this way. There are several different methods of asexual repr oduction. They
include binary fission, fragmentation, and budding.
Binary fission occurs when a parent cell splits into two identical daug hter cells of the same size.

2.28.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8927Fragmentation occurs when a parent organism breaks into fragments, or pieces, and each fragment develops into a new
organism. Starfish, like the one in Figure below, reproduce this way. A new starfish can develop fro m a single ray, or arm.
Starfish, however, are also capable of sexual reproduction.
Budding occurs when a parent cell forms a bubble-like bud. The bud stays attached to the parent cell while it grows and
develops. When the bud is fully developed, it breaks away f rom the parent cell and forms a new organism. Budding in yea st is
shown in Figure below.
Binary Fission in various single-celled organisms (left). Cell divi sion is a relatively simple process in many single-celled
organisms. Eventually the parent cell will pinch apart to form two ide ntical daughter cells. In multiple fission (right), a
multinucleated cell can divide to form more than one daughter cell. Mult iple fission is more often observed among protists.
Starfish reproduce by fragmentation and yeasts reproduce by budding. Both are type s of asexual reproduction.
Asexual reproduction can be very rapid. This is an adva ntage for many organisms. It allows them to crowd out o ther organisms that
reproduce more slowly. Bacteria, for example, may divide several times per hour. Unde r ideal conditions, 100 bacteria can divide to
produce millions of bacterial cells in just a few hours! However, most bacteria do not li ve under ideal conditions. If they did, the
entire surface of the planet would soon be covered wi th them. Instead, their reproduction is kept in chec k by limited resources,
predators, and their own wastes. This is true of most other o rganisms as well.
Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction involves two parents. As you can see from Figure below, in sexual reproduction, parents produce
reproductive cells—called gametes —that unite to form an offspring. Gametes are haploid cells. This means they contain only half
the number of chromosomes found in other cells of th e organism. Gametes are produced by a type of cell di vision called meiosis,
which is described in detail in a subsequent concept. T he process in which two gametes unite is called fertilization. The fertilized
cell that results is referred to as a zygote. A zygote is diploid cell, which means that it has twice the number of chr omosomes as a
gamete.

2.28.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8927
Cycle of Sexual Reproduction. Sexual reproduction involves the production of haploid gametes by meiosis. This is followed
by fertilization and the formation of a diploid zygote. The number of c hromosomes in a gamete is represented by the letter
n. Why does the zygote have 2n, or twice as many, chromosomes?
Summary
Asexual reproduction involves one parent and produces of fspring that are genetically identical to each other and to the parent.
Sexual reproduction involves two parents and produces off spring that are genetically unique.
During sexual reproduction, two haploid gametes join in th e process of fertilization to produce a diploid zygote.
Meiosis is the type of cell division that produces gametes.
Review
1. What are three types of asexual reproduction?
2. Define gamete and zygote. What number of chromosomes do es each have (in humans)?
3. What happens during fertilization?
Am oe ba Siste rs
Asexual and Sexual Reproduction
Asexual and Sexual Reproduction
Watch on

2.28.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89274. Compare and contrast asexual and sexual reproduction.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Starfish: Flickr:amanderson2;
Yeast: Zappy's
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Starfish:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amanderson/7
203865052/; Yeast: CK-12 Foundation
License: Starfish: CC BY 2.0; Yeast: CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Juan Carlos
Tinjaca, 2014;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;BBC
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; CK12 Foundation;
www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/scienc
e/aqa/geneticvariation/reproductionrev1.sht
ml
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Starfish: Flickr:amanderson2;
Yeast: Zappy's
Source: Starfish:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amanderson/7
203865052/; Yeast: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amanderson/7
203865052/; Yeast: CK-12 Foundation
License: Starfish: CC BY 2.0; Yeast: CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.28: Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.29.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89282.29: Meiosis
How do you make a cell with half the DNA?
Meiosis. This allows cells to have half the number of chromosomes, so two of the se cells can come back together to form a new
organism with the complete number of chromosomes. This process not only helps produce gametes, it also ensures genetic
variation.
Meiosis
The process that produces haploid gametes is meiosis. Meiosis is a type of cell division in which the number of c hromosomes is
reduced by half. It occurs only in certain special cells of the organisms. During meiosis, homologous chromoso mes separate, and
haploid cells form that have only one chromosome from each pair. Two cell divisions occur during meiosis, and a total o f four
haploid cells are produced. The two cell divisions ar e called meiosis I and meiosis II. The overall proc ess of meiosis is summarized
in Figure below.
Overview of Meiosis. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes separ ate and go to different daughter cells. This diagram
shows just the nuclei of the cells. Notice the exchange of genetic mat erial that occurs prior to the first cell division.

2.29.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8928Phases of Meiosis
Meiosis I begins after DNA replicates during interphase of the cell cycle. In both meiosis I and meiosis II, c ells go through the
same four phases as mitosis - prophase, metaphase, an aphase and telophase. However, there are important diff erences between
meiosis I and mitosis. The flowchart in Figure below shows what happens in both meiosis I and II.
Phases of Meiosis. This flowchart of meiosis shows meiosis I in gre ater detail than meiosis II. Meiosis I—but not meiosis II
—differs somewhat from mitosis. How does meiosis I differ from mit osis?0:00

2.29.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8928How does meiosis I differ from mitosis? Notice at the beginning of meiosis (prophase I), homologous chromos omes exchange
segments of DNA. This is known as crossing-over, and is unique to this phase of meiosis.
Meiosis I
1. Prophase I: The nuclear envelope begins to break down, and the chromosomes condense. Centrioles start moving to opposite
poles of the cell, and a spindle begins to form. Importantly, homologous chromosomes pair up, which is unique to prophase I.
In prophase of mitosis and meiosis II, homologous chro mosomes do not form pairs in this way. Crossing-over occurs d uring
this phase.
2. Metaphase I: Spindle fibers attach to the paired homologo us chromosomes. The paired chromosomes line up along th e equator
(middle) of the cell. This occurs only in metaphase I. In me taphase of mitosis and meiosis II, it is sister chroma tids that line up
along the equator of the cell.
3. Anaphase I: Spindle fibers shorten, and the chromosomes of each homologous pair start to separate from each other. One
chromosome of each pair moves toward one pole of the cell, an d the other chromosome moves toward the opposite pole.
4. Telophase I and Cytokinesis: The spindle breaks do wn, and new nuclear membranes form. The cytoplasm of the c ell divides,
and two haploid daughter cells result. The daughter cell s each have a random assortment of chromosomes, with one from each
homologous pair. Both daughter cells go on to meiosis II. The DNA does not replicate between meiosis I and meiosis II.
Meiosis II
1. Prophase II: The nuclear envelope breaks down and the spi ndle begins to form in each haploid daughter cell from meio sis I. The
centrioles also start to separate.
2. Metaphase II: Spindle fibers line up the sister chromatids of each chromosome along the equator of the cell.
3. Anaphase II: Sister chromatids separate and move to opposit e poles.
4. Telophase II and Cytokinesis: The spindle breaks d own, and new nuclear membranes form. The cytoplasm of eac h cell divides,
and four haploid cells result. Each cell has a unique co mbination of chromosomes.
Summary
Meiosis is the type of cell division that produces gametes.
Meiosis involves two cell divisions and produces four haplo id cells.
Sexual reproduction has the potential to produce treme ndous genetic variation in offspring. This is due in par t to crossing-over
during meiosis.
Review
1. What is meiosis?
2. Compare the events of metaphase I to metaphase II?
3. Create a diagram to show how crossing-over occurs and ho w it creates new gene combinations on each chromosome.
4. Explain why sexual reproduction results in geneticall y unique offspring.
Cra sh Cou rse
Meiosis: Where the Sex Starts - Cras
Meiosis: Where the Sex Starts - Cras
Watch on

2.29.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89285. Explain how meiosis I differs from mitosis.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.29: Meiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.30.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89292.30: Gametogenesis
What's the biggest cell on Earth?
The ostrich egg - unfertilized, of course. Yes, this e gg, just like a human ovum, is just one cell. The egg shell membrane encloses
the nucleus containing the genetic material and the cy toplasm.
Gametogenesis
At the end of meiosis, four haploid cells have been produced, but the cells are not yet gamete s. The cells need to develop before
they become mature gametes capable of fertilization. Th e development of haploid cells into gametes is called gametogenesis.
How much DNA is in a gamete? The sperm cell forms by meiosis and spermatog enesis. Because it forms by meiosis, the
sperm cell has only half as much DNA as a body cell. Notice the three dis tinct segments: a head piece, a flagella tail and a
midpiece of mostly mitochondria. What is the role of each section?
Gametogenesis may differ between males and females. Mal e gametes are called sperm. Female gametes are called eggs. In human
males, for example, the process that produces mature sperm cells is called spermatogenesis. During this process, sperm cells grow
a tail and gain the ability to “swim,” like the huma n sperm cell shown in Figure below. In human females, the process that
produces mature eggs is called oogenesis. Just one egg is produced from the four haploid cell s that result from meiosis. The single
egg is a very large cell, as you can see from the human egg in Figure below.

2.30.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8929
A human sperm is a tiny cell with a tail. A human egg is much larger. Both c ells are mature haploid gametes that are
capable of fertilization. What process is shown in this photograph? Notic e the sperm with the head piece containing the
genetic material, a flagella tail that propels the sperm, and a mi dpiece of mostly mitochondria, supplying ATP.
Spermatogenesis and Oogenesis
During spermatogenesis, primary spermatocytes go through the first cell division of meiosis to pro duce secondary spermatocytes.
These are haploid cells. Secondary spermatocytes then quickly complete the meiotic division to become spermatids, which are
also haploid cells. The four haploid cells produced fr om meiosis develop a flagellum tail and compact head piece to become mature
sperm cells, capable of swimming and fertilizing an egg. The compact head, which has lost most of its cytopl asm, is key in the
formation of a streamlined shape. The middle piece o f the sperm, connecting the head to the tail, contai ns many mitochondria,
providing energy to the cell. The sperm cell essentia lly contributes only DNA to the zygote.
On the other hand, the egg provides the other half o f the DNA, but also organelles, building blocks for compo unds such as proteins
and nucleic acids, and other necessary materials. The egg, being much larger than a sperm cell, contains almost all of the cytoplasm
a developing embryo will have during its first few da ys of life. Therefore, oogenesis is a much more compl icated process than
spermatogenesis.
Oogenesis begins before birth and is not completed un til after fertilization. Oogenesis begins when oogonia (singular, oogonium),
which are the immature eggs that form in the ovaries before birth and have the diploid number of chromos omes, undergo mitosis to
form primary oocytes, also with the diploid number. Oogenesis proceeds as a primary oocyte undergoes the first cell division of
meiosis to form secondary oocytes with the haploid n umber of chromosomes. A secondary oocyte only undergoe s the second
meiotic cell division to form a haploid ovum if it is fertilized by a sperm. The one egg cell that resul ts from meiosis contains most
of the cytoplasm, nutrients, and organelles. This unequ al distribution of materials produces one large cel l, and one cell with little
more than DNA. This other cell, known as a polar body, eventually breaks down. The larger cell undergoes m eiosis II, once again
producing a large cell and a polar body. The large c ell develops into the mature gamete, called an ovum (Figure below). The
unequal distribution of the cytoplasm during oogenes is is necessary as the zygote that results from fertil ization receives all of its
cytoplasm from the egg. So the egg needs to have as much cyt oplasm as possible.
Maturation of the ovum. Notice only one mature ovum, or egg, forms dur ing meiosis from the primary oocyte. Three polar
bodies may form during oogenesis. These polar bodies will not form mat ure gametes. Conversely, four haploid spermatids
form during meiosis from the primary spermatocyte.

2.30.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8929Summary
Meiosis is a step during spermatogenesis and oogenesis.
Spermatogenesis produces four haploid sperm cells, while ooge nesis produces one mature ovum.
Review
1. What is gametogenesis, and when does it occur?
2. What are the main differences between oogenesis and sperma togenesis?
3. How many chromosomes are in a human oogonia?
T e a ch e r's P e t
Formation of Gametes
Formation of Gametes
Watch on

2.30.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89294. Why is there unequal distribution of the cytoplasm dur ing oogenesis?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright MichaelTaylor,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of www.PDImages.com
Source:
http://www.pdimages.com/03709.html
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.30: Gametogenesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.31.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89302.31: Genetic Variation
What helps ensure the survival of a species?
Genetic variation. It is this variation that is the e ssence of evolution. Without genetic differences amon g individuals, "survival of
the fittest" would not be likely. Either all survive, or all perish.
Genetic Variation
Sexual reproduction results in infinite possibilities of genetic varia tion. In other words, sexual reproduction results in offspring
that are genetically unique. They differ from both pare nts and also from each other. This occurs for a number of re asons.
When homologous chromosomes form pairs during prophas e I of meiosis I, crossing-over can occur. Crossing-over is the
exchange of genetic material between homologous chromoso mes. It results in new combinations of genes on each chromo some.
When cells divide during meiosis, homologous chromosomes are random ly distributed to daughter cells, and different
chromosomes segregate independently of each other. Thi s is called independent assortment. It results in gametes that have
unique combinations of chromosomes.
In sexual reproduction, two gametes unite to produce an o ffspring. But which two of the millions of possible gametes wi ll it be?
This is likely to be a matter of chance. It is obviously an other source of genetic variation in offspring. This is known as random
fertilization.
All of these mechanisms working together result in an amazing amount of potential variation. Each human co uple, for example, has
the potential to produce more than 64 trillion genetical ly unique children. No wonder we are all different!
Crossing-Over
Crossing-over occurs during prophase I, and it is the exchange of genetic material between non-sister chr omatids of homologous
chromosomes. Recall during prophase I, homologous ch romosomes line up in pairs, gene-for-gene down their ent ire length,
forming a configuration with four chromatids, known as a tetrad. At this point, the chromatids are very close to ea ch other and
some material from two chromatids switch chromosomes, t hat is, the material breaks off and reattaches at the same position on the
homologous chromosome (Figure below). This exchange of genetic material can happe n many times within the same pair of
homologous chromosomes, creating unique combinations of g enes. This process is also known as recombination.

2.31.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8930
Crossing-over. A maternal strand of DNA is shown in red. A paternal strand of DNA is shown in blue. Crossing over
produces two chromosomes that have not previously existed. The process of recombination involves the breakage and
rejoining of parental chromosomes (M, F). This results in the gene ration of novel chromosomes (C1, C2) that share DNA
from both parents.
Independent Assortment and Random Fertilization
In humans, there are over 8 million configurations in which the chromosomes can line up during metaphase I of meiosis. It is the
specific processes of meiosis, resulting in four uniqu e haploid cells, that result in these many combinations. This indep endent
assortment, in which the chromosome inherited from eit her the father or mother can sort into any gamete, pr oduces the potential for
tremendous genetic variation. Together with random f ertilization, more possibilities for genetic variatio n exist between any two
people than the number of individuals alive today. Se xual reproduction is the random fertilization of a gamete from the female
using a gamete from the male. In humans, over 8 mill ion (2) chromosome combinations exist in the produc tion of gametes in
both the male and female. A sperm cell, with over 8 million chromosome combinations, fe rtilizes an egg cell, which also has over 8
million chromosome combinations. That is over 64 tr illion unique combinations, not counting the unique c ombinations produced
by crossing-over. In other words, each human couple could produce a child with over 64 trillion unique chromosome c ombinations!
T e a ch e r's P e t
Formation of Gametes
Formation of Gametes
Watch on

2.31.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8930Summary
Sexual reproduction has the potential to produce treme ndous genetic variation in offspring.
This variation is due to independent assortment and cros sing-over during meiosis, and random union of gametes du ring
fertilization.
Review
1. What is crossing-over and when does it occur?
2. Describe how crossing-over, independent assortment, an d random fertilization lead to genetic variation.
3. How many combinations of chromosomes are possible from sexual reproduction in humans?
4. Create a diagram to show how crossing-over occurs and ho w it creates new gene combinations on each chromosome.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;David
Eccles;unknown
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
somal_Recombination.svg;
https://petermontoyainc.wordpress.com/201
6/10/19/contact-strategies-building-aneffective-client-contact-campaign/#more781
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: David Eccles
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
somal_Recombination.svg
License: CC BY 2.5
2.31: Genetic Variation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
W h ite B oa rdScie n ce
The Independent Assortment of Gene
The Independent Assortment of Gene
Watch on

2.32.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89312.32: Life Cycle
Young to old. A life cycle?
Not in the biological sense. Life cycles describe the a mount of DNA present at a specific stage or time in th e life of an organism. Is
there a haploid or diploid amount of DNA? That is the key question.
Life Cycles
Sexual reproduction occurs in a cycle. Diploid parents produce haploid gametes that unite and develop into diploid adults, which
repeat the cycle. This series of life stages and even ts that a sexually reproducing organism goes through is called its life cycle.
Sexually reproducing organisms can have different ty pes of life cycles. Three are represented in Figure below and described in the
following sections.
Life cycles can vary in sexually reproducing organisms. Three types of sexual life cycles are shown here. Do y ou see how they
differ? The letter n indicates haploid stages of the life cycles, and 2n indicates diploid stages.
Haploid Life Cycle
The haploid life cycle is the simplest life cycle. It is found in many single -celled eukaryotic organisms. Organisms with a haploid
life cycle spend the majority of their lives as hapl oid gametes. When the haploid gametes fuse, they for m a diploid zygote. It
quickly undergoes meiosis to produce more haploid gametes that repeat the life cycle.
Diploid Life Cycle
Organisms with a diploid life cycle spend the majority of their lives as diploid adults. When they are ready to reproduce, they
undergo meiosis and produce haploid gametes. Gametes then unite in fertilization and form a diploid zyg ote, which immediately
enters G of the cell cycle. Next, the zygote's DNA is r eplicated. Finally, the processes of mitosis and cyto kinesis produce two
genetically identical diploid cells. Through repeated rounds of growth and division, thi s organism becomes a diploid adult and the
cycle continues. Can you think of an organism with a diploid life cycle? (Hint: What type of life cycle do humans have?)
Alternation of Generations
Plants, algae, and some protists have a life cycle tha t alternates between diploid and haploid phases, known as alternation of
generations. In plants, the life cycle alternates between the dip loid sporophyte and haploid gametophyte. Spore forming cells in the1

2.32.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8931diploid sporophyte undergo meiosis to produce spores, a haploid reproductive cell. Spores can develop in to an adult without fusing
with another cell. The spores give rise to a multicel lular haploid gametophyte, which produce gametes by mitosis. The gametes
fuse, producing a diploid zygote, which grow into the diploid sporophyte. These life cycles may be quite co mplicated. You can read
about them in additional concepts.
Summary
A life cycle is the sequence of stages an organisms go es through from one generation to the next. Organisms th at reproduce
sexually can have different types of life cycles, such as hap loid or diploid life cycles.
Summary of all three life cycles. (
CC BY-NC 3.0
; Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundati on via CK-12 Foundation)
Review
1. What is a life cycle?
2. An adult organism produces gametes that quickly go throug h fertilization and form diploid zygotes. The zygotes ma ture into
adults, which live for many years. Eventually the adults pr oduce gametes and the cycle repeats. What type of life cycle does this
organism have? Explain your answer.
3. Which life cycle is the simplest? Why?

2.32.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/89314. Describe the alternation of generations life cycle.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
2.32: Life Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.33.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14412.33: Phospholipid Bilayer
All cells have a plasma membrane. This membrane surrounds the cell. So what is its role?
Can molecules enter and leave the cell? Yes. Can anyth ing or everything enter or leave? No. So, what determin es what can go in or
out? Is it the nucleus? The DNA? Or the plasma membrane?
The Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane (also known as the cell membrane) forms a barrier between the cytoplasm inside the cel l and the
environment outside the cell. It protects and suppo rts the cell and also controls everything that enter s and leaves the cell. It allows
only certain substances to pass through, while keeping others in or out. The ability to allow only certain molecules in or out of the
cell is referred to as selective permeability or semipermeability. To understand how the plasma membrane controls what crosses
into or out of the cell, you need to know its compositi on.
A Phospholipid Bilayer
The plasma membrane is composed mainly of phospholip ids, which consist of fatty acids and alcohol. The ph ospholipids in the
plasma membrane are arranged in two layers, called a phospholipid bilayer. As shown in the Figure below, each phospholipid
molecule has a head and two tails. The head “loves” water (hydrophilic) and the tails “hate” water (hydrophobic). The waterhating tails are on the interior of the membrane, whe reas the water-loving heads point outwards, toward eith er the cytoplasm or the
fluid that surrounds the cell.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Cell Membranes and Cell Walls | Cel
Cell Membranes and Cell Walls | Cel
Watch on

2.33.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1441Molecules that are hydrophobic can easily pass throu gh the plasma membrane, if they are small enough, beca use they are waterhating like the interior of the membrane. Molecules that are hydrophilic, on the other hand, cannot pass t hrough the plasma
membrane—at least not without help—because they are wa ter-loving like the exterior of the membrane, and ar e therefore excluded
from the interior of the membrane.
Phospholipid Bilayer. The phospholipid bilayer consists of two layers of pho spholipids, with a hydrophobic, or waterhating, interior and a hydrophilic, or water-loving, exterior. The hy drophilic (polar) head group and hydrophobic tails
(fatty acid chains) are depicted in the single phospholipid molecule. The pola r head group and fatty acid chains are attached
by a 3-carbon glycerol unit.
Science Friday: Candy Corn in Space
Candy corn is a very tasty treat. In this video by Scie nce Friday, astronaut Don Pettit uses Candy Corn to demo nstrate the effects of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions.
Sc iF ri
Candy Corn In Space
Candy Corn In Space
Watch on

2.33.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1441Summary
The plasma membrane forms a barrier between the cytoplasm and the environment outside the cell. The plasma membran e has
selective permeability.
The plasma membrane is primarily composed of phospholi pids arranged in a bilayer, with the hydrophobic tails on t he interior
of the membrane, and the hydrophilic heads pointing ou twards.
Review
1. Describe the role of the plasma membrane.
2. What is meant by semipermeability?
3. Describe the composition of the plasma membrane.
4. Explain why hydrophobic molecules can easily cross the p lasma membrane, while hydrophilic molecules cannot.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flickr:stellarr
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/21187899@N
03/2058985902/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for the CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 2.33: Phospholipid Bilayer is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.34.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14422.34: Membrane Proteins
Can anything or everything move in or out of the cell?
No. It is the semipermeable plasma membrane that deter mines what can enter and leave the cell. So, if not e verything can cross the
membrane, how do certain things get across?
Membrane Proteins
The plasma membrane contains molecules other than ph ospholipids, primarily other lipids and proteins. T he yellow molecules
between the phospholipid tails in the Figure below, for example, are the lipid cholesterol. Molecules of cholesterol help the plasma
membrane keep its shape. Many of the proteins in the pl asma membrane assist other substances in crossing the membra ne.
The plasma membranes also contain certain types of p roteins. A membrane protein is a protein molecule that is attached to, or
associated with, the membrane of a cell or an organel le. Membrane proteins can be put into two groups base d on how the protein is
associated with the membrane.
Integral membrane proteins are permanently embedded within the plasma membrane. They have a range of important functions.
Such functions include channeling or transporting mo lecules across the membrane. Other integral proteins ac t as cell receptors.
Integral membrane proteins can be classified accordin g to their relationship with the bilayer:
Transmembrane proteins span the entire plasma membrane. Transmembrane proteins are found in all types of biologic al
membranes.
Integral monotopic proteins are permanently attached t o the membrane from only one side.
Some integral membrane proteins are responsible for c ell adhesion (sticking of a cell to another cell or surface). On the outside of
cell membranes and attached to some of the proteins are carbohydrate chains that act as labels that id entify the cell type. Shown in
the Figure below are two different types of membrane proteins and assoc iated molecules.
Peripheral membrane proteins are proteins that are only temporarily associated wi th the membrane. They can be easily removed,
which allows them to be involved in cell signaling. Per ipheral proteins can also be attached to integral m embrane proteins, or they
can stick into a small portion of the lipid bilayer b y themselves. Peripheral membrane proteins are often a ssociated with ion
channels and transmembrane receptors. Most peripheral m embrane proteins are hydrophilic.

2.34.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1442
Some of the membrane proteins make up a major transport system that mo ves molecules and ions through the polar
phospholipid bilayer.
The Fluid Mosaic Model
In 1972, S.J. Singer and G.L. Nicolson proposed the now widely accepted Fluid Mosaic Model of the structure of cell membranes.
The model proposes that integral membrane proteins a re embedded in the phospholipid bilayer, as seen in t he Figure above. Some
of these proteins extend all the way through the bil ayer, and some only partially across it. These membran e proteins act as transport
proteins and receptors proteins.
Their model also proposed that the membrane behaves like a fluid, rather than a solid. The proteins an d lipids of the membrane
move around the membrane, much like buoys in water. Such movement causes a constant change in the "mos aic pattern" of the
plasma membrane.
Extensions of the Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane may have extensions, such as whip-li ke flagella or brush-like cilia. In single-celled organisms, like those
shown in the Figure below, the membrane extensions may help the organi sms move. In multicellular organisms, the extensions
have other functions. For example, the cilia on human l ung cells sweep foreign particles and mucus toward the mouth and nose.
pporn e lu bio
Fluid Mosaic Model
Fluid Mosaic Model
Watch on

2.34.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1442
Flagella and Cilia. Cilia and flagella are extensions of the plas ma membrane of many cells.
Summary
The plasma membrane has many proteins that assist other sub stances in crossing the membrane.
The Fluid Mosaic Model depicts the biological nature of the plasma membrane.
Cilia and flagella are extensions of the plasma membrane.
Review
1. What is the main difference between the two main types of proteins associated with the plasma membrane?
2. What are two functions of integral membrane proteins?
3. Discuss the Fluid Mosaic Model.

2.34.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14424. What are flagella and cilia?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Witold Ferens, based on the image
Source: https://www.google.com/url?
sa=i&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=images&c
d=&ved=0ahUKEwjB95aCyanRAhVK12
MKHWk8AOEQjB0IBg&url=http%3A%2
F%2Fwiki.pingry.org%2Fu%2Fapbiology%2Findex.php%2FFlagella&psig=
AFQjCNEEd6kumwBKWcEschAyBt4XNpQ7g&ust=148365631
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cell_me
mbrane_detailed_diagram_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Flagella: Courtesy of Dr. Stan
Erlandsen/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (Image #11643); Cilia: Courtesy
of Charles Daghlian;By Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal LadyofHats - the diagram i made
myself using adobe illustrator. as a source
for the information i used the diagrams
found here:[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] and
[7]., Public Domain,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8152684
Source: Flagella:
phil.cdc.gov/phil/home.asp; Cilia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bronchi
olar_epithelium_3_-_SEM.jpg; By
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal LadyofHats - the
diagram i made myself using adobe
illustrator. as a source for the information i
used the diagrams found here:[1]; [2]; [3];
[4]; [5]; [6] and [7].; Public Domain;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8152684
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC-SA
3.0
This page titled 2.34: Membrane Proteins is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

2.35.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14432.35: Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton
Does a cell have, or even need, a "skeleton"?
What do you get if you take some tubing, and make t he tubes smaller and smaller and smaller? You get ve ry small tubes, or
microtubes. Very small tubes, or microtubules, together wit h microfilaments, form the basis of the "skeleton" inside the cell.
The Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton
The cytoplasm consists of everything inside the plasma membrane of the cell, excluding the nucleus in a eukaryotic cel l. It
includes the watery, gel-like material called cytosol, as well as various structures. The water in the cytoplasm makes up about two
thirds of the cell’s weight and gives the cell many of i ts properties.
Functions of the Cytoplasm
The cytoplasm has several important functions, including:
1. suspending cell organelles.
2. pushing against the plasma membrane to help the cell keep its shape.
3. providing a site for many of the biochemical reaction s of the cell.
The Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a cellular "scaffolding" or "skeleton" that cri sscrosses the cytoplasm. All eukaryotic cells have a cytoskeleton,
and recent research has shown that prokaryotic cells a lso have a cytoskeleton. The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is made up of a network
of long, thin protein fibers and has many functions. It helps to maintain cell shape. It holds organelles i n place, and for some cells,
it enables cell movement. The cytoskeleton also play s important roles in both the intracellular movement of substances and in cell
division. Certain proteins act like a path that vesic les and organelles move along within the cell. The thr eadlike proteins that make
up the cytoskeleton continually rebuild to adapt to the cell's constantly changing needs. Three main kin ds of cytoskeleton fibers are
microtubules, intermediate filaments, and microfilamen ts.
Microtubules, shown in the Figure below (a), are hollow cylinders and are the thickest of the cytoskel eton structures. They are
most commonly made of filaments which are polymers of alp ha and beta tubulin, and radiate outwards from an area nea r the
nucleus called the centrosome. Tubulin is the protein that forms microtubules. Two forms of tub ulin, alpha and beta, form
dimers (pairs) which come together to form the hollow c ylinders. The cylinders are twisted around each other to form the
microtubules. Microtubules help the cell keep its shape. The y hold organelles in place and allow them to move around the cell,
and they form the mitotic spindle during cell division. Micr otubules also make up parts of cilia and flagella, the organ elles that
help a cell move.
Microfilaments, shown in Figure below (b), are made of two thin actin chains that are twisted around one another.
Microfilaments are mostly concentrated just beneath the cell membrane, where they support the cell and help the cell keep its

2.35.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1443shape. Microfilaments form cytoplasmatic extensions, su ch as pseudopodia and microvilli, which allow certain cells to move.
The actin of the microfilaments interacts with the pro tein myosin to cause contraction in muscle cells. Microfila ments are found
in almost every cell, and are numerous in muscle cells and in cells that move by changing shape, such as phagocytes (wh ite
blood cells that search the body for bacteria and other invaders).
Intermediate filaments differ in make-up from one cell type to another. Intermedi ate filaments organize the inside structure of
the cell by holding organelles and providing strength. They are also structural components of the nuclear envelope. Inte rmediate
filaments made of the protein keratin are found in skin, h air, and nails cells.
(a)
The eukaryotic cytoskeleton. Microfilaments are shown in red, microtubule s in green, and the nuclei are in blue. By linking
regions of the cell together, the cytoskeleton helps support the shape of the cell.
(b)
Microscopy of microfilaments (actin filaments), shown in green, ins ide cells. The nucleus is shown in blue.
Microtubules Intermediate Filaments Microfilaments
Protein CompositionTubulin, with two subunits,
alpha and beta tubulinOne of different types of
proteins such as lamin,
vimentin, and keratinActin
ShapeHollow cylinders made of two
protein chains twisted around
each otherProtein fiber coils twisted into
each otherTwo actin chains twisted around
one another
Main FunctionsOrganelle and vesicle
movement; form mitotic
spindles during cell
reproduction; cell motility (in
cilia and flagella)Organize cell shape; positions
organelles in cytoplasm
structural support of the nuclear
envelope and sarcomeres;
involved in cell-to-cell and cellto-matrix junctionsKeep cellular shape; allows
movement of certain cells by
forming cytoplasmatic
extensions or contraction of
actin fibers; involved in some
cell-to-cell or cell-to-matrix
junctions
Representation

2.35.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1443Summary
The cytoplasm consists of everything inside the plasma membrane of the cell.
The cytoskeleton is a cellular "skeleton" that crisscro sses the cytoplasm. Three main cytoskeleton fibers are m icrotubules,
intermediate filaments, and microfilaments.
Microtubules are the thickest of the cytoskeleton structu res and are most commonly made of filaments which are pol ymers of
alpha and beta tubulin.
Microfilament are the thinnest of the cytoskeleton struc tures and are made of two thin actin chains that are twiste d around one
another.
Review
1. What is the difference between cytoplasm and cytosol?
2. List two roles of the cytoplasm.
3. Name the three main types of cytoskeleton fibers.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Cytoskeleton Microtubules | Cell Bio
Cytoskeleton Microtubules | Cell Bio
Watch on

2.35.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14434. List two functions of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Source: (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: (a) Courtesy of the US
Government; (b) Weerapong Prasongchean
Source: (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 2.35: Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.36.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14442.36: Nucleus
Where does the DNA live?
The answer depends on if the cell is prokaryotic or eu karyotic. The main difference between the two types of cells is the presence
of a nucleus. And in eukaryotic cells, DNA lives in the nu cleus.
The Nucleus
The nucleus is a membrane-enclosed organelle found in most euka ryotic cells. The nucleus is the largest organelle in the cell a nd
contains most of the cell's genetic information (mi tochondria also contain DNA, called mitochondrial DNA, but it makes up just a
small percentage of the cell’s overall DNA content). T he genetic information, which contains the informatio n for the structure and
function of the organism, is found encoded in DNA in th e form of genes. A gene is a short segment of DNA that contains
information to encode an RNA molecule into a protein strand. DNA in the nucleus is organized in long linea r strands that are
attached to different proteins. These proteins help t he DNA coil up for better storage in the nucleus. Think how a string gets tightly
coiled up if you twist one end while holding the othe r end. These long strands of coiled-up DNA and protein s are called
chromosomes. Each chromosome contains many genes. The function of t he nucleus is to maintain the integrity of these gen es and
to control the activities of the cell by regulating gene expression. Gene expression is the process by which the information in a
gene is "decoded" by various cell molecules to produce a func tional gene product, such as a protein molecule.
The degree of DNA coiling determines whether the chrom osome strands are short and thick or long and thin. Be tween cell
divisions, the DNA in chromosomes is more loosely coiled and forms long, thin strands called chromatin. Before the cell divides,
the chromatin coil up more tightly and form chromoso mes. Only chromosomes stain clearly enough to be see n under a microscope.
The word chromosome comes from the Greek word chroma (color), and soma (body), due to its ability to be stained strongly by
dyes.
The Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope is a double membrane of the nucleus that encloses th e genetic material. It separates the contents of the
nucleus from the cytoplasm. The nuclear envelope is m ade of two lipid bilayers, an inner membrane and an ou ter membrane. The
outer membrane is continuous with the rough endoplasm ic reticulum. Many tiny holes called nuclear pores are found in the
nuclear envelope. These nuclear pores help to regul ate the exchange of materials (such as RNA and protei ns) between the nucleus
and the cytoplasm.
The Nucleolus
The nucleus of many cells also contains a non-membrane bound organelle calle d a nucleolus, shown in the Figure below. The
nucleolus is mainly involved in the assembly of ribo somes. Ribosomes are organelles made of protein and ribosomal RNA
(rRNA), and they build cellular proteins in the cytopl asm. The function of the rRNA is to provide a way of d ecoding the genetic
messages within another type of RNA (called mRNA), into am ino acids. After being made in the nucleolus, ribosomes are exported
to the cytoplasm, where they direct protein synthesis.

2.36.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1444
The eukaryotic cell nucleus. Visible in this diagram are the ribosome- studded double membranes of the nuclear envelope,
the DNA (as chromatin), and the nucleolus. Within the cell nucleus is a visc ous liquid called nucleoplasm, similar to the
cytoplasm found outside the nucleus. The chromatin (which is normally invi sible), is visible in this figure only to show that
it is spread throughout the nucleus.
Summary
The nucleus is a membrane-enclosed organelle, found in m ost eukaryotic cells, which stores the genetic material (DNA).
The nucleus is surrounded by a double lipid bilayer, the nuclear envelope, which is embedded with nuclear pores.
The nucleolus is inside the nucleus, and is where ribosomes are made.
Review
1. What is the role of the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell?
2. Describe the nuclear membrane.
3. What are nuclear pores?
c ra igde t
The Nucleus Song
The Nucleus Song
Watch on

2.36.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14444. What is the role of the nucleolus?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diagram
_human_cell_nucleus.svg
License: Public Domain
This page titled 2.36: Nucleus is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

2.37.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83522.37: Ribosomes and Mitochondria
Sperm cells and muscle cells need lots of energy. What do they have in common?
They have lots of mitochondria. Mitochondria are cal led the power plants of the cell, as these organelles are where most of the
cell's energy is produced. Cells that need lots of energy have lots of mitochondria.
Other Organelles
In addition to the nucleus, eukaryotic cells have many other organelles, including ribosomes and mitochondria. Ribosomes are
present in all cells.
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are small organelles and are the sites of protein sy nthesis (or assembly). They are made of ribosomal prote in and
ribosomal RNA, and are found in both eukaryotic and p rokaryotic cells. Unlike other organelles, ribosomes are not surrounded by a
membrane. Each ribosome has two parts, a large and a s mall subunit, as shown in the Figure below. The subunits are attached to
one another. Ribosomes can be found alone or in gro ups within the cytoplasm. Some ribosomes are attached t o the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and others are attached to the nuclear en velope.
The two subunits that make up a ribosome, small organelles that are intercel lular protein factories.
Ribozymes are RNA molecules that catalyze chemical reactions, such as translation. Translation is the process of ordering the
amino acids in the assembly of a protein, and transla tion will be discussed more in another concept. Briefl y, the ribosomes interact
with other RNA molecules to make chains of amino acids called polypeptide chains, due to the peptide bond th at forms between
individual amino acids. Polypeptide chains are built f rom the genetic instructions held within a messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule.

2.37.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8352Polypeptide chains that are made on the rough ER are inserted directly into the ER and then are transpor ted to their various cellular
destinations. Ribosomes on the rough ER usually produce pr oteins that are destined for the cell membrane.
Ribosomes are found in both eukaryotic and prokaryot ic cells. Ribosomes are not surrounded by a membrane. The other organelles
found in eukaryotic cells are surrounded by a membran e.
Mitochondria
A mitochondrion (mitochondria, plural), is a membrane-enclosed organelle that is found in most eukaryotic cells. Mitochondria
are called the "power plants" of the cell because the y are the sites of cellular respiration, where they u se energy from organic
compounds to make ATP (adenosine triphosphate). ATP is the cell's energy source that is used for such th ings such as movement
and cell division. Some ATP is made in the cytosol of the cell, but most of it is made inside mitochondria. The number of
mitochondria in a cell depends on the cell’s energy needs. For example, active human muscle cells may have t housands of
mitochondria, while less active red blood cells do not have any.
As the Figure above (a) and (b) show, a mitochondrion has two phospholipid membrane s. The smooth outer membrane separates
the mitochondrion from the cytosol. The inner membr ane has many folds, called cristae. The fluid-filled inside of the
mitochondrion, called the matrix, is where most of the cell’s ATP is made.
Although most of a cell's DNA is contained in the cell nucleus, mitochondria have their own DNA. Mitochondria a re able to
reproduce asexually, and scientists think that they are descended from prokaryotes. According to the en dosymbiotic theory,
mitochondria were once free-living prokaryotes that infected or were engulfed by ancient eukaryotic cell s. The invading
prokaryotes were protected inside the eukaryotic host ce ll, and in turn the prokaryote supplied extra ATP to its host.
DN A L e a rn in g Ce n te r
mRNA T ranslation (Advanced)
mRNA T ranslation (Advanced)
Watch on

2.37.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8352Summary
Ribosomes are small organelles and are the site of protein synthesis. Ribosomes are found in all cells.
Mitochondria are where energy from organic compounds is used to make ATP.
Review
1. What is the function of a ribosome?
2. What is a significant difference between the structu re of a ribosome and other organelles?
3. Identify the reason why mitochondria are called "power pla nts" of the cell.
Am oe ba Siste rs
(OLD VIDEO) Cellular Respiration and
(OLD VIDEO) Cellular Respiration and
Watch on

2.37.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83524. Describe the structure of a mitochondrion.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Source: (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats), modified for CK12 Foundation;(a) Courtesy of the National
Institutes of Health; (b) Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons)
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Original
version:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Endome
mbrane_system_diagram_en.svg; (a)
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mitochondrion_
186.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
mitochondrion_diagram_en.svg; (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3] Credit: (a) Courtesy of the National
Institutes of Health; (b) Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats), modified for CK-12
Foundation
Source: (a)
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mitochondrion_
186.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
mitochondrion_diagram_en.svg; Original
version:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Endome
mbrane_system_diagram_en.svg; (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)

2.37.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8352commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: Public Domain
2.37: Ribosomes and Mitochondria is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.38.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83532.38: Cell Structure
Does a cell have its own ER?
Yes, but in this case, the ER is not just for emergen cies. True, there might be times when the cell responds to emergency conditions
and the functions of the ER may be needed, but usual ly the cell's ER is involved in normal functions. Pro teins are also made on the
outside of the ER, and this starts a whole process of protein transport, both around the inside of the c ell and to the cell membrane
and out.
Other Organelles
In addition to the nucleus, eukaryotic cells have many other organelles, including the endoplasm ic reticulum, Golgi apparatus,
vesicles, vacuoles, and centrioles.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (plural, reticuli) is a network of phospholipid membr anes that form hollow tubes, flattened
sheets, and round sacs. These flattened, hollow folds and s acs are called cisternae. The ER has two major functions:
Transport: Molecules, such as proteins, can move from place to place inside the ER, much like on an intracellular highwa y.
Synthesis: Ribosomes that are attached to ER, similar to unattached ribosomes, make proteins. Lipids are also produced in the
ER.
There are two types of endoplasmic reticulum, rough endopla smic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SE R).
Rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded with ribosomes, which gives it a "rough" appea rance. These ribosomes make
proteins that are then transported from the ER in small s acs called transport vesicles. The transport vesicles pinc h off the ends of
the ER. The rough endoplasmic reticulum works with the Golg i apparatus to move new proteins to their proper destinat ions in
the cell. The membrane of the RER is continuous with the outer layer of the nuclear envelope.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum does not have any ribosomes attached to it, and so it has a smooth appearance. SER has many
different functions, some of which include lipid synthesis, c alcium ion storage, and drug detoxification. Smooth endopla smic
reticulum is found in both animal and plant cells and it serves different functions in each. The SER is m ade up of tubules and
vesicles that branch out to form a network. In some cells t here are dilated areas like the sacs of RER. Smooth endop lasmic
reticulum and RER form an interconnected network.

2.38.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8353
Image of nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, and how they wor k together. The process of secretion from
endoplasmic reticuli to Golgi apparatus is shown.
Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus is a large organelle that is usually made up of fiv e to eight cup-shaped, membrane-covered discs calle d
cisternae, as shown in the Figure above. The cisternae look a bit like a stack of deflated balloons. The Golgi apparatus modifies,
sorts, and packages different substances for secretio n out of the cell, or for use within the cell. The Go lgi apparatus is found close
to the nucleus of the cell, where it modifies protein s that have been delivered in transport vesicles from the RER. It is also involved
in the transport of lipids around the cell. Pieces of the Golgi membrane pinch off to form vesicles that t ransport molecules around
the cell. The Golgi apparatus can be thought of as si milar to a post office; it packages and labels "item s" and then sends them to
different parts of the cell. Both plant and animal cells have a Golgi apparatus. Plant cells can have up to s everal hundred Golgi
stacks scattered throughout the cytoplasm. In plants, the Golgi apparatus contains enzymes that synthesize s ome of the cell wall
polysaccharides.
le a rn biologica lly
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Watch on

2.38.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8353Vesicles
A vesicle is a small, spherical compartment that is separated f rom the cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. Many vesicles are made
in the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum, or are made from parts of the cell membrane. Vesicles from the Golgi
apparatus can be seen in the Figure above. Because it is separated from the cytosol, the spa ce inside the vesicle can be made to be
chemically different from the cytosol. Vesicles are basic tools of the cell for organizing metabolism, tr ansport, and storage of
molecules. Vesicles are also used as chemical reactio n chambers. They can be classified by their contents and fu nction.
Transport vesicles are able to move molecules between locations inside t he cell. For example, transport vesicles move proteins
from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi appara tus.
Lysosomes are vesicles that are formed by the Golgi apparatus. The y contain powerful enzymes that could break down (digest)
the cell. Lysosomes break down harmful cell products, wast e materials, and cellular debris and then force them out o f the cell.
They also digest invading organisms such as bacteria. Lysosomes also break down cells that are ready to die, a process called
autolysis.
Peroxisomes are vesicles that use oxygen to break down toxic subst ances in the cell. Unlike lysosomes, which are formed by
the Golgi apparatus, peroxisomes self-replicate by gro wing bigger and then dividing. They are common in liver an d kidney cells
that break down harmful substances. Peroxisomes are named fo r the hydrogen peroxide (H O) that is produced when they
break down organic compounds. Hydrogen peroxide is toxic, an d in turn is broken down into water (H O) and oxygen (O)
molecules.
Vacuoles
Vacuoles are membrane-bound organelles that can have secretor y, excretory, and storage functions. Many organisms wil l use
vacuoles as storage areas and some plant cells have very large vacuoles. Vesicles are much smaller than vacuoles and function in
transporting materials both within and to the outside of the cell.
Centrioles
Centrioles are rod-like structures made of short microtubules. Ni ne groups of three microtubules make up each centri ole. Two
perpendicular centrioles make up the centrosome. Centrioles are very important in cellular division, where they arrange the mitotic
spindles that pull the chromosome apart during mitosis.
Summary
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is involved in the synt hesis of lipids and synthesis and transport of proteins.
The Golgi apparatus modifies, sorts, and packages different substances for secretion out of the cell, or for use within the cell.
Vesicles are also used as chemical reaction chambers. Transport vesicles, lysosomes, and peroxisomes are type s of vesicles.
Vacuoles have secretory, excretory, and storage function s.
Centrioles are made of short microtubules and are very impo rtant in cell division.
le a rn biologica lly
Golgi Body
Golgi Body
Watch on
2 2
2 2

2.38.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8353Review
1. List five organelles eukaryotes have that prokaryotes d o not have.
2. Explain how the following organelles ensure that a cell has the proteins it needs: nucleus, rough ER, vesicles, and Golgi
apparatus.
3. What is the main difference between rough endoplasmic reticulum and smooth endoplasmic reticulum?
4. Describe the three types of vesicles.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Source: (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats), modified for CK-12
Foundation
Source: Original version:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Endome
mbrane_system_diagram_en.svg; (a)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fluoresc
entCells.jpg; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7_amn
ion_cells.png
License: Public Domain
2.38: Cell Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.39.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83542.39: Plant Cell Structure
What do plants have to do that animals don't?
Many plant cells are green. Why? Plant cells also usually have a disti nct shape. The rigid exterior around the cells is nec essary to
allow the plants to grow upright. Animal cells do not h ave these rigid exteriors. There are other distinct d ifferences between plant
and animal cells. These will be the focus of this concept.
Plant Cells
Special Structures in Plant Cells
Most organelles are common to both animal and plant c ells. However, plant cells also have features that anim al cells do not have: a
cell wall, a large central vacuole, and plastids such as chlo roplasts.
Plants have very different lifestyles from animals, and these differences are apparent when you examine the structure of the plant
cell. Plants make their own food in a process called photosynthesis. They take in carbon dioxide (CO) and water (H O) and
convert them into sugars. The features unique to plant c ells can be seen in the Figure below.2 2

2.39.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8354
In addition to containing most of the organelles found in animal cells, pl ant cells also have a cell wall, a large central
vacuole, and plastids. These three features are not found in animal cells.
The Cell Wall
A cell wall is a rigid layer that is found outside the cell mem brane and surrounds the cell. The cell wall contains n ot only cellulose
and protein, but other polysaccharides as well. The c ell wall provides structural support and protection. Pores in the cell wall allow
water and nutrients to move into and out of the cell. The cell wall also prevents the plant cell from burstin g when water enters the
cell.
Microtubules guide the formation of the plant cell wa ll. Cellulose is laid down by enzymes to form the prim ary cell wall. Some
plants also have a secondary cell wall. The secondary wa ll contains a lignin, a secondary cell component in p lant cells that have
completed cell growth/expansion.
The Central Vacuole
Most mature plant cells have a central vacuole that occupies more than 30% of the cell's volume. T he central vacuole can occupy
as much as 90% of the volume of certain cells. The central vacuole is surrounded by a membrane called t he tonoplast. The central
vacuole has many functions. Aside from storage, the mai n role of the vacuole is to maintain turgor pressure against the cell wall.
Proteins found in the tonoplast control the flow of water into and out of the vacuole. The central vacuole al so stores the pigments
that color flowers.
The central vacuole contains large amounts of a liqu id called cell sap, which differs in composition to t he cell cytosol. Cell sap is a
mixture of water, enzymes, ions, salts, and other subst ances. Cell sap may also contain toxic byproducts tha t have been removed
from the cytosol. Toxins in the vacuole may help to protec t some plants from being eaten.
Plastids
Plant plastids are a group of closely related membrane-bound organ elles that carry out many functions. They are respon sible for
photosynthesis, for storage of products such as starch, a nd for the synthesis of many types of molecules that are needed as cellular
building blocks. Plastids have the ability to change their function between these and other forms. Plastids c ontain their own DNA
and some ribosomes, and scientists think that plastid s are descended from photosynthetic bacteria that allowed the first eukaryotes
to make oxygen. The main types of plastids and their func tions are:
Chloroplasts are the organelle of photosynthesis. They capture ligh t energy from the sun and use it with water and carbon
dioxide to make food (sugar) for the plant. The arrangem ent of chloroplasts in a plant’s cells can be seen in t he Figure below.

2.39.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8354Chromoplasts make and store pigments that give petals and fruit thei r orange and yellow colors.
Leucoplasts do not contain pigments and are located in roots and non- photosynthetic tissues of plants. They may become
specialized for bulk storage of starch, lipid, or prote in. However, in many cells, leucoplasts do not have a majo r storage
function. Instead, they make molecules such as fatty acids an d many amino acids.
Plant cells with visible chloroplasts.
Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts capture light energy from the sun and use it with wa ter and carbon dioxide to produce sugars for food. Chloroplasts
look like flat discs and are usually 2 to 10 microm eters in diameter and 1 micrometer thick. A model of a chloroplast is shown in
the Figure below. The chloroplast is enclosed by an inner and an outer phospholipid membrane. Between these two layers is the
intermembrane space. The fluid within the chloroplast is called the stroma, and it contains one or more molecules of small, ci rcular
DNA. The stroma also has ribosomes. Within the stroma ar e stacks of thylakoids, sub-organelles that are the site of photosynthesis.
The thylakoids are arranged in stacks called grana (singular: granum). A thylakoid has a flattened disk shape. Inside it is an empty
area called the thylakoid space or lumen.
Within the thylakoid membrane is the complex of pro teins and light-absorbing pigments, such as chlorophyll and carotenoids. This
complex allows capture of light energy from many wavel engths because chlorophyll and carotenoids both absor b different
wavelengths of light. These will be further discussed in t he "Photosynthesis" concept.
The internal structure of a chloroplast, with a granal stack of thylakoids circled.

2.39.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/8354Further Reading
Plants
Summary
Plant cells have a cell wall, a large central vacuole, and plastids su ch as chloroplasts.
The cell wall is a rigid layer that is found outside the c ell membrane and surrounds the cell, providing structu ral support and
protection.
The central vacuole maintains turgor pressure against the cell wall.
Chloroplasts capture light energy from the sun and use i t with water and carbon dioxide to produce sugars for food.
Review
1. List three structures that are found in plant cells but not in animal cells.
2. Identify two functions of plastids in plant cells.
3. What are the roles of the cell wall and the central vacuole?
m rspe re ira cla ss
P arts of a P lant Cell
P arts of a P lant Cell
Watch on

2.39.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/83544. Describe the chloroplast structure.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:It'sJustMe/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chloropl
ast-new.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plant_ce
ll_structure_svg.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plant_ce
ll_structure_svg.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit:
User:It'sJustMe/Wikipedia;Flickr:stellarr
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chloropl
ast-new.jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/21187899@N
03/2058985902/
License: Public Domain; CC BY 2.0
2.39: Plant Cell Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Genetics
3.1: Genetic Linkage
3.2: Mendelian Inheritance
3.3: Genetic Disorders
3.4: Biotechnology
3.5: Biotechnology Applications
3.6: Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues in Biotechnology (ELSI)
3.7: Pea Plants
3.8: Mendel's First Experiment
3.9: Mendel's Second Experiment
3.10: Mendel's Laws
3.11: Probability
3.12: Punnett Squares
3.13: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
3.14: Human Genome
3.15: Human Chromosomes
This page titled 3: Genetics is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

3.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120653.1: Genetic Linkage
What does it mean to be linked?
For a pair of hands, the above image may suggest a cert ain type of linkage. For genes, it might suggest that the y are very hard to
separate.
Linkage
Genes that are located on the same chromosome are ca lled linked genes. Alleles for these genes tend to segregate together during
meiosis, unless they are separated by crossing-over. Crossing-over occurs when two homologous chromosomes exchange geneti c
material during meiosis I. The closer together two ge nes are on a chromosome, the less likely their allel es will be separated by
crossing-over.
Linkage explains why certain characteristics are fre quently inherited together. For example, genes for hai r color and eye color are
linked, so certain hair and eye colors tend to be in herited together, such as blonde hair with blue eyes a nd brown hair with brown
eyes. What other human traits seem to occur together? Do yo u think they might be controlled by linked genes?
Sex-Linked Genes
Genes located on the sex chromosomes are called sex-linked genes. Most sex-linked genes are on the X chromosome, becaus e the
Y chromosome has relatively few genes. Strictly speaki ng, genes on the X chromosome are X-linked genes, but the term sexlinked is often used to refer to them.
Mapping Linkage
Linkage can be assessed by determining how often cross ing-over occurs between two genes on the same chromoso me. Genes on
different (nonhomologous) chromosomes are not linked. They assort independently during meiosis, so they h ave a 50 percent
chance of ending up in different gametes. If genes show up in different gametes less than 50 percent of t he time (that is, they tend
to be inherited together), they are assumed to be on the same (homologous) chromosome. They may be separat ed by crossing-over,
but this is likely to occur less than 50 percent of t he time. The lower the frequency of crossing-over, the closer together on the same
chromosome the genes are presumed to be. Frequencies o f crossing-over can be used to construct a linkage ma p like the one in the
Figure below. A linkage map shows the locations of genes on a chromosome.

3.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12065
Linkage Map for the Human X Chromosome. This linkage map shows the locations o f several genes on the X chromosome.
Some of the genes code for normal proteins. Others code for abnormal prot eins that lead to genetic disorders. Which pair of
genes would you expect to have a lower frequency of crossing-over: the ge nes that code for hemophilia A and G6PD
deficiency, or the genes that code for protan and Xm?
Summary
Linked genes are located on the same chromosome.
Sex-linked genes are located on a sex chromosome, and X-lin ked genes are located on the X chromosome.
The frequency of crossing-over between genes is used to co nstruct linkage maps that show the locations of genes on
chromosomes.
M a tth e w B rode rick
Biology - 3.01: Linked Genes
Biology - 3.01: Linked Genes
Watch on

3.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12065Review
1. What are linked genes?
2. Explain how you would construct a linkage map for a human chromosome. What data would you need?
3. People with red hair usually have very light skin. What might be a genetic explanation for this observation?
4. How often does crossing-over occur between non-linked gen es? Explain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Sam McCabe
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Sam McCabe
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
3.1: Genetic Linkage is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120663.2: Mendelian Inheritance
What number can you see?
Red-green colorblindness is a common inherited trait in humans. About 1 in 10 men have some form of color bl indness, however,
very few women are color blind. Why?
Mendelian Inheritance in Humans
Characteristics that are encoded in DNA are called genetic traits. Different types of human traits are inherited in dif ferent ways.
Some human traits have simple inheritance patterns l ike the traits that Gregor Mendel studied in pea pla nts. Other human traits
have more complex inheritance patterns.
Mendelian inheritance refers to the inheritance of t raits controlled by a single gene with two alleles, on e of which may be dominant
to the other. Not many human traits are controlled b y a single gene with two alleles, but they are a good st arting point for
understanding human heredity. How Mendelian traits are inherited depends on whether the traits are controll ed by genes on
autosomes or the X chromosome.
Autosomal Traits
Autosomal traits are controlled by genes on one of t he 22 human autosomes. Consider earlobe attachment. A single autosomal gene
with two alleles determines whether you have attached earlobes or free-hanging earlobes. The allele for f ree-hanging earlobes (F)
is dominant to the allele for attached earlobes (f). Other single-gene autosomal traits include widow’s pe ak and hitchhiker’s thumb.
The dominant and recessive forms of these traits are sho wn in the Figure below. Which form of these traits do you have? What are
your possible genotypes for the traits?
The chart in the Figure below is called a pedigree. It shows how the earlobe trait was passed from generat ion to generation within
a family. Pedigrees are useful tools for studying inheritan ce patterns.

3.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12066
Having free-hanging earlobes is an autosomal dominant trait. This figur e shows the trait and how it was inherited in a
family over three generations. Shading indicates people who have the rec essive form of the trait. Look at (or feel) your own
earlobes. Which form of the trait do you have? Can you tell which ge notype you have?
Other single-gene autosomal traits include widow's peak and hitchhiker's thumb. The dominant and recessive forms of these traits
are shown in the Figure below. Which form of these traits do you have? What ar e your possible genotypes for the traits?
Widow's peak and hitchhiker's thumb are dominant traits controlled by a singl e autosomal gene.
Sex-Linked Traits
Traits controlled by genes on the sex chromosomes are called sex-linked traits, or X-linked traits in the case of the X
chromosome. Single-gene X-linked traits have a differen t pattern of inheritance than single-gene autosomal traits. Do you know
why? It’s because males have just one X chromosome. In addition, they always inherit their X chromosome from t heir mother, and
they pass it on to all their daughters but none of thei r sons. This is illustrated in the Figure below.

3.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12066
Inheritance of Sex Chromosomes. Mothers pass only X chromosomes to their children. Fathers always pass their X
chromosome to their daughters and their Y chromosome to their sons. Can you explain why fathers always determine the
sex of the offspring?
Because males have just one X chromosome, they have on ly one allele for any X-linked trait. Therefore, a r ecessive X-linked allele
is always expressed in males. Because females have two X chromosomes, they have two alleles for any X-linked tra it. Therefore,
they must inherit two copies of the recessive allele to express the recessive trait. This explains why X-link ed recessive traits are less
common in females than males. An example of a recessive X-linked trait is red-green color blindness. People with this trait
cannot distinguish between the colors red and green. More than one recessive gene on the X chromosome codes for this trait, which
is fairly common in males but relatively rare in females (Figure below).
Pedigree for Color Blindness. Color blindness is an X-linked recessive tra it. Mothers pass the recessive allele for the trait to
their sons, who pass it to their daughters.
Summary
A minority of human traits are controlled by single gene s with two alleles.
They have different inheritance patterns depending on whether they are controlled by autosomal or X-linked gen es.

3.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12066Review
1. Describe the inheritance pattern for a single-gene aut osomal dominant trait, such as free-hanging earlobes.
2. Draw a pedigree for hitchhiker’s thumb. Your pedigree should cover at least two generations and include both d ominant and
recessive forms of the trait. Label the pedigree with gen otypes, using the letter H to represent the dominant allele for the trait
and the letter h to represent the recessive allele.
3. Why is a recessive X-linked allele always expressed in m ales?
4. What is necessary for a recessive X-linked allele to be ex pressed in females?
5. What is an example of a recessive X-linked trait?

3.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12066Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Dominant:
User:Covalent/Wikipedia; Recessive:
Claire P.; pedigree created by Sam McCabe
(CK-12 Foundation)
Source: Dominant:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Earcov.J
PG; Recessive:
www.flickr.com/photos/rockinfree/4939042
632;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Earcov.J
PG; Recessive:
www.flickr.com/photos/rockinfree/4939042
License: Dominant: Public Domain;
Recessive: CC BY 2.0
An dre w Dou ch
P edigree Analysis 1: How to solve a g
P edigree Analysis 1: How to solve a g
Watch on

3.2.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12066
[Figure 3]Credit: Left to right: Image copyright
Alberto Zornetta, 2014; Image copyright
iko, 2014; Eva Blue; Sara Reid
Source: Left to right:
http://www.shutterstock.com;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/evablue/6184
132023;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/29406311@N
04/3120877348/;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/evablue/6184
132023;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/29406311@N
04/3120877348/
License: Left to right: Used under license
from Shutterstock.com, Used under license
from Shutterstock.com; CC BY 2.0; CC BY
2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Yassine Mrabet, based on
image by the National Institutes of Health
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:ABO_system_codominance.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Jodi So;Yassine Mrabet, based on
image by the National Institutes of Health
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
title=File:ABO_system_codominance.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
3.2: Mendelian Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120693.3: Genetic Disorders
Is being short-statured inherited?
It can be. Achondroplasia is the most common form of dwa rfism in humans, and it is caused by a dominant mutati on. The mutation
can be passed from one generation to the next.
Genetic Disorders
Many genetic disorders are caused by mutations in one or a few genes. Other g enetic disorders are caused by abnormal numbers
of chromosomes.
Genetic Disorders Caused by Mutations
The Table below lists several genetic disorders caused by muta tions in just one gene. Some of the disorders are cau sed by
mutations in autosomal genes, others by mutations in X-linked genes. Which disorder would you expect to be more common in
males than females?
Genetic Disorder Direct Effect of MutationSigns and Symptoms of the
DisorderMode of Inheritance
Marfan syndromedefective protein in connective
tissueheart and bone defects and
unusually long, slender limbs
and fingersautosomal dominant
Sickle cell anemiaabnormal hemoglobin protein
in red blood cellssickle-shaped red blood cells
that clog tiny blood vessels,
causing pain and damaging
organs and jointsautosomal recessive
Vitamin D-resistant ricketslack of a substance needed for
bones to absorb mineralssoft bones that easily become
deformed, leading to bowed
legs and other skeletal
deformitiesX-linked dominant
Hemophilia Areduced activity of a protein
needed for blood clottinginternal and external bleeding
that occurs easily and is
difficult to controlX-linked recessive
Few genetic disorders are controlled by dominant alle les. A mutant dominant allele is expressed in every in dividual who inherits
even one copy of it. If it causes a serious disorder, affected people may die young and fail to reproduc e. Therefore, the mutant
dominant allele is likely to die out of the population.

3.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12069A mutant recessive allele, such as the allele that c auses sickle cell anemia (see the Figure below and the link that follows), is not
expressed in people who inherit just one copy of it. Th ese people are called carriers. They do not have the disorder themselves, but
they carry the mutant allele and can pass it to thei r offspring. Thus, the allele is likely to pass on to the next generation rather than
die out.
Sickle-Shaped and Normal Red Blood Cells. Sickle cell anemia is an autosomal recessive disorder. The mutation that causes
the disorder affects just one amino acid in a single protein, but it has serious consequences for the affected person. This
photo shows the sickle shape of red blood cells in people with sickle cell ane mia.
Cystic Fibrosis and Tay-Sachs disease are two additional severe genetic disorders.
Chromosomal Disorders
Mistakes may occur during meiosis that result in nondisjunction. This is the failure of replicated chromosomes to se parate during
meiosis (the animation at the link below shows how thi s happens). Some of the resulting gametes will be mis sing a chromosome,
while others will have an extra copy of the chromosom e. If such gametes are fertilized and form zygotes, t hey usually do not
survive. If they do survive, the individuals are like ly to have serious genetic disorders. The Table below lists several genetic
disorders that are caused by abnormal numbers of chr omosomes. Most chromosomal disorders involve the X chrom osome. Look
back at the X and Y chromosomes and you will see why. The X and Y chromosomes are very different in size, s o nondisjunction of
the sex chromosomes occurs relatively often.
Genetic Disorder Genotype Phenotypic Effects
Down syndromeextra copy (complete or partial) of
chromosome 21 (see Figure below)developmental delays, distinctive facial
appearance, and other abnormalities (see
Figure below)
Turner’s syndromeone X chromosome but no other sex
chromosome (XO)female with short height and infertility
(inability to reproduce)
Triple X syndrome three X chromosomes (XXX)female with mild developmental delays and
menstrual irregularities
Klinefelter’s syndromeone Y chromosome and two or more X
chromosomes (XXY, XXXY)male with problems in sexual development
and reduced levels of the male hormone
testosterone

3.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12069
(left) Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome) Karyotype. A
karyotype
is a picture of a cell's chromosomes. Note the extra chromosome 21. (right) Child with Down syndrome, exhibiting
characteristic facial appearance.
Diagnosing Genetic Disorders
A genetic disorder that is caused by a mutation can be inherited. Therefore, people with a genetic disord er in their family may be
concerned about having children with the disorder. Pro fessionals known as genetic counselors can help them understand the risks
of their children being affected. If they decide to have children, they may be advised to have prenatal (“before birth”) testing to see
if the fetus has any genetic abnormalities. One method of prenatal testing is amniocentesis. In this procedure, a few fetal cells are
extracted from the fluid surrounding the fetus, and the f etal chromosomes are examined.
Treating Genetic Disorders
The symptoms of genetic disorders can sometimes be t reated, but cures for genetic disorders are still in t he early stages of
development. One potential cure that has already been used with some success is gene therapy. This involves inserting normal
genes into cells with mutant genes.
If you could learn your risk of getting cancer or a nother genetic disease, would you? Though this is a p ersonal decision, it is a
possibility. A number of companies now make it easy to order m edical genetic tests through the Web.
Summary
Many genetic disorders are caused by mutations in one or a few genes.
Other genetic disorders are caused by abnormal numbers of ch romosomes.
B e st0fScie n ce
Genetic Disorders And Diseases
Genetic Disorders And Diseases
Watch on

3.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12069Review
1. Describe a genetic disorder caused by a mutation in a si ngle gene.
2. What causes Down syndrome?
3. What is nondisjunction?
4. What is gene therapy?
5. Explain why genetic disorders caused by abnormal numbers of chromosomes most often involve the X chromosome.

3.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12069Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Karyotype: Courtesy of National
Human Genome Research Institute; Photo:
Erin Ryan;Courtesy of Drs. Noguchi,
Rodgers, and Schechter of the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Down_S
yndrome_Karyotype.png; Photo:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brushfie
ld_eyes.jpg; Sickle cells:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sicklece
lls.jpg; Red blood cells:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Redbloo
dcells.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzk, 2013
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3] Credit: Karyotype: Courtesy of National
Human Genome Research Institute; Photo:
Erin Ryan
Source: Karyotype:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Down_S
yndrome_Karyotype.png; Photo:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brushfie
ld_eyes.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Down_S
yndrome_Karyotype.png; Photo:
drm dk
T ay-Sachs Disease
T ay-Sachs Disease
Watch on

3.3.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12069commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brushfie
ld_eyes.jpg
License: Public Domain
3.3: Genetic Disorders is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120713.4: Biotechnology
So how does a scientist work with DNA?
It always starts with the sequence. Once the sequence is k nown, so much more can be done. Specific regions can be isolated,
cloned, amplified, and then used to help us.
Biotechnology Methods
It always starts with the sequence. Once the sequence is k nown, so much more can be done. Specific regions can be isolated,
cloned, amplified, and then used to help us.
Biotechnology Methods
Biotechnology is the use of technology to change the genetic mak eup of living things for human purposes. Generally, t he purpose
of biotechnology is to create organisms that are usef ul to humans or to cure genetic disorders. For exampl e, biotechnology may be
used to create crops that resist insect pests or yield more food, or to create new treatments for human diseases.
Biotechnology uses a variety of techniques to achieve its aims. Two commonly used techniques are gene clonin g and the
polymerase chain reaction.
Gene Cloning
Gene cloning is the process of isolating and making copies of a g ene. This is useful for many purposes. For example, gen e cloning
might be used to isolate and make copies of a normal gene for gene therapy. Gene cloning involves four st eps: isolation, ligation,
transformation, and selection.
1. In isolation, an enzyme (called a restriction enzyme) i s used to break DNA at a specific base sequence. This is done to is olate a
gene.
2. During ligation, the enzyme DNA ligase combines the isolated gene with plasmid DNA from bacteria. (A plasmid is circular
DNA that is not part of a chromosome and can replicate indep endently.) Ligation is illustrated in the Figure below. The DNA
that results is called recombinant DNA.
3. In transformation, the recombinant DNA is inserted into a living cell, usuall y a bacterial cell. Changing an organism in this
way is also called genetic engineering.
4. Selection involves growing transformed bacteria to make sure they have the recombinant DNA. This is a neces sary step because
transformation is not always successful. Only bacteria that co ntain the recombinant DNA are selected for further use.

3.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12071Polymerase Chain Reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) makes many copies of a gene or other DNA segment. Thi s might be done in order to make
large quantities of a gene for genetic testing. PCR involves three steps: denaturing, annealing, and extension. The three steps are
illustrated in the Figure below. They are repeated many times in a cycle to make large quantities of the gene.
1. Denaturing involves heating DNA to break the bonds holdin g together the two DNA strands. This yields two single strands o f
DNA.
2. Annealing involves cooling the single strands of DNA and mix ing them with short DNA segments called primers. Primers have
base sequences that are complementary to segments of th e single DNA strands. As a result, bonds form between the DNA
strands and primers.
3. Extension occurs when an enzyme (Taq polymerase or Taq DNA polymerase) adds nucleotides to the primers. Thi s produces
new DNA molecules, each incorporating one of the original DNA strands.
The Polymerase Chain Reaction. The polymerase chain reaction invol ves three steps. High temperatures are needed for the
process to work. The enzyme Taq polymerase is used in step 3 because it can withstand high temperatures.
Summary
Biotechnology is the use of technology to change the gene tic makeup of living things for human purposes.
Gene cloning is the process of isolating and making copies of a DNA segment such as a gene.
The polymerase chain reaction makes many copies of a gen e or other DNA segment.
M ITK 12V ide os
Genetic Engineering
Genetic Engineering
Watch on

3.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12071Review
1. Define biotechnology.
2. What is recombinant DNA?
3. Identify the steps of gene cloning.
4. What is the purpose of the polymerase chain reactio n?
5. Describe the three steps of PCR.
Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So;Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Jodi So;Courtesy of Chemical
Science &#38; Technology Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and
Technology
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Codis_p
rofile.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
3.4: Biotechnology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
dre m ch y ld
Biotechnology & Gene Therapy
Biotechnology & Gene Therapy
Watch on

3.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120723.5: Biotechnology Applications
Why would anyone grow plants like this?
Developing better crops is a significant aspect of bio technology. Crops that are resistant to damage from insects or droughts must
have a significant role in the world's future. And it all st arts in the lab.
Applications of Biotechnology
Methods of biotechnology can be used for many practical purposes. They are used widely in both medicine and agricul ture.
Applications in Medicine
In addition to gene therapy for genetic disorders, biotechnology can be used to transform bacteria so they are able to make human
proteins. The Figure below shows how this is done to produce a cytokine, which is a small protein that helps fight infections.
Proteins made by the bacteria are injected into people who cannot produce them becau se of mutations.
Genetically Engineering Bacteria to Produce a Human Protein. Bact eria can be genetically engineered to produce a human
protein, such as a cytokine. A cytokine is a small protein that helps fig ht infections.
Insulin was the first human protein to be produced in this way. Insulin helps cells take up glucose from the blood. People with type
1 diabetes have a mutation in the gene that normall y codes for insulin. Without insulin, their blood glu cose rises to harmfully high
levels. At present, the only treatment for type 1 dia betes is the injection of insulin from outside sour ces. Until recently, there was no

3.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12072known way to make insulin outside the human body. The problem was solved by gene cloning. The human insulin gene was cloned
and used to transform bacterial cells, which could then p roduce large quantities of human insulin.
Pharmacogenomics
We know that, thanks to our DNA, each of us is a little bi t different. Some of those differences are obvious, l ike eye and hair color.
Others are not so obvious, like how our bodies react to medication. Researchers are beginning to look at how to tailor medical
treatments to our genetic profiles, in a relatively new field called pharmacogenomics. Some of the biggest breakthroughs have
been in cancer treatment.
Synthetic Biology
Imagine living cells acting as memory devices, biofuels brewing from yeas t, or a light receptor taken from algae that makes
photographs on a plate of bacteria. The new field of synthetic biology is making biology easier to engineer so that new fu nctions
can be derived from living systems.
Applications in Agriculture
Biotechnology has been used to create transgenic cro ps. Transgenic crops are genetically modified with new genes that code fo r
traits useful to humans. The diagram in the Figure below shows how a transgenic crop is created.
Creating a Transgenic Crop. A transgenic crop is genetically modif ied to be more useful to humans. The bacterium
transfers the T-DNA (from the Ti plasmid) fragment with the desired gene into the host plant's nuclear genome.
K QED
Decoding Synthetic Biology - KQED Q
Decoding Synthetic Biology - KQED Q
Watch on

3.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12072Transgenic crops have been created with a variety of d ifferent traits, such as yielding more food, tasting better, surviving drought,
and resisting insect pests. Scientists have even creat ed a transgenic purple tomato that contains a cancer -fighting compound and
others that have high levels of antioxidants (see the Figure below).
Transgenic Purple Tomato. A purple tomato is genetically modifi ed to contain a cancer-fighting compound. A gene for the
compound was transferred into normal red tomatoes.
Applications in Forensic Science
Biotechnology has also had tremendous impacts in the fo rensic sciences.
Further Reading
Biotechnology and Forensic Science
Biotechnology and Agriculture
Biotechnology and Medicine
Scie n ti  c Am e rica n
What Is a Genetically Modi  ed Food?
What Is a Genetically Modi  ed Food?
Watch on
M ITK 12V ide os
Gel Electrophoresis
Gel Electrophoresis
Watch on

3.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12072Cloning
Summary
Biotechnology can be used to transform bacteria so they are able to make human proteins, such as insuli n.
It can also be used to create transgenic crops, such as cro ps that yield more food or resist insect pests.
Review
1. What are transgenic crops?
2. Make a flow chart outlining the steps involved in creating a transgenic crop.
3. Explain how bacteria can be genetically engineered to produce a human protei n.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Purple tomato: F Delventhal; Red
tomato; Flickr:photo_de;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source: Purple tomato:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/krossbow/782
6368470/; Red tomato;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/photon_de/27
00323949/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Purple tomato: F Delventhal; Red
tomato; Flickr:photo_de
Source: Purple tomato:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/krossbow/782
6368470/; Red tomato;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/photon_de/27
00323949/
License: CC BY 2.0
3.5: Biotechnology Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120733.6: Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues in Biotechnology (ELSI)
Right or wrong? Good or bad? Legal or illegal?
The completion of The Human Genome Project is one of th e most important scientific events of the past 50 y ears. However, is
knowing all of our DNA a good thing? The advancement o f biotechnology has raised many interesting ethical, legal and social
questions.
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues
Imagine someone analyzes part of your DNA. Who controls that information? What if your health insurance comp any found out
you were predisposed to develop a devastating geneti c disease. Might they decide to cancel your insurance? Privacy issues
concerning genetic information is an important issue in this day and age.
ELSI stands for Ethical, Legal and Social Issues. It's a t erm associated with the Human Genome project. This proj ect didn't only
have the goal to identify all the genes in the human genome, but also to address the ELSI that might arise from the project. Rapid
advances in DNA-based research, human genetics, and their applications have resulted in new and complex ethical and legal issues
for society.
Concerns from Biotechnology
The use of biotechnology has raised a number of ethical, legal, and social issues. Here are just a few:
Who owns genetically modified organisms such as bacteria? Can such organisms be patented like inventions?
Are genetically modified foods safe to eat? Might they have un known harmful effects on the people who consume them?
Are genetically engineered crops safe for the environment? Might they harm other organisms or even entire ecosystem s?
Who controls a person’s genetic information? What safeg uards ensure that the information is kept private?
How far should we go to ensure that children are free of mutat ions? Should a pregnancy be ended if the fetus has a mutat ion for
a serious genetic disorder?
Summary
Biotechnology has raised a number of ethical, legal, and so cial issues. For example, are genetically modified foods safe t o eat,
and who controls a person’s genetic information?
Review
1. Identify three ethical, legal, or social issues raised by biotechnology.

3.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120732. State your view on an ELSI issue, and develop a logical arg ument to support your view.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
3.6: Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues in Biotechnology (ELSI) is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

3.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14513.7: Pea Plants
What's so interesting about pea plants?
These purple-flowered plants are not just pretty to loo k at. Plants like these led to a huge leap forward in biology. The plants are
common garden pea plants, and they were studied in th e mid-1800s by an Austrian monk named Gregor Mendel. Wit h his careful
experiments, Mendel uncovered the secrets of heredity, or how parents pass characteristics to their offspring.
You may not care much about heredity in pea plants, but you probably care about your own heredity. Mende l’s discoveries apply to
you as well as to peas—and to all other living things that reproduce sexually.
Mendel and His Pea Plants
People have long known that the characteristics of liv ing things are similar in parents and their offspri ng. Whether it’s the flower
color in pea plants or nose shape in people, it is o bvious that offspring resemble their parents. However, it wasn’t until the
experiments of Gregor Mendel that scientists understood how characteristics are inherited. Mendel’s discoverie s formed the basis
of genetics, the science of heredity. That’s why Mendel is often called the "father of genetics." It’s not common fo r a single
researcher to have such an important impact on scien ce. The importance of Mendel’s work was due to three th ings: a curious mind,
sound scientific methods, and good luck. You’ll see why when you read about Mendel’s experiments.
Gregor Mendel was born in 1822 and grew up on his paren ts’ farm in Austria. He did well in school and became a monk. He also
went to the University of Vienna, where he studied scie nce and math. His professors encouraged him to learn sc ience through
experimentation and to use math to make sense of his results. Mendel is best known for his experiments with the pea plant Pisum
sativum (see Figure below).
Gregor Mendel. The Austrian monk Gregor Mendel experimented with pea plants. He did all of his research in the garden
of the monastery where he lived.
Blending Theory of Inheritance
During Mendel’s time, the blending theory of inheritan ce was popular. This is the theory that offspring have a blend, or mix, of the
characteristics of their parents. Mendel noticed plan ts in his own garden that weren’t a blend of the paren ts. For example, a tall
plant and a short plant had offspring that were either tall or short but not medium in height. Observations such as these led Mendel

3.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451to question the blending theory. He wondered if there was a different underlying principle that could expl ain how characteristics are
inherited. He decided to experiment with pea plants to find out. In fact, Mendel experimen ted with almost 30,000 pea plants over
the next several years!
Why Study Pea Plants?
Why did Mendel choose common, garden-variety pea pla nts for his experiments? Pea plants are a good choic e because they are fast
growing and easy to raise. They also have several visib le characteristics that may vary. These characteristic s, which are shown in
the Figure below, include seed form and color, flower color, po d form and color, placement of pods and flowers on stem s, and stem
length. Each characteristic has two common values. For example, seed form may be round or wrinkled, and flower color may be
white or purple (violet).
Mendel investigated seven different characteristics in pea plants. In t his chart, cotyledons refer to the tiny leaves inside
seeds. Axial pods are located along the stems. Terminal pods are loca ted at the ends of the stems.
Controlling Pollination
To research how characteristics are passed from parent s to offspring, Mendel needed to control pollination. Pollination is the
fertilization step in the sexual reproduction of pl ants. Pollen consists of tiny grains that are the male gametes o f plants. They are
produced by a male flower part called the anther (see Figure below). Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred f rom the anther
to the stigma of the same or another flower. The stigma is a female part of a flower. It passes the pollen gra ins to female gametes in
the ovary.
Flowers are the reproductive organs of plants. Each pea plant flower has bo th male and female parts. The anther is part of
the stamen, the male structure that produces male gametes (pollen). The stigma is part of the pistil, the female structure
that produces female gametes and guides the pollen grains to them. The stig ma receives the pollen grains and passes them
to the ovary, which contains female gametes.
Pea plants are naturally self-pollinating. In self-pollination, pollen grains from anthers on one plant are transfe rred to stigmas of
flowers on the same plant. Mendel was interested in t he offspring of two different parent plants, so he ha d to prevent selfpollination. He removed the anthers from the flowers o f some of the plants in his experiments. Then he polli nated them by hand
with pollen from other parent plants of his choice. W hen pollen from one plant fertilizes another plant o f the same species, it is
called cross-pollination. The offspring that result from such a cross are called hybrids.

3.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1451Summary
Gregor Mendel experimented with pea plants to learn how chara cteristics are passed from parents to offspring.
Mendel’s discoveries formed the basis of genetics, the science of heredity.
Cross-pollination produces hybrids.
Review
1. What is the blending theory of inheritance? Why did Me ndel question this theory?
2. List the seven characteristics that Mendel investigat ed in pea plants.
3. How did Mendel control pollination in pea plants?
SciSh ow
The Man Who Discovered Dominant
The Man Who Discovered Dominant
Watch on

3.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14514. What are hybrids?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: William Bateson;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gregor_
Mendel_Monk.jpg; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Rupali Raju;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 3.7: Pea Plants is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

3.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14523.8: Mendel's First Experiment
Peas. Some round and some wrinkled. Why?
That's what Mendel asked. He noticed peas were always ro und or wrinkled, but never anything else. Seed shape was one of the
traits Mendel studied in his first set of experiments.
Mendel’s First Set of Experiments
Mendel first experimented with just one characteristi c of a pea plant at a time. He began with flower color. As shown in the Figure
below, Mendel cross-pollinated purple- and white-flowere d parent plants. The parent plants in the experiments are referred to as the
P (for parent) generation.
This diagram shows Mendel's first experiment with pea plants. The F1 generation results from cross-pollination of two
parent (P) plants, and contained all purple flowers. The F2 generation result s from self-pollination of F1 plants, and
contained 75% purple flowers and 25% white flowers. This type of experim ent is known as a monohybrid cross.
F1 and F2 Generations
The offspring of the P generation are called the F1 (for filial, or “offspring”) generation. As you can see from the Figure above, all
of the plants in the F1 generation had purple flowers. None of them had white flowers. Mendel wondered what had happened to the
white-flower characteristic. He assumed some type of inh erited factor produces white flowers and some other i nherited factor
produces purple flowers. Did the white-flower factor just disappear in the F1 generation? If so, then the offsp ring of the F1
generation—called the F2 generation —should all have purple flowers like their parents.
To test this prediction, Mendel allowed the F1 generatio n plants to self-pollinate. He was surprised by the resul ts. Some of the F2
generation plants had white flowers. He studied hundreds of F2 generation plants, and for every three purple -flowered plants, there

3.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1452was an average of one white-flowered plant.
Law of Segregation
Mendel did the same experiment for all seven pea plant characteristics. In each cas e, one value of the characteristic disappeared in
the F1 plants and then showed up again in the F2 plants. And in each case, 75 percent of F2 plants had one valu e of the
characteristic and 25 percent had the other value. Based on these observations, Mendel formulated his first law of inheritance. This
law is called the law of segregation. It states that there are two factors controlling a g iven characteristic, one of which dominates
the other, and these factors separate and go to differe nt gametes when a parent reproduces.
Summary
Mendel first researched one characteristic at a time. This l ed to his law of segregation. This law states that each cha racteristic is
controlled by two factors, which separate and go to differ ent gametes when an organism reproduces.
Review
1. Describe in general terms Mendel’s first set of expe riments.
2. State Mendel's first law.
3. Assume you are investigating the inheritance of stem leng th in pea plants. You cross-pollinate a short-stemmed plant with a
long-stemmed plant. All of the offspring have long stems. Then, you let the offspring self-pollinate. Describe the stem lengths
you would expect to find in the second generation of offspr ing.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 3.8: Mendel's First Experiment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
T e a ch e r's P e t
Gregor Mendel
Gregor Mendel
Watch on

3.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14533.9: Mendel's Second Experiment
Round and green, round and yellow, wrinkled and green, or wrinkled and yellow?
Can two traits be inherited together? Or are all trait s inherited separately? Mendel asked these questions after his first round of
experiments.
Mendel’s Second Set of Experiments
After observing the results of his first set of experim ents, Mendel wondered whether different characteristics a re inherited together.
For example, are purple flowers and tall stems always i nherited together? Or do these two characteristics show u p in different
combinations in offspring? To answer these questions, Me ndel next investigated two characteristics at a time. For example, he
crossed plants with yellow round seeds and plants with green wrinkled seeds. The results of this cross, which is a dihybrid cross,
are shown in the Figure below.
This chart represents Mendel's second set of experiments. It shows the out come of a cross between plants that differ in seed
color (yellow or green) and seed form (shown here with a smooth round appeara nce or wrinkled appearance). The letters R,
r, Y, and y represent genes for the characteristics Mendel was study ing. Mendel didn’t know about genes, however. Genes
would not be discovered until several decades later. This experiment demo nstrates that in the F2 generation, 9/16 were
round yellow seeds, 3/16 were wrinkled yellow seeds, 3/16 were round green se eds, and 1/16 were wrinkled green seeds.

3.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453F1 and F2 Generations
In this set of experiments, Mendel observed that plants in the F1 generation were all alike. All of them had y ellow and round seeds
like one of the two parents. When the F1 generation pla nts self-pollinated, however, their offspring—the F2 ge neration—showed
all possible combinations of the two characteristics. Some had green round seeds, for example, and some h ad yellow wrinkled
seeds. These combinations of characteristics were not pr esent in the F1 or P generations.
Law of Independent Assortment
Mendel repeated this experiment with other combinations of characteristics, such as flower color and stem length. Each time, the
results were the same as those in the Figure above. The results of Mendel’s second set of experime nts led to his second law. This is
the law of independent assortment. It states that factors controlling different char acteristics are inherited independently of each
other.
Summary
After his first set of experiments, Mendel researched two cha racteristics at a time. This led to his law of independent
assortment. This law states that the factors controlling d ifferent characteristics are inherited independently of each other.
Review
1. What was Mendel investigating with his second set of experi ments? What was the outcome?
2. State Mendel’s second law.
3. If a purple-flowered, short-stemmed plant is crossed with a white-flowered, long-stemmed plant, would all of the pur pleflowered offspring also have short stems? Why or why not?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
TED-Ed
How Mendel' s pea plants helped us u
How Mendel' s pea plants helped us u
Watch on

3.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1453This page titled 3.9: Mendel's Second Experiment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14543.10: Mendel's Laws
Do you look like your parents?
You probably have some characteristics or traits in co mmon with each of your parents. Mendel's work provided the basis to
understand the passing of traits from one generation to the next.
Mendel’s Laws and Genetics
You might think that Mendel's discoveries would have m ade a big impact on science as soon as he made them. But you would be
wrong. Why? Because Mendel's work was largely ignored. Me ndel was far ahead of his time and working from a remo te
monastery. He had no reputation among the scientific commu nity and no previously published work.
Mendel’s work, titled Experiments in Plant Hybridization, was published in 1866, and sent to prominent librari es in several
countries, as well as 133 natural science associations. Mendel himself even sent carefully marked experiment kits to Karl von
Nageli, the leading botanist of the day. The result - it was almost completely ignored. V on Nageli instead se nt hawkweed seeds to
Mendel, which he thought was a better plant for studyin g heredity. Unfortunately hawkweed reproduces asexually, resulting in
genetically identical clones of the parent.
Charles Darwin published his landmark book on evolutio n in 1869, not long after Mendel had discovered his la ws. Unfortunately,
Darwin knew nothing of Mendel's discoveries and didn’t understand heredity. This made his arguments about e volution less
convincing to many people. This example demonstrates the importance for scientists to communicate the resu lts of their
investigations.
Rediscovering Mendel’s Work
Mendel’s work was virtually unknown until 1900. In that y ear, three different European scientists — named Hugo De Vries, Carl
Correns, and Erich V on Tschermak-Seysenegg — independe ntly arrived at Mendel’s laws. All three had done expe riments similar
to Mendel’s. They came to the same conclusions that he had drawn almost half a century earlier. Only then wa s Mendel’s actual
work rediscovered.
As scientists learned more about heredity - the passing of traits from parents to offspring - over the next few decades, they were
able to describe Mendel’s ideas about inheritance in term s of genes. In this way, the field of genetics was born.
Genetics of Inheritance
Today, we know that characteristics of organisms are controlled by genes on chromosomes (see the Figure below). The position of
a gene on a chromosome is called its locus. In sexually reproducing organisms, each individual has two copies of the same gene, as
there are two versions of the same chromosome (homologous chromosomes). One copy comes from each parent. The gene for a
characteristic may have different versions, but the different versions are always at the same locus. The di fferent versions are called
alleles. For example, in pea plants, there is a purple-flower allele (B) and a white-flower allele (b). Different alleles account for
much of the variation in the characteristics of organisms.

3.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454
Chromosome, Gene, Locus, and Allele. This diagram shows how the concepts of chro mosome, gene, locus, and allele are
related. What is the different between a gene and a locus? Between a gene a nd an allele?
During meiosis, homologous chromosomes separate and go t o different gametes. Thus, the two alleles for each g ene also go to
different gametes. At the same time, different chromo somes assort independently. As a result, alleles for d ifferent genes assort
independently as well. In these ways, alleles are shuffled and recombined in each parent’s gametes.
Genotype and Phenotype
When gametes unite during fertilization, the resulti ng zygote inherits two alleles for each gene. One allel e comes from each parent.
The alleles an individual inherits make up the indi vidual’s genotype. The two alleles may be the same or different. As shown in the
Table below, an organism with two alleles of the same type (BB or bb) is called a homozygote. An organism with two different
alleles (Bb) is called a heterozygote. This results in three possible genotypes.
Alleles Genotypes Phenotypes
BB (homozygote) purple flowers
B (purple) Bb (heterozygote) purple flowers
b (white) bb (homozygote) white flowers
The expression of an organism’s genotype produces its phenotype. The phenotype refers to the organism’s characteri stics, such as
purple or white flowers. As you can see from the Table above, different genotypes may produce the same phe notype. For example,
BB and Bb genotypes both produce plants with purple flowers. Why does this happen? In a Bb heterozygote, only the B allele is
expressed, so the b allele doesn’t influence the phenotype. In general, when only one of two alleles is expressed in the pheno type,
the expressed allele is called the dominant allele. The allele that isn’t expressed is called the recessive allele.
How Mendel Worked Backward to Get Ahead
Mendel used hundreds or even thousands of pea plants in each experiment he did. Therefore, his results were very close to thos e
you would expect based on the rules of probability (s ee "Probability" concept). For example, in one of his first experiments with
flower color, there were 929 plants in the F2 generatio n. Of these, 705 (76 percent) had purple flowers and 2 24 (24 percent) had
white flowers. Thus, Mendel’s results were very close to the 75 percent purple and 25 percent white you would expect by the laws
of probability for this type of cross.
Of course, Mendel had only phenotypes to work with. He kn ew nothing about genes and genotypes. Instead, he had to work
backward from phenotypes and their percents in offsp ring to understand inheritance. From the results of his first set of experiments,
Mendel realized that there must be two factors control ling each of the characteristics he studied, with on e of the factors being
dominant to the other. He also realized that the two factors separate and go to different gametes and la ter recombine in the
offspring. This is an example of Mendel’s good luck. All of t he characteristics he studied happened to be inherited in this way.
Mendel also was lucky when he did his second set of exp eriments. He happened to pick characteristics that ar e inherited
independently of one another. We now know that these c haracteristics are controlled by genes on nonhomologo us chromosomes.
What if Mendel had studied characteristics controlled b y genes on homologous chromosomes? Would they be inh erited together? If

3.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1454so, how do you think this would have affected Mendel’ s conclusions? Would he have been able to develop his second law of
inheritance?
Summary
Mendel’s work was rediscovered in 1900. Soon after that, gen es and alleles were discovered. This allowed Mendel’s laws to b e
stated in terms of the inheritance of alleles.
The gene for a characteristic may have different version s. These different versions of a gene are known as alleles.
Alleles for different genes assort independently during meiosis.
The alleles an individual inherits make up the indivi dual’s genotype. The individual may be homozygous (two of the same
alleles) or heterozygous (two different alleles).
The expression of an organism’s genotype produces its phe notype.
When only one of two alleles is expressed, the expressed a llele is the dominant allele, and the allele that isn’t ex pressed is the
recessive allele.
Mendel used the percentage of phenotypes in offspring to understand how characteristics are inherited.
Review
1. If Darwin knew of Mendel’s work, how might it have influenced his theory of evolution? Do you think this would have aff ected
how well Darwin’s work was accepted?
2. Explain Mendel’s laws in genetic terms, that is, in terms of chromosomes, genes, and alleles.
3. Explain the relationship between genotype and phenot ype. How can one phenotype result from more than one gen otype?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Sam McCabe;Forest and Kim
Starr/Starr Environmental;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
www.flickr.com/photos/starrenvironmental/9196383877/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0
This page titled 3.10: Mendel's Laws is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14563.11: Probability
What are the odds of landing on 25 again?
Not as high as inheriting an allele from a parent. Pro bability plays a big role in determining the chance of inheriting an allele from a
parent. It is similar to tossing a coin. What's the chance of the coin landing on heads?
Probability
Assume you are a plant breeder trying to develop a ne w variety of plant that is more useful to humans. You pl an to cross-pollinate
an insect-resistant plant with a plant that grows rapid ly. Your goal is to produce a variety of plant that is both insect resistant and
fast growing. What percentage of the offspring would y ou expect to have both characteristics? Mendel’s laws can be used to find
out. However, to understand how Mendel’s laws can be used in t his way, you first need to know about probability.
Probability is the likelihood, or chance, that a certain event wi ll occur. The easiest way to understand probability is with coin
tosses (see the Figure below). When you toss a coin, the chance of a head tu rning up is 50 percent. This is because a coin has o nly
two sides, so there is an equal chance of a head or tail turnin g up on any given toss.
Tossing a Coin. Competitions often begin with the toss of a coin. Why is this a fair way to decide who goes first? If you
choose heads, what is the chance that the toss will go your way?
If you toss a coin twice, you might expect to get one head and one tail. But each time you toss the coin, t he chance of a head is still
50 percent. Therefore, it’s quite likely that you will get two or even several heads (or tails) in a row. W hat if you tossed a coin ten
times? You would probably get more or less than the e xpected five heads. For example, you might get seven heads (70 percent) and
three tails (30 percent). The more times you toss th e coin, however, the closer you will get to 50 percent heads. For example, if you
tossed a coin 1000 times, you might get 510 heads and 490 t ails.

3.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1456Probability and Inheritance
The same rules of probability in coin tossing apply to the main events that determine the genotypes of offspring. These events are
the formation of gametes during meiosis and the union of gametes during fertilization.
Probability and Gamete Formation
How is gamete formation like tossing a coin? Consider Mendel’s purple-flowered pea plants again. Assume that a plant is
heterozygous for the flower-color allele, so it has the genotype Bb (see the Figure below). During meiosis, homologous
chromosomes, and the alleles they carry, segregate a nd go to different gametes. Therefore, when the Bb pea plant forms gametes,
the B and b alleles segregate and go to different gametes. As a result, half the gametes produced by the Bb parent will have the B
allele and half will have the b allele. Based on the rules of probability, any given gamete of this parent has a 50 percent chance of
having the B allele and a 50 percent chance of having the b allele.
Formation of gametes by meiosis. Paired alleles always separate and go to different gametes during meiosis.
Probability and Fertilization
Which of these gametes joins in fertilization with the gamete of another parent plant? This is a matter o f chance, like tossing a coin.
Thus, we can assume that either type of gamete—one with the B allele or one with the b allele—has an equal chance of uniting
with any of the gametes produced by the other parent. Now assume that the other parent is also Bb. If gametes of two Bb parents
unite, what is the chance of the offspring having one o f each allele like the parents (Bb)? What is the chance of them having a
different combination of alleles than the parents (either BB or bb)? To answer these questions, geneticists use a simple to ol called a
Punnett square, which is the focus of the next concept.
Summary
Probability is the chance that a certain event will occur. Fo r example, the probability of a head turning up on any given coin toss
is 50 percent.
Probability can be used to predict the chance of gamete s and offspring having certain alleles.
Review
1. Define probability. Apply the term to a coin toss.
2. How is gamete formation like tossing a coin?

3.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14563. With a BB homozygote, what is the chance of a gamete havi ng the B allele? The b allele?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Anneka, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 3.11: Probability is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

3.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14553.12: Punnett Squares
What do you get when you cross an apple and an orange?
Though the above fruit may not result, it would be ni ce to scientifically predict what would result. Predict ing the possible
genotypes and phenotypes from a genetic cross is often aided by a Punnett square.
Punnett Squares
A Punnett square is a chart that allows you to easily determine the ex pected percentage of different genotypes in the offs pring of
two parents. An example of a Punnett square for pea plan ts is shown in the Figure below. In this example, both parents are
heterozygous for flower color (Bb). The gametes produced by the male parent are at the top of the chart, and the gametes produced
by the female parent are along the side. The differe nt possible combinations of alleles in their offspring are determined by filling in
the cells of the Punnett square with the correct letters (allel es).
This Punnett square shows a cross between two heterozygotes, Bb. Do you know where e ach letter (allele) in all four cells
comes from? Two pea plants, both heterozygous for flower color, are cr ossed. The offspring will show the dominant purple
coloration in a 3:1 ratio. Or, about 75% of the offspring will be pur ple.
Predicting Offspring Genotypes
In the cross shown in the Figure above, you can see that one out of four offspring (25 percent) has the genotype BB, one out of
four (25 percent) has the genotype bb, and two out of four (50 percent) have the genotype Bb. These percentages of genotypes are
what you would expect in any cross between two heterozy gous parents. Of course, when just four offspring are pr oduced, the
actual percentages of genotypes may vary by chance f rom the expected percentages. However, if you considere d hundreds of such
crosses and thousands of offspring, you would get very close to the expected results, just like tossing a coin.
Predicting Offspring Phenotypes
You can predict the percentages of phenotypes in the offspring of this cross from their genotypes. B is dominant to b, so offspring
with either the BB or Bb genotype will have the purple-flower phenotype. Only offspring with the bb genotype will have the white-

3.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455flower phenotype. Therefore, in this cross, you would expect three out of four (75 percent) of the offspr ing to have purple flowers
and one out of four (25 percent) to have white flowers. These are the same percentages that Mendel got in his first experiment.
Determining Missing Genotypes
A Punnett square can also be used to determine a missing genotype based on the other genotypes involved in a cross. Suppose you
have a parent plant with purple flowers and a parent plant with white flowers. Because the b allele is recessive, you know that the
white-flowered parent must have the genotype bb. The purple-flowered parent, on the other hand, could have either the BB or the
Bb genotype. The Punnett square in the Figure below shows this cross. The question marks (?) in the chart could be either B or b
alleles.
Punnett Square: Cross Between White-Flowered and Purple-Flowered Pea P lants. This Punnett square shows a cross
between a white-flowered pea plant and a purple-flowered pea plant. Can you fill in the missing alleles? What do you need
to know about the offspring to complete their genotypes?
Can you tell what the genotype of the purple-flowered parent is from the information in the Punnett square? No; you also need to
know the genotypes of the offspring in row 2. What if you found out that two of the four offspring have whi te flowers? Now you
know that the offspring in the second row must have th e bb genotype. One of their b alleles obviously comes from the whiteflowered (bb) parent, because that’s the only allele this parent has. The other b allele must come from the purple-flowered parent.
Therefore, the parent with purple flowers must have the gen otype Bb.
Punnett Square for Two Characteristics
When you consider more than one characteristic at a time, using a Punnett square is more complicated. This is because many more
combinations of alleles are possible. For example, wi th two genes each having two alleles, an individual ha s four alleles, and these
four alleles can occur in 16 different combinations. This is illustrated for pea plants in the Figure below. In this cross, known as a
dihybrid cross, both parents are heterozygous for pod color (Gg) and pod form (Ff).
im won de rin g
P unnett Square to determine possibl
P unnett Square to determine possibl
Watch on

3.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1455
Punnett Square for Two Characteristics. This Punnett square represents a cross between two pea plants that are
heterozygous for two characteristics. G represents the dominant allele for green pod color, and g represents the recessive
allele for yellow pod color. F represents the dominant allele f or full pod form, and f represents the recessive allele for
constricted pod form.
Summary
A Punnett square is a chart that allows you to determine th e expected percentages of different genotypes in the of fspring of two
parents.
A Punnett square allows the prediction of the percenta ges of phenotypes in the offspring of a cross from known genotypes.
A Punnett square can be used to determine a missing gen otype based on the other genotypes involved in a cross.
Review
1. What is a Punnett square? How is it used?
2. Draw a Punnett square of an Ss x ss cross. The S allele codes for long stems in pea plants and the s allele codes for short stems.
If S is dominant to s, what percentage of the offspring would you expect to have e ach phenotype?
3. What letter should replace the question marks (?) in this Punnett square? Explain how you know.
4. How do the Punnett squares for a monohybrid cross and a dihyb rid cross differ?
5. What are the genotypes of gametes of a AaBb self-pollin ation?
Am oe ba Siste rs
Dihybrid and Two-T rait Crosses
Dihybrid and Two-T rait Crosses
Watch on

3.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14556. Mendel carried out a dihybrid cross to examine the inheritance of the characteristics for seed color a nd seed shape. The
dominant allele for yellow seed color is Y, and the recessive allele for green color is y. The dominant allele for round seeds is R,
and the recessive allele for a wrinkled shape is r. The two plants that were crossed were F1 dihybrids RrYy. Identify the ratios of
traits that Mendel observed in the F2 generation. Creat e a Punnett square to help you answer the question.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Sam
McCabe;Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Jodi So;Sam McCabe
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Sam
McCabe;Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 3.12: Punnett Squares is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

3.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120623.13: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
Green, blue, brown, black, hazel, violet, or grey. What color are your eyes?
Of course human eyes do not come in multi-color, but th ey do come in many colors. How do eyes come in so many colors? That
brings us to complex inheritance patterns, known as non-Mendelian inheritance. Many times inheritance is more complicated than
the simple patterns observed by Mendel.
Non-Mendelian Inheritance
The inheritance of characteristics is not always as sim ple as it is for the characteristics that Mendel stud ied in pea plants. Each
characteristic Mendel investigated was controlled by o ne gene that had two possible alleles, one of which was completely dominant
to the other. This resulted in just two possible phe notypes for each characteristic. Each characteristi c Mendel studied was also
controlled by a gene on a different (nonhomologous) chromosome. As a result, each characteristic was inheri ted independently of
the other characteristics. Geneticists now know that inhe ritance is often more complex than this.
A characteristic may be controlled by one gene with two alleles, but the two alleles may have a different relationship than the
simple dominant-recessive relationship that you have read about so far. For example, the two alleles may h ave a codominant or
incompletely dominant relationship. The former is ill ustrated by the flower in the Figure below, and the latter in the Figure below.
Codominance
Codominance occurs when both alleles are expressed equally in the phenotype of the heterozygote. The red and white flo wer in
the figure has codominant alleles for red petals and whi te petals.

3.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12062
Codominance. The flower has red and white petals because of codominance of red-petal and white-petal alleles.
Incomplete Dominance
Incomplete dominance occurs when the phenotype of a heterozygote offsprin g is somewhere in between the phenotypes of both
homozygous parents; a completely dominant allele doe s not occur. For example, when red snapdragons (C C) a re crossed with
white snapdragons (C C), the F hybrids are all pink het erozygotes for flower color (C C). The pink color is a n intermediate
between the two parent colors. When two F (C C) hybrids a re crossed they will produce red, pink, and white flowers. The
genotype of an organism with incomplete dominance can be determined from its phenotype (Figure below).
Incomplete Dominance. The flower has pink petals because of incomplete domina nce of a red-petal allele and a recessive
white-petal allele.
Multiple Alleles
Many genes have multiple (more than two) alleles. An e xample is ABO blood type in humans. There are three common alleles for
the gene that controls this characteristic. The allel es I and I are dominant over i. A person who is homoz ygous recessive ii has
type O blood. Homozygous dominant I I or heterozygous d ominant I i have type A blood, and homozygous dominan t I I or
heterozygous dominant I i have type B blood. I I peopl e have type AB blood, because the A and B alleles ar e codominant. Type
A and type B parents can have a type AB child. Type A and type B parents can also have a child with Type O blood, if they are both
heterozygous (I i, I i).
Type A blood: I I, I i
Type B blood: I I, I i
Type AB blood: I I
Type O blood: iiR R
W W
1R W
1R W
A B
A A A B B
B A B
B A
A A A
B B B
A B

3.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12062Polygenic Characteristics
Polygenic characteristics are controlled by more than one gene, and each gene may have two or more alleles. The genes may be
on the same chromosome or on nonhomologous chromosomes.
If the genes are located close together on the same chrom osome, they are likely to be inherited together. However, it is possible
that they will be separated by crossing-over during meiosis, in which case they may be inherited independently of one another.
If the genes are on nonhomologous chromosomes, they may be recombined in various ways because of independent assortment.
For these reasons, the inheritance of polygenic charac teristics is very complicated. Such characteristics ma y have many possible
phenotypes. Skin color and adult height are examples of polygenic characteristics in humans. Do you have any idea how many
phenotypes each characteristic has?
Human Adult Height. Like many other polygenic traits, adult height has a bell- shaped distribution.
Effects of Environment on Phenotype
Genes play an important role in determining an organ ism’s characteristics. However, for many characteristics, the individual’s
phenotype is influenced by other factors as well. Envi ronmental factors, such as sunlight and food availa bility, can affect how
genes are expressed in the phenotype of individuals. Here a re just two examples:
Genes play an important part in determining our adult heigh t. However, factors such as poor nutrition can prevent us from
achieving our full genetic potential.
Genes are a major determinant of human skin color. However, ex posure to ultraviolet radiation can increase the amount o f
pigment in the skin and make it appear darker.
Summary
Many characteristics have more complex inheritance patt erns than those studied by Mendel. They are complicated by f actors
such as codominance, incomplete dominance, multiple al leles, and environmental influences.
Am oe ba Siste rs
Incomplete Dominance, Codominanc
Incomplete Dominance, Codominanc
Watch on

3.13.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12062Review
1. A classmate tells you that a person can have type AO blo od. Do you agree? Explain.
2. Mendelian inheritance does not apply to the inherita nce of alleles that result in incomplete dominance and co dominance.
Explain why this is so.
3. Describe the relationship between environment and phe notype.
4. Mendel investigated stem length, or height, in pea plant s. What if he had investigated human height instead? Why wou ld his
results have been harder to interpret?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Darwin Cruz;Jodi So
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Codominance_Rhododendron.jpg; CK-12
Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flower: Sandy Schultz;Jodi So
Source: Flower:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/chatblanc1/47
88366795/; CK-12 Foundation
License: Flower: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC
3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Jodi
So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
3.13: Non-Mendelian Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120633.14: Human Genome
All these ACGTs. What are they?
Over three billion of them from a human form the hum an genome - the human genetic material - all the in formation needed to
encode a human being. It would take about 9.5 years to read out loud - without stopping - the more than thr ee billion pairs of bases
in one person's genome.
The Human Genome
What makes each one of us unique? You could argue t hat the environment plays a role, and it does to some extent. But most would
agree that your parents have something to do with yo ur uniqueness. In fact, it is our genes that make each one of us unique – or at
least genetically unique. We all have the genes tha t make us human: the genes for skin and bones, eyes an d ears, fingers and toes,
and so on. However, we all have different skin colors, di fferent bone sizes, different eye colors and differe nt ear shapes. In fact,
even though we have the same genes, the products of th ese genes work a little differently in most of us. An d that is what makes us
unique.
The human genome is the genome - all the DNA - of Homo sapiens. Humans have about 3 billion bases of information, d ivided
into roughly 20,000 to 22,000 genes, which are spread among non-coding sequences and distributed among 24 distinct
chromosomes (22 autosomes plus the X and Y sex chromosomes) (Figure below). The genome is all of the hereditary informat ion
encoded in the DNA, including the genes and non-coding sequenc es.
Human Genome, Chromosomes, and Genes. Each chromosome of the human genome contains many genes as well as
noncoding intergenic (between genes) regions. Each pair of chromosomes is shown here in a different color.
Thanks to the Human Genome Project, scientists now know the DNA sequence of the entire hu man genome. The Human Genome
Project is an international project that includes sci entists from around the world. It began in 1990, and b y 2003, scientists had
sequenced all 3 billion base pairs of human DNA. Now they are trying to identify all the genes in the sequenc e. The Human
Genome Project has produced a reference sequence of th e human genome. The human genome consists of protein -coding exons,

3.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12063associated introns and regulatory sequences, genes that encode other RNA molecules, and other DNA sequences (sometimes
referred to as "junk" DNA), which are regions in which no function as yet been identified.
ENCODE: The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements
In September 2012, ENCODE, The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements, was announced. ENCODE was a colossal project, involvi ng
over 440 scientists in 32 labs the world-over, whose goa l was to understand the human genome. It had been tho ught that about 80%
of the human genome was "junk" DNA. ENCODE has established t hat this is not true. Now it is thought that about 80% of the
genome is active. In fact, much of the human genome is regulatory sequences, on/off switches that tell our genes what to do and
when to do it. Dr. Eric Green, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institut es of Health which
organized this project, states, "It's this incredible ch oreography going on, of a modest number of genes and an immense number of
... switches that are choreographing how those genes are used."
It is now thought that at least three-quarters of the genome is involved in making RNA, and most of this RNA appears to help
regulate gene activity. Scientists have also identif ied about 4 million sites where proteins bind to DNA and act in a regulatory
capacity. These new findings demonstrate that the human genome has remarkable and precise, and complex, cont rols over the
expression of genetic information within a cell.
Summary
The human genome consists of about 3 billion base pairs of DNA.
In 2003, the Human Genome Project finished sequencing all 3 b illion base pairs.
Review
1. Describe the human genome.
2. What has the Human Genome Project achieved?
3. Describe the makeup of the human genome.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Courtesy of Chemical Science
&#38; Technology Laboratory, National
Institute of Standards and Technology
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Codis_p
rofile.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
3.14: Human Genome is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120643.15: Human Chromosomes
Coiled bundles of DNA and proteins, containing hundreds or thousands of genes. What are these
things?
Chromosomes. These ensure that each cell receives the proper amount of DNA during cell division. And usually p eople have 46 of
them, 23 from each parent.
Chromosomes and Genes
Each species has a characteristic number of chromosom es. Chromosomes are coiled structures made of DNA and proteins calle d
histones (Figure below). Chromosomes are the form of the genetic material of a cell during cell division. See the "Chromosomes "
concept for additional information.
The human genome has 23 pairs of chromosomes located in the nucleus of somat ic cells. Each chromosome is composed of
genes and other DNA wound around histones (proteins) into a tightly coiled mol ecule.
The human species is characterized by 23 pairs of chromo somes, as shown in the Figure below.

3.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12064
Human Chromosomes. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes. Pairs 1-22 are autosomes. Females have two X
chromosomes, and males have an X and a Y chromosome.
Autosomes
Of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes, 22 pairs are auto somes (numbers 1–22 in the Figure above). Autosomes are chromosomes
that contain genes for characteristics that are unr elated to sex. These chromosomes are the same in male s and females. The great
majority of human genes are located on autosomes.
Sex Chromosomes
The remaining pair of human chromosomes consists of the sex chromosomes, X and Y. Females have two X chromosomes, and
males have one X and one Y chromosome. In females, one o f the X chromosomes in each cell is inactivated and kn own as a Barr
body. This ensures that females, like males, have only one functioning copy of the X chromosome in each cell.
As you can see from the Figures above, the X chromosome is much larger than the Y ch romosome. The X chromosome has about
2,000 genes, whereas the Y chromosome has fewer than 100, none of which are essential to survival. (For compar ison, the smallest
autosome, chromosome 22, has over 500 genes.) Virtuall y all of the X chromosome genes are unrelated to sex. Only the Y
chromosome contains genes that determine sex. A singl e Y chromosome gene, called SRY (which stands for sex-determining
region Y gene), triggers an embryo to develop into a male. Without a Y chromosome, an individual develo ps into a female, so you
can think of female as the default sex of the human species. Can you think of a reason why the Y chromoso me is so much smaller
than the X chromosome?
Human Genes
Humans have an estimated 20,000 to 22,000 genes. This may sound like a lot, but it really isn’t. Far simpler species have almost as
many genes as humans. However, human cells use splicing and other processes to make multiple prot eins from the instructions
encoded in a single gene. Of the 3 billion base pairs in the human genome, only about 25 percent make up genes and their
regulatory elements. The functions of many of the other b ase pairs are still unclear.
The majority of human genes have two or more possible alleles, which are alternative forms of a gene. Differences in alleles
account for the considerable genetic variation among people. In fact, most human genetic variation is the result of differences in
individual DNA bases within alleles.

3.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12064Further Reading
Genetic Linkage
Summary
Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes. Of these, 22 pairs are aut osomes.
The X and Y chromosomes are the sex chromosomes. Females hav e two X chromosomes, and males have one X and one Y.
Human chromosomes contain a total of 20,000 to 22,000 gene s, the majority of which have two or more alleles.
Review
1. Describe human chromosomes.
2. Compare and contrast human autosomes and sex chromoso mes.
3. What is SRY?
4. Why are females the "default sex" of the human species?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:KES47/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
some_en.svg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
3.15: Human Chromosomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
T e a ch e r's P e t
Genes and Chromosomes
Genes and Chromosomes
Watch on

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Molecular Biology
4.1: Mutation Effects
4.2: Gene Expression
4.3: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
4.4: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
4.5: Central Dogma
4.6: DNA
4.7: DNA Structure and Replication
4.8: RNA
4.9: Transcription
4.10: Genetic Code
4.11: Translation
4.12: Mutation
4.13: Mutation Causes
This page titled 4: Molecular Biology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120884.1: Mutation Effects
Is this rat hairless?
Yes. Why? The result of a mutation, a change in the DNA sequence. The effects of mutations can vary widely, fr om being
beneficial, to having no effect, to having lethal conse quences, and every possibility in between.
Effects of Mutations
The majority of mutations have neither negative nor positive effects on the organism in which they occur. These mutations are
called neutral mutations. Examples include silent point mutations. They are n eutral because they do not change the amino acids in
the proteins they encode.
Many other mutations have no effect on the organism because they are repaired before protein synthesis oc curs. Cells have multiple
repair mechanisms to fix mutations in DNA. One way DNA can be repaired is illustrated in the Figure below. If a cell’s DNA is
permanently damaged and cannot be repaired, the cell is l ikely to be prevented from dividing.
DNA Repair Pathway. This flow chart shows one way that damaged DNA is repaired in
E. coli
bacteria.

4.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12088Beneficial Mutations
Some mutations have a positive effect on the organism in which they occur. They are called beneficial mutations. They lead to
new versions of proteins that help organisms adapt to changes in their environment. Beneficial mutations a re essential for evolution
to occur. They increase an organism’s changes of surviv ing or reproducing, so they are likely to become mo re common over time.
There are several well-known examples of beneficial mutati ons. Here are just two:
1. Mutations in many bacteria that allow them to survive in the presence of antibiotic d rugs. The mutations lead to antibioticresistant strains of bacteria.
2. A unique mutation is found in people in a small town in I taly. The mutation protects them from developing ather osclerosis,
which is the dangerous buildup of fatty materials in blo od vessels. The individual in which the mutation first a ppeared has even
been identified.
Harmful Mutations
Imagine making a random change in a complicated mac hine such as a car engine. The chance that the rando m change would
improve the functioning of the car is very small. Th e change is far more likely to result in a car that does not run well or perhaps
does not run at all. By the same token, any random ch ange in a gene's DNA is likely to result in a protein t hat does not function
normally or may not function at all. Such mutations ar e likely to be harmful. Harmful mutations may cause g enetic disorders or
cancer.
A genetic disorder is a disease caused by a mutation in one or a few genes. A h uman example is cystic fibrosis. A mutation in a
single gene causes the body to produce thick, sticky m ucus that clogs the lungs and blocks ducts in digestive or gans.
Cancer is a disease in which cells grow out of control and form abnormal masses of cells. It i s generally caused by mutations in
genes that regulate the cell cycle. Because of the mutatio ns, cells with damaged DNA are allowed to divide without lim its.
Cancer genes can be inherited.
B e st0fScie n ce
Genetic Disorders And Diseases
Genetic Disorders And Diseases
Watch on

4.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12088Summary
Mutations are essential for evolution to occur because th ey increase genetic variation and the potential for indi viduals to differ.
The majority of mutations are neutral in their effects on the organisms in which they occur.
Beneficial mutations may become more common through natur al selection.
Harmful mutations may cause genetic disorders or cancer.
Review
1. Why are mutations essential for evolution to occur?
2. What is a genetic disorder?
3. What is cancer? What usually causes cancer?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC

4.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12088
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
4.1: Mutation Effects is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120894.2: Gene Expression
Can your expression change at any moment?
As you know, a person's expression can change moment by moment. The expression that is demonstrated is usuall y appropriate for
that moment's feelings. Gene expression is the use of a gene whose product is necessary for that moment. It may be a moment
during development, it may be a moment of increased anxiety, or it may be in response to an environmental change. Whenever a
particular protein is needed, gene expression provides it.
Gene Expression
Each of your cells has at least 20,000 genes. In fact, all of your cell s have the same genes. Do all of your cells make the same
proteins? Obviously not. If they did, then all your cel ls would be alike. Instead, you have cells with differ ent structures and
functions. This is because different cells make diffe rent proteins. They do this by using, or expressing, different genes. Using a
gene to make a protein is called gene expression.
How Gene Expression is Regulated
Gene expression is regulated to ensure that the corre ct proteins are made when and where they are needed. Regulation may occur at
any point in the expression of a gene, from the star t of transcription to the processing of a protein af ter translation. Following is a
list of stages where gene expression is regulated:
Chemical and structural modification of DNA or chromatin
Transcription
Translation
Post-transcriptional modification
RNA transport
mRNA degradation
Post-translational modifications
As shown in the Figure below, transcription is controlled by regulatory proteins binding to the DNA. Specifically, gene
regulation at the level of transcription controls wh en transcription occurs as well as how much RNA is crea ted. A regulatory
protein, or a transcription factor, is a protein involved in regulating gene expressi on. It is usually bound to a cis-regulatory
element, which is part of the DNA. Regulatory proteins often mu st be bound to a cis-regulatory element to switch a g ene on
(activator), or to turn a gene off (repressor).
Transcription of a gene by RNA polymerase can be regulate d by at least five mechanisms:

4.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12089Transcription factors (proteins) alter the specificity of RNA polymerase for a promoter or set of promoters, making it more or
less likely to bind to the promoter and begin transcriptio n.
Activator proteins enhance the interaction between RNA po lymerase and a particular promoter.
Repressor proteins bind to non-coding sequences on the DNA that are close to or overlap the promoter region, impeding RNA
polymerase's progress along the strand.
Basal factors are transcription factors that help posit ion RNA polymerase at the start of a gene.
Enhancers are sites on the DNA strand that are bound by activators in o rder to loop the DNA, bringing a specific transcription
factor to the initiation complex. An initiation complex is composed of RNA polymerase and numerous (usually more than one)
transcription factors.
As the organism grows more sophisticated, gene regulatio n becomes more complex, though prokaryotic organism s possess some
highly regulated systems. Some human genes are controll ed by many activators and repressors working together. Obviously, a
mutation in a cis-regulatory region, such as the pro moter, can greatly affect the proper expression of a gene. It may keep the gene
permanently off, such that no protein can be made, or it can keep the gene permanently on, such that the c orresponding protein is
constantly made. Both of these can have detremental effec ts on the cell.
Regulation of Transcription. Regulatory proteins bind to regulatory e lements to control transcription. The regulatory
elements are embedded within the DNA.
Summary
Gene transcription is controlled by regulatory proteins th at bind to regulatory elements on DNA.
The proteins usually either activate or repress transcr iption.
Am oe ba Siste rs
Gene Regulation and the Operon
Gene Regulation and the Operon
Watch on

4.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12089Review
1. What is gene expression?
2. Why is gene expression regulated?
3. List three stages where gene expression is regulated.
4. Describe how regulatory proteins regulate gene express ion.
5. Compare activators to repressors.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;User:Ktbn/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antenna
pedia.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
4.2: Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120904.3: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
On or off?
When it comes to genes, that is an important question. And if you're a single-celled organism like a bacter ium, conserving energy
by not producing unnecessary proteins is very important.
Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
Transcription is regulated differently in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In general, prokaryotic regulation is simpler than eukaryotic
regulation.
The Role of Operons
Regulation of transcription in prokaryotes typicall y involves operons. An operon is a region of DNA that consists of one or more
genes that encode the proteins needed for a specific function. The operon also includes a promoter and an operator. The operator is
a region of the operon where regulatory proteins bin d. It is located near the promoter and helps regulate transcription of the operon
genes.
The Lac Operon
A well-known example of operon regulation involves the lac operon in E. coli bacteria (see Figure below and the video at the link
below). The lac operon consists of a promoter, an operat or, and three genes that encode the enzymes needed t o digest lactose, the
sugar found in milk. The lac operon is regulated by lact ose in the environment.
When lactose is absent, a repressor protein binds to the operator. The operator is located between the promoter and the three lac
operon genes. The protein blocks the binding of RNA polymera se to the promoter. As a result, the lac genes are not express ed.
When lactose is present, the repressor protein does not bind to the operator. This allows RNA polymerase to bind to the
promoter and begin transcription. As a result, the lac ge nes are expressed, and lactose is digested.
Why might it be beneficial to express genes only when they are needed? (Hint: synthesizing proteins requir es energy and
materials.)
The three genes of the lac operon are lacZ, lacY, and lacA. They enco de proteins needed to digest lactose. The genes are
expressed only in the presence of lactose.

4.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12090Summary
Regulation of transcription in prokaryotes typically i nvolves an operon, such as the lac operon in E. coli.
The lac operon is regulated by proteins that behave dif ferently depending on whether lactose is present or absent.
Review
1. What is an operon?
2. Why might it be beneficial to express genes only when the y are needed?
3. What is the role of an operon's operator?
4. What happens to the lac operon in the absence of lacto se?
5. Draw a diagram to show how the lac operon is regulated.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
4.3: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
n dsu virtu a lc e ll
Lac Operon
Lac Operon
Watch on

4.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120914.4: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
On or Off? On or Off? On or Off?
That is the key question. Gene regulation in eukaryote s is a highly regulated process usually involving man y proteins, which either
bind to each other or bind to the DNA.
Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
In eukaryotic cells, the start of transcription is one of the most comp licated parts of gene regulation. There may be many regulatory
proteins and regulatory elements involved. Regulation may also involve enhancers. Enhancers are distant regions of DNA that can
loop back to interact with a gene’s promoter.
The TATA Box
Different types of cells have unique patterns of regulatory elements that r esult in only the necessary genes being transcribed. That’s
why a skin cell and nerve cell, for example, are so d ifferent from each other. However, some patterns of regu latory elements are
common to all genes, regardless of the cells in which they occur. An example is the TATA box, so named because it has a core
sequence of TATAAA. This is a regulatory element that is part of the p romoter of most eukaryotic genes. A number of regula tory
proteins bind to the TATA box, forming a multi-prot ein complex. It is only when all of the appropriate p roteins are bound to the
TATA box that RNA polymerase recognizes the complex a nd binds to the promoter. Once RNA polymerase binds, tr anscription
begins.
Regulation During Development
The regulation of gene expression is extremely import ant during the development of an organism. Regulator y proteins must turn on
certain genes in particular cells at just the right time so the organism develops normal organs and organ systems. Homeobox genes
are an example of genes that regulate development. T hey code for regulatory proteins that switch on whole s eries of major
developmental genes. In insects, homeobox genes called hox genes ensure that body parts such as limbs develop in the c orrect
place. Figure below shows how a mutation in a hox gene can affect a n insect’s development. Other organisms, including h umans,
also have hox genes.

4.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12091
Effect of Hox Gene Mutation. Scientists caused a mutation in a hox gene of this fruit fly. As a result of the mutation, a leg
grew out of its head where an antenna should have developed.
Gene Expression and Cancer
The mutations that cause cancer generally occur in t wo types of regulatory genes: tumor-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes
(see Figure below). These genes produce regulatory proteins that control the cell cycle. When the genes mutate, cells with
mutations divide rapidly and without limits, potentially resulting in a tumor and cancer.
How Cancer Develops. This flow chart shows how a series of mutations in tum or-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes
leads to cancer.

4.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12091Summary
Regulation of transcription in eukaryotes is generally more complex than in prokaryotes. It involves unique regulatory elements
in different cells as well as common regulatory elements such as the TATA box.
Regulation is especially important during development. It may involve regulatory genes such as homeobox genes that switch
other regulatory genes on or off.
Mutations in regulatory genes that normally control the cell cycle cause cancer.
Review
1. Identify the TATA box and its function in transcription.
2. What is a homeobox gene?
3. Why is gene regulation especially important during dev elopment?
4. What are tumor-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes?
Al M a zu re k III
Evolution Genetic T ool Kit
Evolution Genetic T ool Kit
Watch on

4.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120915. Sketch how an insect with a mutated hox gene might look. Ex plain your sketch.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Ktbn/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antenna
pedia.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
4.4: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14834.5: Central Dogma
Is it always DNA to RNA to proteins?
The central dogma of molecular biology. Coined by Fra ncis Crick. And in his own words, "I called this idea t he central dogma, for
two reasons, I suspect. I had already used the obvious wor d hypothesis in the sequence hypothesis, and in addition I wante d to
suggest that this new assumption was more central and more po werful."
Central Dogma of Molecular Biology
Your DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, contains the genes that determine who you are. How can this organic molecule c ontrol your
characteristics? DNA contains instructions for all the p roteins your body makes. Proteins, in turn, determine the structure and
function of all your cells. What determines a protein’s structure? It begins wit h the sequence of amino acids that make up the
protein. Instructions for making proteins with the corre ct sequence of amino acids are encoded in DNA.
DNA is found in chromosomes. In eukaryotic cells, chromosomes always remain in the nucleus, but proteins are made at ribosomes
in the cytoplasm. How do the instructions in DNA get to the site of protein synthesis outside the nucleus? Ano ther type of nucleic
acid is responsible. This nucleic acid is RNA, or ribonucleic acid. RNA is a small molecule that c an squeeze through pores in the
nuclear membrane. It carries the information from DNA in the nucleus to a ribosome in the cytoplasm and th en helps assemble the
protein. In short:
DNA → RNA → Protein
Discovering this sequence of events was a major milesto ne in molecular biology. It is called the central dogma of molecular
biology. The two processes involved in the central dogma are transcription and translation, which are discussed in additional
concepts.

4.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1483Summary
The central dogma of molecular biology states that DNA co ntains instructions for making a protein, which are copied by RNA.
RNA then uses the instructions to make a protein.
In short: DNA → RNA → Protein, or DNA to RNA to Protein.
Review
1. State the central dogma of molecular biology.
2. What are transcription and translation?
3. Explain the central dogma of molecular biology.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 4.5: Central Dogma is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
R IK EN gsc
The Central Dogma (English version)
The Central Dogma (English version)
Watch on

4.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14844.6: DNA
What type of organic molecule is this?
Here’s a hint: molecules like this one determine who you are. They contain genetic information that cont rols your characteristics.
They determine your eye color, facial features, and ot her physical attributes. What molecule is it?
You probably answered "DNA." Today, it is commonly known th at DNA is the genetic material. For a long time, scienti sts knew
such molecules existed. They were aware that genetic i nformation was contained within organic molecules. Howev er, they didn’t
know which type of molecules play this role. In fact, for many decades, scientists thought that proteins were the molecules that
carry genetic information. In this section, you will lear n how scientists discovered that DNA carries the code of life.
DNA, the Genetic Material
DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, is the genetic material in your cells. It was passed on to you from your parents and deter mines your
characteristics. The discovery that DNA is the genetic m aterial was another important milestone in molecular bio logy.
Griffith Searches for the Genetic Material
Many scientists contributed to the identification of DNA as the genetic material. In the 1920s, Frederick Griffi th made an important
discovery. He was studying two different strains of a b acterium, called R (rough) strain and S (smooth) str ain. He injected the two
strains into mice. The S strain killed (virulent) the mice, but the R strain did not (non-virulent) (see th e Figure below). Griffith also
injected mice with S-strain bacteria that had been killed by heat. As expected, the kill ed bacteria did not harm the mice. However,
when the dead S-strain bacteria were mixed with live R-strain bacteria and injected, the mice died.
Griffith’s Experimental Results. Griffith showed that a substance could be transferred to harmless bacteria and make them
deadly.
Based on his observations, Griffith deduced that somet hing in the killed S strain was transferred to the pr eviously harmless R
strain, making the R strain deadly. He called this p rocess transformation, as something was "transforming" the bacteria from one
strain into another strain. What was that something? What type of substance could change the characteris tics of the organism that
received it?

4.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1484Avery’s Team Makes a Major Contribution
In the early 1940s, a team of scientists led by Oswald A very tried to answer the question raised by Griffith’ s results. They
inactivated various substances in the S-strain bacteria. They then killed the S-strain bacteria and mixed t he remains with live Rstrain bacteria. (Keep in mind, the R-strain bacteria usually did not harm the mice.) When they inactivate d proteins, the R-strain
was deadly to the injected mice. This ruled out prot eins as the genetic material. Why? Even without the S-s train proteins, the R
strain was changed, or transformed, into the deadly stra in. However, when the researchers inactivated DNA in the S strain, the R
strain remained harmless. This led to the conclusion that DNA is the substance that controls the characteri stics of organisms. In
other words, DNA is the genetic material.
Hershey and Chase Seal the Deal
The conclusion that DNA is the genetic material was not widely accepted at first. It had to be confirmed by other research. In the
1950s, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase did experiments with viruses and bacteria. Viruses are not made of cells. They are
basically DNA inside a protein coat. To reproduce, a vi rus must insert its own genetic material into a cell (such as a bacterium).
Then it uses the cell’s machinery to make more viru ses. The researchers used different radioactive element s to label the DNA and
proteins in viruses. This allowed them to identify wh ich molecule the viruses inserted into bacteria. DNA was the molecule they
identified. This confirmed that DNA is the genetic material.
Summary
The work of several researchers led to the discovery tha t DNA is the genetic material.
Along the way, Griffith discovered the process of transformati on.
Review
1. List the research that determined that DNA is the genetic material.
2. What is transformation?
3. What happened to the R-strain bacteria when Avery and his colleagues inactivated DNA in the S strain bacteria?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Public Domain Images
Source: pixabay.com/illustrations/dnabiology-medicine-gene-163466/
License: CC0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 4.6: DNA is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was edited
to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14874.7: DNA Structure and Replication
How do these four structures form DNA?
In an extremely elegant model, that's how. As you will soon see, the model predicts how the DNA sequence can co de for proteins,
and how the molecule can be replicated.
DNA Structure and Replication
Chargaff's Rules
Other important discoveries about DNA were made in the mid-1900s by Erwin Chargaff. He studied DNA from many dif ferent
species. He was especially interested in the four diff erent nitrogen bases of DNA: adenine (A), guanine (G), cy tosine (C), and
thymine (T) (see the Figure below). Chargaff found that concentrations of the fo ur bases differed from one species to another.
However, within each species, the concentration of adenine was always about the same as the concentration of thym ine. The same
was true of the concentrations of guanine and cytosin e. These observations came to be known as Chargaff’s rules. The
significance of the rules would not be revealed until th e structure of DNA was discovered.
Nitrogen Bases in DNA. The DNA of all species has the same four nitroge n bases.
The Double Helix
After DNA was found to be the genetic material, scientist s wanted to learn more about it. James Watson and Franci s Crick are
usually given credit for discovering that DNA has a double helix shape, like a spiral staircase (see the Figure below). The

4.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1487discovery was based on the prior work of Rosalind Frankli n and other scientists, who had used X rays to learn more about DNA’s
structure. Franklin and these other scientists have not always been given credit for their contributions.
The DNA molecule has a double helix shape. This is the same basic shape as a spir al staircase. Do you see the resemblance?
Which parts of the DNA molecule are like the steps of the spiral stai rcase?
The double helix shape of DNA, together with Chargaff’s rules, led to a better understanding of DNA. DNA, as a nuc leic acid, is
made from nucleotide monomers, and the DNA double helix consists of two polynu cleotide chains. Each nucleotide consists of a
sugar (deoxyribose), a phosphate group, and a nitrogen -containing base (A, C, G, or T).
Scientists concluded that bonds (hydrogen bonds) bet ween complementary bases hold together the two polynucl eotide chains of
DNA. Adenine always bonds with its complementary base, thymi ne. Cytosine always bonds with its complementary base, guanine.
If you look at the nitrogen bases in the Figure above, you will see why. Adenine and guanine have a two -ring structure. Cytosine
and thymine have just one ring. If adenine were to bi nd with guanine and cytosine with thymine, the distanc e between the two
DNA chains would be variable. However, when a one-ring mole cule binds with a two-ring molecule, the distance betwe en the two
chains is kept constant. This maintains the uniform shape of the DNA double helix. These base pairs (A-T or G-C) stick into the
middle of the double helix, forming, in essence, the steps o f the spiral staircase.
DNA Replication
Knowledge of DNA’s structure helped scientists understand how DNA replicates. DNA replication is the process in which DNA is
copied. It occurs during the synthesis (S) phase of th e eukaryotic cell cycle. DNA replication begins when a n enzyme, DNA
helicase, breaks the bonds between complementary bases in DNA (see the Figure below). This exposes the bases inside the
molecule so they can be “read” by another enzyme, DNA polymerase, and used to build two new DNA strands with complementary
bases, also by DNA polymerase. The two daughter molecules that result each contain one strand from the parent molecule and one
new strand that is complementary to it. As a result, th e two daughter molecules are both identical to the p arent molecule. DNA
replication is a semi-conservative process because half of the parent DNA molecule is co nserved in each of the two daughter DNA
molecules.
The process of DNA replication is actually much more compl ex than this simple summary.

4.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1487
DNA Replication. DNA replication is a semi-conservative process. Half of the parent DNA molecule is conserved in each of
the two daughter DNA molecules.
Summary
Chargaff's rules state that the amount of A is similar to the am ount of T, and the amount of G is similar to the amount o f C.
Watson and Crick discovered that DNA has a double helix s hape, consisting of two polynucleotide chains held toget her by
bonds between complementary bases.
DNA replication is semi-conservative: half of the paren t DNA molecule is conserved in each of the two daughter DNA
molecules.
Review
1. What are Chargaff’s rules?
2. Identify the structure of the DNA molecule.
3. What are nucleotides? What makes up a nucleotide?
4. Why is DNA replication said to be semi-conservative?
5. Create a diagram that shows how DNA replication occurs.
T e a ch e r's P e t
DNA Replication
DNA Replication
Watch on

4.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14876. What is complementary base pairing? Explain why comp lementary base pairing is necessary to maintain the doub le helix shape
of the DNA molecule.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: DNA: Image copyright ermess,
2014; Staircase: Andrew Gould;Madeleine
Price Ball;Image copyright ermess,
2014;Hana Zavadska;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats)
Source: DNA:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Staircase:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/27950702@
N04/3644533740;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DNA_re
plication_split.svg;
http://www.shutterstock.com; CK-12
Foundation
License: DNA: License from Shutterstock;
Staircase: CC BY 2.0; Public Domain; CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats);Laura
Guerin;DNA: Image copyright ermess,
2014; Staircase: Andrew Gould
Source: CK-12 Foundation; DNA:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Staircase:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/27950702@
N04/3644533740
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; DNA: License
from Shutterstock; Staircase: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: DNA: Image copyright ermess,
2014; Staircase: Andrew Gould;Image
copyright ermess, 2014;"0322 DNA
Nucleotides" by OpenStax College Anatomy & Physiology, Connexions Web
site. http://cnx.org/content/col11496/1.6/,
Jun 19, 2013.. Licensed under CC BY 3.0
via Wikimedia Commons commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F...es.jpg;Ma
riana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats)
Source: DNA:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Staircase:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/27950702@
N04/3644533740;
http://www.shutterstock.com; CK-12
Foundation
License: DNA: License from Shutterstock;
Staircase: CC BY 2.0

4.7.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1487
[Figure 4]Credit: Madeleine Price Ball;DNA: Image
copyright ermess, 2014; Staircase: Andrew
Gould;Image copyright ermess,
2014;Yassine Mrabet
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DNA_re
plication_split.svg; DNA:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Staircase:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/27950702@
N04/3644533740;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
somes_mutations-en.svg
License: Public Domain; DNA License
from Shutterstock; Staircase CC BY 2.0
This page titled 4.7: DNA Structure and Replication is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14854.8: RNA
How does the information move from the nucleus, where the DNA is located, to the cytoplasm, where
the ribosomes are?
RNA, the other nucleic acid, that's how. Specifically mRNA. RNA, the middle player in the central dogma. This im age is an
abstract representation of tRNA. Without tRNA, mRNA, and rRNA, pro teins cannot be made.
RNA
DNA alone cannot ‘‘tell’’ your cells how to make proteins. It needs the help of RNA, ribonucleic acid, the other main player in the
central dogma of molecular biology. Remember, DNA ‘‘li ves’’ in the nucleus, but proteins are made on the r ibosomes in the
cytoplasm. How does the genetic information get from the nuc leus to the cytoplasm? RNA is the answer.
RNA vs. DNA
RNA, like DNA, is a nucleic acid. However, RNA differs from DNA in several ways. In addition to being smaller than DNA, RNA
also
consists of one nucleotide chain instead of two,
contains the nitrogen base uracil (U) instead of thymine,
contains the sugar ribose instead of deoxyribose.
Types of RNA
There are three main types of RNA, all of which are involved in making proteins.
1. Messenger RNA (mRNA) copies the genetic instructions from DNA in the nucleus, and carries the instructions to the
cytoplasm.
2. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) helps form ribosomes, the organelle where proteins are assembled.
3. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings amino acids to ribosomes, where they are joined tog ether to form proteins.
Shown are the three types of RNA and their roles: (1) mRNA contains the ge netic message, (2) tRNA transfers the amino
acids to the ribosome, (3) rRNA is the main component of the ribosome. M ore on the roles of the RNAs will be discussed in
additional concepts.

4.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1485Summary
RNA differs from DNA in several ways.
There are three main types of RNA: messenger RNA (mRNA), ribosoma l RNA (rRNA), and transfer RNA (tRNA).
Each type plays a different in role in making proteins.
Review
1. What are the three main types of RNA? Describe their roles.
2. Compare and contrast DNA and RNA.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Marilee Bailey, courtesy of U.S.
Department of Energy;Image copyright
ermess, 2014;Kosi Gramatikoff
(User:Kosigrim);Kyle Schneider
Source:
http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Huma
n_Genome/publicat/tko/index.shtml;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SiRNAv
itro.gif;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TRNA_
all2.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Marilee Bailey, courtesy of U.S.
Department of Energy;Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Image copyright ermess, 2014
Source:
http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Huma
n_Genome/publicat/tko/index.shtml; CK12 Foundation;
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 4.8: RNA is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was edited
to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14864.9: Transcription
How does a cell use the information in its DNA?
To transcribe means ‘‘to paraphrase or summarize in writing’’. The information in DNA is transcribed - or summarized - into a
smaller version - RNA - that can be used by the cell. Th is process is called transcription.
Transcription
The process in which cells make proteins is called protein synthesis. It actually consists of two processes: transcription and
translation. Transcription takes place in the nucleus. It uses DNA as a template to make an RNA molecule. RNA then leaves the
nucleus and goes to a ribosome in the cytoplasm, whe re translation occurs. Translation reads the genetic c ode in mRNA and makes
a protein.
Transcription is the first part of the central dogma of molecular biology: DNA → RNA. It is the transfer of genetic instructions in
DNA to messenger RNA (mRNA). During transcription, a strand of mRNA is made that is complementary to a strand of DNA. The
Figure below shows how this occurs.
Overview of Transcription. Transcription uses the sequence of bases in a strand of DNA to make a complementary strand of
mRNA. Triplets are groups of three successive nucleotide bases in DNA. Codo ns are complementary groups of bases in
mRNA.

4.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1486Steps of Transcription
Transcription takes place in three steps: initiation, elo ngation, and termination. The steps are illustrated in th e Figure below.
1. Initiation is the beginning of transcription. It occurs when the enz yme RNA polymerase binds to a region of a gene called the
promoter. This signals the DNA to unwind so the enzyme can ‘‘read’’ th e bases in one of the DNA strands. The enzyme is now
ready to make a strand of mRNA with a complementary seque nce of bases.
2. Elongation is the addition of nucleotides to the mRNA strand. RNA pol ymerase reads the unwound DNA strand and builds the
mRNA molecule, using complementary base pairs. There is a brief time during this process when the newly formed RNA is
bound to the unwound DNA. During this process, an adenine (A) in the DNA binds to an uracil (U) in the RNA.
3. Termination is the ending of transcription, and occurs when RNA polym erase crosses a stop (termination) sequence in the
gene. The mRNA strand is complete, and it detaches from DNA.
Steps of Transcription. Transcription occurs in the three steps - initiat ion, elongation, and termination - shown here.
Processing mRNA
In eukaryotes, the new mRNA is not yet ready for transl ation. It must go through additional processing befor e it leaves the nucleus.
This may include splicing, editing, and polyadenylat ion. These processes modify the mRNA in various ways. Suc h modifications
allow a single gene to be used to make more than one pro tein.
Splicing removes introns from mRNA (see the Figure below). Introns are regions that do not code for protein s. The remaining
mRNA consists only of regions that do code for proteins, whic h are called exons. Ribonucleoproteins are nucleoproteins that
contain RNA. Small nuclear ribonuclearproteins are involved i n pre-mRNA splicing.
Editing changes some of the nucleotides in mRNA. For example, the hu man protein called APOB, which helps transport lipids
in the blood, has two different forms because of editing. One form is smaller than the other because editing adds a pre mature
stop signal in the mRNA.
Polyadenylation adds a “tail” to the mRNA. The tail consists of a string of As (adenine bases). It signals the end of mRNA. It
is also involved in exporting mRNA from the nucleus. In addi tion, the tail protects mRNA from enzymes that might brea k it
down.

4.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1486
Splicing. Splicing removes introns from mRNA. UTR is an untranslated region of the mRNA.
Summary
Transcription is the DNA → RNA part of the central dogma of mo lecular biology.
Transcription occurs in the nucleus.
During transcription, a copy of mRNA is made that is complem entary to a strand of DNA. In eukaryotes, mRNA may be
modified before it leaves the nucleus.
Review
1. What is protein synthesis?
2. What enzyme is involved in transcription?
3. Describe transcription.
4. Describe splicing. Distinguish introns from exons.
n dsu virtu a lc e ll
T ranscription
T ranscription
Watch on

4.9.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14865. How may mRNA be modified before it leaves the nucleus?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 4.9: Transcription is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14884.10: Genetic Code
How do you go from four letters to 20 amino acids?
You need a code. And the code that changes the infor mation embedded in DNA and RNA into ordered amino acid s and proteins is
the genetic code. And every living organism uses the same genetic code.
The Genetic Code
How is the information in a gene encoded? The answer i s the genetic code. The genetic code consists of the sequence of nitrogen
bases—A, C, G, U—in an mRNA chain. The four bases make up the “letters” of the genetic code. The letters are combined in
groups of three to form code “words,” called codons. Each codon stands for (encodes) one amino acid, un less it codes for a start or
stop signal.
There are 20 common amino acids in proteins. There a re 64 possible codons, more than enough to code for t he 20 amino acids. The
genetic code is shown in the Figure below.
The Genetic Code. To find the amino acid for a particular codon, find the cell in the table for the first and second bases of
the codon. Then, within that cell, find the codon with the correct third base. Fo r example CUG codes for leucine, AAG
codes for lysine, and GGG codes for glycine.
Reading the Genetic Code
As shown in the Figure above, the codon AUG codes for the amino acid methioni ne. This codon is also the start codon that begins
translation. The start codon establishes the reading frame of mRNA. The reading frame is the way the letters are divided into
codons. After the AUG start codon, the next three letters are read as the second codon. The next three letters after that are read as
the third codon, and so on. This is illustrated in t he Figure below. The mRNA molecule is read, codon by codon, un til a stop codon
is reached. UAG, UGA, and UAA are all stop codons. They do not code for any amino acids. Stop codons are also known a s
termination codons.

4.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1488
Reading the Genetic Code. The genetic code is read three bases at a time. Codons ar e the code words of the genetic code.
Which amino acid does codon 2 in the drawing stand for?
Characteristics of the Genetic Code
The genetic code has a number of important characteris tics.
The genetic code is universal. All known living organisms u se the same genetic code. This shows that all organisms sh are a
common evolutionary history.
The genetic code is unambiguous. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). What might happ en if codons
encoded more than one amino acid?
The genetic code is redundant. Most amino acids are enc oded by more than one codon. In the Figure above, how many codons
code for the amino acid threonine? What might be an adv antage of having more than one codon for the same amin o acid?
Summary
The genetic code consists of the sequence of bases in DNA or RNA.
Groups of three bases form codons, and each codon stands for one amino acid (or start or stop).
The codons are read in sequence following the start codon until a stop codon is reached.
The genetic code is universal, unambiguous, and redunda nt.
Review
1. What is the genetic code?
2. What are codons? How many codons are there?
3. Use the genetic code to translate the following segment o f RNA into a sequence of five amino acids: GUC-GCG-CAU-AGCAAG
Sta te d Cle a rly
What is DNA and How Does it Work?
What is DNA and How Does it Work?
Watch on

4.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14884. The genetic code is universal, unambiguous, and redun dant. Explain what this means.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska;Kyle Schneider
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TRNA_
all2.png
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 4.10: Genetic Code is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120854.11: Translation
RNA to proteins. How?
You must translate. To go from one language to anoth er. Spanish to English, French to German, or nucleotide s to amino acids.
Which type is the translation of molecular biology? Obviously, the type of translating discussed here tran slates from the language
of nucleotides to the language of amino acids.
Translation
Translation is the second part of the central dogma of molecul ar biology: RNA → Protein. It is the process in which the genetic
code in mRNA is read, one codon at a time, to make a protein. The Figure below shows how this happens. After mRNA leaves the
nucleus, it moves to a ribosome, which consists of rRNA and proteins. The ribosome reads the sequence of codo ns in mRNA.
Molecules of tRNA bring amino acids to the ribosome in the correct sequ ence.
Translation of the codons in mRNA to a chain of amino acids occurs at a r ibosome. Notice the growing amino acid chain
attached to the tRNAs and ribosome. Find the different types of RNA in the diagra m. What are their roles in translation?
To understand the role of tRNA, you need to know more ab out its structure. Each tRNA molecule has an anticodon for the amino
acid it carries. An anticodon is a sequence of 3 bas es, and is complementary to the codon for an amino a cid. For example, the
amino acid lysine has the codon AAG, so the anticodon i s UUC. Therefore, lysine would be carried by a tRNA molecul e with the
anticodon UUC. Wherever the codon AAG appears in mRNA, a UUC anticodon on a tRNA temporarily binds to the codon. W hile
bound to the mRNA, the tRNA gives up its amino acid. Bon ds form between adjacent amino acids as they are brou ght one by one
to the ribosome, forming a polypeptide chain. The chain of amino acids keeps growing until a st op codon is reached.

4.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12085
The tRNA structure is a very important aspect in its role. Though the m olecule folds into a
3-leaf clover
structure, notice the anticodon arm in the lower segment of the molec ule, with the amino acid attached at the opposite end
of the molecule (acceptor stem). It is the anticodon that determines whi ch codon in the mRNA the tRNA will bind to.
After a polypeptide chain is synthesized, it may unde rgo additional processes. For example, it may assume a folded shape due to
interactions among its amino acids. It may also bind with other polypeptides or with different types of mole cules, such as lipids or
carbohydrates. Many proteins travel to the Golgi apparatus to be modified for their specific function.
Summary
Translation is the RNA → Protein part of the central dogma.
Translation occurs at a ribosome.
During translation, a protein is synthesized using the cod ons in mRNA as a guide.
All three types of RNA play a role in translation.

4.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12085Review
1. Outline the steps of translation.
2. Discuss the structure of a tRNA molecule, and its role in translation.
3. How are transcription and translation related to the cen tral dogma of molecular biology?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Original image by the National
Human Genome Research Institute,
redrawn by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Original
image from:
http://www.genome.gov/Glossary/index.cf
m?id=200
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Kyle Schneider
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TRNA_
all2.png
License: Public Domain
4.11: Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120864.12: Mutation
What causes albinism?
This rare albino alligator must have the specific "ins tructions," or DNA, to have this quality. The cause of al binism is a mutation in
a gene for melanin, a protein found in skin and eye s. Such a mutation may result in no melanin production at all or a significant
decline in the amount of melanin.
Mutations
A change in the sequence of bases in DNA or RNA is calle d a mutation. Does the word mutation make you think of science fic tion
and bug-eyed monsters? Think again. Everyone has mut ations. In fact, most people have dozens or even hund reds of mutations in
their DNA. Mutations are essential for evolution to occur. They are the ultimate source of all new genetic mat erial - new alleles - in
a species. Although most mutations have no effect on the organisms in which they occur, some mutations are beneficial. Even
harmful mutations rarely cause drastic changes in organi sms.
Types of Mutations
There are a variety of types of mutations. Two major catego ries of mutations are germline mutations and somatic mutati ons.
Germline mutations occur in gametes. These mutations are especially signi ficant because they can be transmitted to offspring
and every cell in the offspring will have the mutation.
Somatic mutations occur in other cells of the body. These mutations may have little effect o n the organism because they are
confined to just one cell and its daughter cells. Somatic m utations cannot be passed on to offspring.
Mutations also differ in the way that the genetic mate rial is changed. Mutations may change the structure o f a chromosome or just
change a single nucleotide.
Chromosomal Alterations
Chromosomal alterations are mutations that change chromosome structure. Th ey occur when a section of a chromosome breaks
off and rejoins incorrectly or does not rejoin at all. Poss ible ways these mutations can occur are illustrated in the Figure below.

4.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12086
Chromosomal Alterations. Chromosomal alterations are major cha nges in the genetic material.
Chromosomal alterations are very serious. They often result in the death of the organism in which they occu r. If the organism
survives, it may be affected in multiple ways.
Point Mutations
A point mutation is a change in a single nucleotide in DNA. This type o f mutation is usually less serious than a chromosomal
alteration. An example of a point mutation is a mutat ion that changes the codon UUU to the codon UCU. Point mut ations can be
silent, missense, or nonsense mutations, as shown in the Table below. The effects of point mutations depend on how they change
the genetic code.
Type Description Example Effect
Silentmutated codon codes for the
same amino acidCAA (glutamine) → CAG
(glutamine)none
Missensemutated codon codes for a
different amino acidCAA (glutamine) → CCA
(proline)variable
Nonsensemutated codon is a premature
stop codonCAA (glutamine) → UAA
(stop)usually serious
Frameshift Mutations
A frameshift mutation is a deletion or insertion of one or more nucleoti des that changes the reading frame of the base sequence.
Deletions remove nucleotides, and insertions add nucleot ides. Consider the following sequence of bases in RNA:
AUG-AAU-ACG-GCU = start-asparagine-threonine-alanine
Now, assume an insertion occurs in this sequence. Let’s say an A nucleotide is inserted after the start codon AUG:
AUG-AAA-UAC-GGC-U = start-lysine-tyrosine-glycine
Even though the rest of the sequence is unchanged, t his insertion changes the reading frame and thus al l of the codons that follow
it. As this example shows, a frameshift mutation can dra matically change how the codons in mRNA are read. This can have a
drastic effect on the protein product.

4.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12086Summary
Germline mutations occur in gametes. Somatic mutations occu r in other body cells.
Chromosomal alterations are mutations that change chr omosome structure.
Point mutations change a single nucleotide.
Frameshift mutations are additions or deletions of nucleoti des that cause a shift in the reading frame.
Review
1. Identify three types of chromosomal alterations.
2. Distinguish among silent, missense, and nonsense point mut ations.
3. What is a frameshift mutation? What causes this type of mut ation?
4. Assume that a point mutation changes the codon AUU to AUC. Why is this a silent mutation?
5. Look at the following mutation: AUG-GUC-CCU-AAA → AUG-AGU-CCC-UAA-A. The base A was inserted following the
start codon AUG. Describe how this mutation affects the enc oded amino acid sequence.
6. Compare and contrast germline mutations and somatic m utations.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Tom Hilton
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/tomhilton/85
87793196/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the National Human
Genome Research Institute,
User:Dietzel65/De.Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chromo
somenmutationen.png
License: Public Domain
4.12: Mutation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Mutations
Mutations
Watch on

4.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120874.13: Mutation Causes
What does radiation contamination do?
It mutates DNA. The Chernobyl disaster was a nuclear ac cident that occurred on April 26, 1986. It is considere d the worst nuclear
power plant accident in history. A Russian publication concludes that 985,000 excess cancers occurred betwe en 1986 and 2004 as a
result of radioactive contamination. The 2011 repor t of the European Committee on Radiation Risk calcu lates a total of 1.4 million
excess cancers occurred as a result of this contaminatio n.
Causes of Mutation
Mutations have many possible causes. Some mutations seem to happ en spontaneously without any outside influence. They can
occur when mistakes are made during DNA replication or transcription. Other mutations are caused by environm ental factors.
Anything in the environment that can cause a mutatio n is known as a mutagen. Examples of mutagens are pictured in the Figure
below.
Examples of Mutagens. Types of mutagens include radiation, chemica ls, and infectious agents. Do you know of other
examples of each type of mutagen shown here?
Spontaneous Mutations
There are five common types of spontaneous mutations. These are described in the Table below.

4.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12087Mutation Description
Tautomerism a base is changed by the repositioning of a hydrogen a tom
Depurination loss of a purine base (A or G)
Deamination spontaneous deamination of 5-methycytosine
Transitiona purine to purine (A to G, G to A), or a pyrimidine to pyrimidine
(C to T, T to C) change
Transversion a purine becomes a pyrimidine, or vice versa
The Chernobyl Disaster: Follow-up
Though the area immediately around the Chernobyl di saster may not be safe for human life for thousands o f years, the "Exclusion
Zone" around the Chernobyl nuclear power station has become a haven for wildlife. As humans were evacuated f rom the area after
the disaster, existing animal populations multiplied and rare species not seen for centuries have returne d or have been reintroduced,
including the lynx, wild boar, wolf, Eurasian brown bear, European bison, Przewalski's horse, and eagle owl. The Exclusion Zone
is so lush with wildlife and greenery that in 2007 th e Ukrainian government designated it a wildlife sanct uary. It is now one of the
largest wildlife sanctuaries in Europe.
Summary
Mutations are caused by environmental factors known as mutagens.
Types of mutagens include radiation, chemicals, and infecti ous agents.
Mutations may be spontaneous in nature.
Review
1. Define mutation and mutagen.
2. List three examples of mutagens.
Ca n ce rQu e st- CJ
Gene mutation
Gene mutation
Watch on

4.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120873. Distinguish between a transition and a transversion.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
4.13: Mutation Causes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Evolution
5.1: Classification
5.2: Phylogeny and Cladistics
5.3: Darwin
5.4: Influences on Darwin
5.5: Theory of Evolution
5.6: Fossils
5.7: Comparative Anatomy
5.8: Biogeography
5.9: Population Genetics
5.10: Hardy-Weinberg
5.11: History of Life
5.12: Forces of Evolution
5.13: Natural Selection
5.14: Origin of Species
5.15: Coevolution
5.16: Macroevolution
5.17: Animal Evolution
5.18: Formation of Earth
5.19: First Organic Molecules
5.20: First Cell
5.21: Eukaryote Evolution
5.22: Late Precambrian
5.23: Paleozoic Era
5.24: Mesozoic Era
5.25: Cenozoic Era
This page titled 5: Evolution is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

5.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121025.1: Classification
In biology, what is classification?
There are millions and millions of species, so classify ing organisms into proper categories can be a difficu lt task. To make it easier
for all scientists to do, a classification system had to be developed.
Linnaean Classification
The evolution of life on Earth over the past 4 billi on years has resulted in a huge variety of species. Fo r more than 2,000 years,
humans have been trying to classify the great diversit y of life. The science of classifying organisms is call ed taxonomy.
Classification is an important step in understanding th e present diversity and past evolutionary history of lif e on Earth.
All modern classification systems have their roots in t he Linnaean classification system. It was developed by Swedish botanist
Carolus Linnaeus in the 1700s. He tried to classify all living things that were known at his time. He grouped to gether organisms
that shared obvious physical traits, such as number of legs or shape of leaves. For his contribution, Linn aeus is known as the
“father of taxonomy.”
The Linnaean system of classification consists of a hier archy of groupings, called taxa (singular, taxon). Taxa range from the
kingdom to the species (see Figure below). The kingdom is the largest and most inclusive grouping. It cons ists of organisms that
share just a few basic similarities. Examples are the pl ant and animal kingdoms. The species is the smallest and most exclusive
grouping. It consists of organisms that are similar enough to produce fertile offspring together. Closely related species are grouped
together in a genus.
Linnaean Classification System: Classification of the Human Specie s. This chart shows the taxa of the Linnaean
classification system. Each taxon is a subdivision of the taxon below i t in the chart. For example, a species is a subdivision of
a genus. The classification of humans is given in the chart as an ex ample.
Binomial Nomenclature
Perhaps the single greatest contribution Linnaeus ma de to science was his method of naming species. This method, called binomial
nomenclature, gives each species a unique, two-word Latin name cons isting of the genus name and the species name. An exa mple
is Homo sapiens, the two-word Latin name for humans. It literally means “wi se human.” This is a reference to our big brains.
Why is having two names so important? It is similar t o people having a first and a last name. You may kno w several people with
the first name Michael, but adding Michael’s last nam e usually pins down exactly whom you mean. In the same wa y, having two
names uniquely identifies a species.

5.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12102Revisions in Linnaean Classification
Linnaeus published his classification system in the 1700s. Since then, many new species have been discovere d. The biochemistry
of many organisms has also become known. Eventually, scien tists realized that Linnaeus’s system of classification n eeded revision.
A major change to the Linnaean system was the additio n of a new taxon called the domain. A domain is a taxon that is larger and
more inclusive than the kingdom. Most biologists agree there are three domains of life on Earth: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya
(see Figure below). Both Bacteria and Archaea consist of single-celled prokaryotes. Eukarya consists of all eukaryotes, from
single-celled protists to humans. This domain includes the Animalia (animals), Plantae (plants), Fungi (fung i), and Protista
(protists) kingdoms.
This phylogenetic tree is based on comparisons of ribosomal RNA base se quences among living organisms. The tree divides
all organisms into three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Hum ans and other animals belong to the Eukarya
domain. From this tree, organisms that make up the domain Eukarya appear t o have shared a more recent common
ancestor with Archaea than Bacteria.
Hemimastigotes: A New Kingdom?
In late 2018, Canadian researchers reported on what cou ld be a novel kingdom of life. Hemimastigotes, an eu karyotic microscopic
organism, does not fit into any of the known kingdoms o f life.
These eukaryotic organisms have numerous flagella, but seem to move in a random fashion, unlike the coordi nated fashion of other
microscopic organisms with many flagella. Genetic ana lysis confirmed a greater difference to other organ isms than that seen
between animals and fungi. The authors estimate the common ancestor between these organisms and other known living organis ms
lived over one billion years ago, about 500 million ye ars before the first animals. See the link below for additional information.
Rare microbes lead scientists to discover new branch on the tree of life
Science Friday: Isn't this Octopus Adorable?
What do you call a tiny octopus with big eyes, gelat inous skin and is cute as a button? Nobody knows quite yet! In this video by
Science Friday, Stephanie Bush aims to classify and name thi s presently undescribed deep-sea cephalopod.
Am oe ba Siste rs
Classi  cation
Classi  cation
Watch on

5.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12102Summary
Classification is an important step in understanding li fe on Earth.
All modern classification systems have their roots in the Lin naean classification system.
The Linnaean system is based on similarities in obviou s physical traits. It consists of a hierarchy of taxa, from t he kingdom to
the species.
Each species is given a unique two-word Latin name.
The recently added domain is a larger and more inclusive taxon than the kingdom.
Review
1. What is taxonomy?
2. Define taxon and give an example.
3. What is binomial nomenclature? Why is it important?
4. What is a domain? What are the three domains of life on Earth?
Sc iF ri
Isn 't this Octopus Adorabilis?
Isn 't this Octopus Adorabilis?
Watch on

5.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121025. Create a taxonomy, modeled on the Linnaean classificati on system, for a set of common objects, such as motor vehicl es, tools,
or office supplies. Identify the groupings that corresp ond to the different taxa in the Linnaean system.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Christopher Auyeung (based on
image by Peter Halasz)
Source: CK-12 Foundation (original image
from
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Biologic
al_classification_L_Pengo_tweaked.svg)
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Christopher Auyeung (based on
image by Peter Halasz);Barbara Akre and
Jin Yu, based on data from
http://cnx.org/content/m12174/latest/ and
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodiversity
Source: CK-12 Foundation (original image
from
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Biologic
al_classification_L_Pengo_tweaked.svg);
CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY-NC 3.0;
(Original image) Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Barbara Akre and Jin Yu, based on
data from
http://cnx.org/content/m12174/latest/ and
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodiversity
Source:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Phylogenetic
_tree.svg; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
5.1: Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121035.2: Phylogeny and Cladistics
Can two different species be related?
Of course they can. For example, there are many diffe rent species of mammals, or of one type of mammal, s uch as mice. And they
are all related. In other words, how close or how far ap art did they separate from a common ancestor during evolution?
Determining how different species are evolutionarily rel ated can be a tremendous task.
Phylogenetic Classification
Linnaeus classified organisms based on obvious physic al traits. Basically, organisms were grouped togethe r if they looked alike.
After Darwin published his theory of evolution in the 1 800s, scientists looked for a way to classify organisms that showed
phylogeny. Phylogeny is the evolutionary history of a group of related o rganisms. It is represented by a phylogenetic tree, like the
one in Figure below.
Phylogenetic Tree. This phylogenetic tree shows how three hypotheti cal species are related to each other through common
ancestors. Do you see why Species 1 and 2 are more closely rela ted to each other than either is to Species 3?
One way of classifying organisms that shows phylogeny i s by using the clade. A clade is a group of organisms that includes an
ancestor and all of its descendants. Clades are based on cladistics. This is a method of comparing traits in related spec ies to
determine ancestor-descendant relationships. Clades a re represented by cladograms, like the one in Figure below. This cladogram
represents the mammal and reptile clades. The reptile clade includes birds. It shows that birds evolved from reptiles. Linnaeus
classified mammals, reptiles, and birds in separate class es. This masks their evolutionary relationships.

5.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12103
This cladogram classifies mammals, reptiles, and birds in clades base d on their evolutionary relationships.
Summary
Phylogeny is the evolutionary history of group of related organisms. It is represented by a phylogenetic tree tha t shows how
species are related to each other through common ancest ors.
A clade is a group of organisms that includes an ances tor and all of its descendants. It is a phylogenetic classif ication, based on
evolutionary relationships.
Review
1. What is a clade?
2. What is cladistics, and what is it used for?
3. Explain why reptiles and birds are placed in the same clad e.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Cladograms
Cladograms
Watch on

5.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121034. Dogs and wolves are more closely related to each other th an either is to cats. Draw a phylogenetic tree to show the se
relationships.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
5.2: Phylogeny and Cladistics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121055.3: Darwin
What's that big red pouch?
The Frigate bird of the Galápagos Islands. This bird ca n be found throughout the tropical Atlantic down to t he Galápagos Islands
and Ecuador, but not in Europe or South America, so Darwi n may never have come across one until he landed on the Galápagos.
Such a unique creature was bound to make a naturalist such as Darwin wonder why. Why do they look the way they do? What's
that big red pouch? What are the advantages?
Darwin’s Theory
The Englishman Charles Darwin is one of the most famous scientists who ever lived. His place in the history of science is well
deserved. Darwin’s theory of evolution represents a giant lea p in human understanding. It explains and unifies all of b iology.
Darwin’s theory of evolution actually contains two major ideas:
1. One idea is that evolution occurs. In other words, organi sms change over time. Life on Earth has changed as descen dants
diverged from common ancestors in the past.
2. The other idea is that evolution occurs by natural selection. Natural selection is the process that results in living t hings with
beneficial traits producing more offspring than others. T his results in changes in the traits of living things over time.
In Darwin’s day, most people believed that all species were created at the same time and remained unchanged thereafter. They also
believed that Earth was only about 6,000 years old. Th erefore, Darwin’s ideas revolutionized biology. How did Darwin come up
with these important ideas? It all started when he went on a voyage.
The Voyage of the Beagle
In 1831, when Darwin was just 22 years old, he set sail on a scientific expedition on a ship called the HMS Beagle. He was the
naturalist on the voyage. As a naturalist, it was his job to obse rve and collect specimens of plants, animals, rocks, and fossils
wherever the expedition went ashore. The route the ship t ook and the stops they made are shown in the Figure below.

5.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12105
Voyage of the
Beagle
. This map shows the route of Darwin’s 5-year voyage on the
HMS Beagle
. Each stop along the way is labeled. Darwin and the others on board eventual ly circled the globe.
Darwin was fascinated by nature, so he loved his job on the Beagle. He spent more than 3 years of the 5-year trip explo ring nature
on distant continents and islands. While he was away, a former teacher published Darwin’s accounts of his obser vations. By the
time Darwin finally returned to England, he had become famo us as a naturalist.
Darwin’s Observations
During the long voyage, Darwin made many observations that help ed him form his theory of evolution. For example:
He visited tropical rainforests and other new habitats wh ere he saw many plants and animals he had never seen before (see
Figure below). This impressed him with the great diversity of lif e.
He experienced an earthquake that lifted the ocean floor 2.7 meters (9 feet) above sea level. He also found rocks cont aining
fossil sea shells in mountains high above sea level. These obs ervations suggested that continents and oceans had change d
dramatically over time and continue to change in drama tic ways.
He visited rock ledges that had clearly once been beaches t hat had gradually built up over time. This suggested t hat slow, steady
processes also change Earth’s surface.
He dug up fossils of gigantic extinct mammals, such as the grou nd sloth (see Figure below). This was hard evidence that
organisms looked very different in the past. It suggested t hat living things—like Earth’s surface—change over tim e.
On his voyage, Darwin saw giant marine iguanas and blue-footed boobies. He als o dug up the fossil skeleton of a giant
ground sloth like the one shown here. From left: Giant Marine Iguana, Blue- Footed Boobies, and Fossil Skeleton of a Giant
Ground Sloth
The Galápagos Islands
Darwin’s most important observations were made on the Galápagos Islands (see map in Figure below). This is a group of 16
small volcanic islands 966 kilometers (600 miles) off th e west coast of Ecuador, South America.

5.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12105
Galápagos Islands. This map shows the location of the Galápagos Islands that Darwin visited on his voyage.
Individual Galápagos islands differ from one another in important ways. Some are rocky and dry. Others have be tter soil and more
rainfall. Darwin noticed that the plants and animals on the different islands also differed. For example, the giant tortoises on one
island had saddle-shaped shells, while those on another island had dome-shaped shells (see Figure below). People who lived on the
islands could even tell the island a turtle came fro m by its shell. This started Darwin thinking about the origin of species. He
wondered how each island came to have its own type of tortoise.
Galápagos Tortoises. Galápagos tortoises have differently shape d shells depending on which island they inhabit. Tortoises
with saddle-shaped shells can reach up to eat plant leaves above their hea d. Tortoises with dome-shaped shells cannot reach
up in this way. These two types of tortoises live on islands with differ ent environments and food sources. How might this
explain the differences in their shells?
The Farallon Islands – "California's Galapagos"
One of the most productive marine food webs on the pl anet is located on the Farallon Islands, just 28 mile s off the San Francisco,
California coast. These islands also host the largest seabird breeding colony in the continental United Stat es, with over 300,000
breeding seabirds. The islands are known as the Galapagos of California. Why?

5.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12105Summary
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection states th at living things with beneficial traits produce more offspr ing than
others do. This produces changes in the traits of living thing s over time.
During his voyage on the Beagle, Darwin made many observations that helped him develop h is theory of evolution.
Darwin's most important observations were made on the Galáp agos Islands.
Review
1. State the two main ideas in Darwin's theory.
2. What was Darwin's role on the Beagle?
3. Describe two observations Darwin made on his voyage on the Beagle that helped him develop his theory of evolution.
K QED
The Farallon Islands, "California' s Ga
The Farallon Islands, "California' s Ga
Watch on

5.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121054. Why did Darwin’s observations of Galápagos tortoises cause him to wonder how species originate?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Saddle-shell: Catriona MacCallum;
Dome-shell: Nicolas de Camaret;Common
rock pigeon: Image copyright Marketa
Mark, 2014; Carrier pigeon: Image
copyright guentermanaus, 2014; Fantail
pigeon: Image copyright Ulrike Haberkorn,
Source: Saddle-shell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Geochel
one_nigra.png; Dome-shell:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ndecam/6215
265502/; http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Saddle-shell: CC BY 2.5; Domeshell CC BY 2.0; License from
Shutterstock; (left) CC BY 2.0; (middle)
CC BY 2.0; (right) Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: From left to right: A. Davey;
Nicolas de Camaret; Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal
Source: From left to right:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/adavey/41142
30491/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ndecam/6214
744005/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Megathe
rium_americanum_complete.JPG
License: From left to right: CC BY 2.0; CC
BY 2.0; Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: User:Geo Swan/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orthogr
aphic_projection_centred_over_the_Galapa
gos.png
License: Public Domain

5.3.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12105
[Figure 5]Credit: Saddle-shell: Catriona MacCallum;
Dome-shell: Nicolas de Camaret
Source: Saddle-shell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Geochel
one_nigra.png; Dome-shell:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ndecam/6215
265502/
License: Saddle-shell CC BY 2.5; CC BY
2.0
5.3: Darwin is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121065.4: Influences on Darwin
How do structures like this form?
Cathedral Rock in Sedona, Arizona. Though Arizona was not on Darwin's itinerary, the work of others that saw and studied Earth's
changing landscape influenced him. One geologist, Char les Lyell, proposed that gradual geological processes have shaped Earth’s
surface, inferring that Earth must be far older than most people believed. How else could structures like those shown here develop?
If in fact Earth was much older then just 6,000 years, Darwin believed there would have been plenty of time for evolu tion to occur.
Influences on Darwin
Science, like evolution, always builds on the past. Darwin didn’t develop his theory completely on his own. He was influenced by
the ideas of earlier thinkers.
Earlier Thinkers Who Influenced Darwin
1. Jean Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829) was an important French naturalist. He was one o f the first scientists to propose that
species change over time. However, Lamarck was wrong about ho w species change. His idea of the inheritance of acquired
characteristics is incorrect. Traits an organism develops during its own life time cannot be passed on to offspring, as Lamarck
believed.
2. Charles Lyell (1797–1875) was a well-known English geologist. Darwin took Lyell's book, Principles of Geology, with him on
the Beagle. In the book, Lyell argued that gradual geological proces ses have gradually shaped Earth’s surface. From this, Ly ell
inferred that Earth must be far older than most people b elieved.
3. Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) was an English economist. He wrote an essay t itled On Population. In the essay, Malthus argued
that human populations grow faster than the resources th ey depend on. When populations become too large, famin e and disease
break out. In the end, this keeps populations in check b y killing off the weakest members.
Artificial Selection
These weren’t the only influences on Darwin. He was also awa re that humans could breed plants and animals to have useful traits.
By selecting which animals were allowed to reproduce, they could change an organism’s traits. The pigeons in Figure below are
good examples. Darwin called this type of change in o rganisms artificial selection. He used the word ‘‘artificial’’ to distinguish it
from natural selection.

5.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12106
Artificial Selection in Pigeons. Pigeon hobbyists breed pigeons to have certain characteristics. Both of the pigeons in the
bottom row were bred from the common rock pigeon.
Wallace’s Theory
Did you ever hear the saying that “great minds think alike?” It certainly applies to Charles Darwin and an other English naturalist
named Alfred Russel Wallace. Wallace lived at about the same time as Darwin. He al so traveled to distant places to study nature.
Wallace wasn’t as famous as Darwin. However, he developed ba sically the same theory of evolution. While working in distant
lands, Wallace sent Darwin a paper he had written. In th e paper, Wallace explained his evolutionary theory. This served to confirm
what Darwin already thought.
Summary
Darwin was influenced by other early thinkers, including Lama rck, Lyell, and Malthus.
Darwin was also influenced by his knowledge of artificial select ion.
Wallace’s paper on evolution confirmed Darwin’s ideas.
Review
1. What is the inheritance of acquired characteristics? What scientist developed this mistaken idea?
2. Who was Charles Lyell? How did he influence Darwin?
3. What is artificial selection? How does it work?
Explora tion F ilm s
Charles Darwin ' s Early In uences
Charles Darwin ' s Early In uences
Watch on

5.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121064. How did Alfred Russel Wallace influence Darwin?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Common rock pigeon: Image
copyright Marketa Mark, 2014; Carrier
pigeon: Image copyright guentermanaus,
2014; Fantail pigeon: Image copyright
Ulrike Haberkorn, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Common rock pigeon: Image
copyright Marketa Mark, 2014; Carrier
pigeon: Image copyright guentermanaus,
2014; Fantail pigeon: Image copyright
Ulrike Haberkorn, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under licenses from
Shutterstock.com
5.4: Influences on Darwin is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121075.5: Theory of Evolution
How do new species form?
This is the only illustration in Charles Darwin's 1859 b ook On the Origin of Species, showing his ideas describing the divergence
of species from common ancestors.
Darwin’s Theory of Evolution by Natural Selection
Darwin spent many years thinking about the work of Lamar ck, Lyell, and Malthus, what he had seen on his voyage, an d artificial
selection. What did all this mean? How did it all fit together? It fits together in Darwin’s theory of evolu tion by natural selection.
It’s easy to see how all of these influences helped shap e Darwin’s ideas.
Evolution of Darwin’s Theory
It took Darwin years to form his theory of evolution by nat ural selection. His reasoning went like this:
1. Like Lamarck, Darwin assumed that species can change over time. The fossils he found helped convince him of that.
2. From Lyell, Darwin saw that Earth and its life were very old. T hus, there had been enough time for evolution to produce th e
great diversity of life Darwin had observed.
3. From Malthus, Darwin knew that populations could grow fast er than their resources. This “overproduction of offspri ng” led to a
“struggle for existence,” in Darwin’s words.
4. From artificial selection, Darwin knew that some offspring have variations that occur by chance, and that can be inher ited. In
nature, offspring with certain variations might be more likely to survive the “struggle for existence” and repro duce. If so, they
would pass their favorable variations to their offspring.
5. Darwin coined the term fitness to refer to an organism’s relative ability to survive an d produce fertile offspring. Nature selects
the variations that are most useful. Therefore, he called this type of selection natural selection.
6. Darwin knew artificial selection could change domestic species over time. He inferred that natural selection co uld also change
species over time. In fact, he thought that if a species changed enough, it might evolve into a new species.
Wallace’s paper not only confirmed Darwin’s ideas. It also pushed him to finish his book, On the Origin of Species. Published in
1859, this book changed science forever. It clearly spelled out Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural se lection and provided
convincing arguments and evidence to support it.
Applying Darwin’s Theory
The following example applies Darwin’s theory. It explai ns how giraffes came to have such long necks (see Figure below).
In the past, giraffes had short necks. But there was chance variation in neck length. Some giraffes had necks a little lo nger than
the average.
Then, as now, giraffes fed on tree leaves. Perhaps the env ironment changed, and leaves became scarcer. There would be more
giraffes than the trees could support. Thus, there would b e a “struggle for existence.”

5.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12107Giraffes with longer necks had an advantage. They could reach l eaves other giraffes could not. Therefore, the long-nec ked
giraffes were more likely to survive and reproduce. Th ey had greater fitness.
These giraffes passed the long-neck trait to their offsp ring. Each generation, the population contained more long- necked
giraffes. Eventually, all giraffes had long necks.
Giraffes feed on leaves high in trees. Their long necks allow them to r each leaves that other ground animals cannot.
As this example shows, chance variations may help a spe cies survive if the environment changes. Variation among species helps
ensure that at least one will be able to survive environme ntal change.
KQED: Chasing Beetles, Finding Darwin
It's been over 150 years since Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species. Yet his ideas remain as central to scientific
exploration as ever, and has been called the unifying conc ept of all biology. Is evolution continuing today? Of co urse it is.
QUEST follows researchers who are still unlocking the myste ries of evolution, including entomologist David Kavanau gh of the
California Academy of Sciences, who predicted that a n ew beetle species would be found on the Trinity Alps o f Northern
California.
It's rare for a biologist to predict the discovery of a new species. For his prediction, Kavanaugh drew inspiration fr om Darwin's own
1862 prediction. When Darwin observed an orchid from Ma dagascar with a foot-long nectar, he predicted that a pollinator would
be found with a tongue long enough to reach the nect ar inside the orchid's very thin, elongated nectar ‘‘ pouch’’, though he had
never seen such a bird or insect. Darwin's prediction was based on his finding that all species are relate d to each other and that
some of them evolve together, developing similar adaptations. Darwin's prediction came true in 1903, when a moth wa s
discovered in Madagascar with a long, thin proboscis, whi ch it uncurls to reach the nectar in the orchid's n ectar. In the process of
feeding from the orchid, the moth serves as its pollin ator. The moth was given the scientific name Xanthopan morganii praedicta,
in honor of Darwin’s prediction.
As you view Chasing Beetles, Finding Darwin, focus on the following concepts:
K QED
Chasing Beetles, Finding Darwin | KQ
Chasing Beetles, Finding Darwin | KQ
Watch on

5.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121071. the relationship between studying beetles and evolutio n,
2. the development of new species,
3. the relationship between genetic make-up of an orga nism and evolution,
4. the role of beneficial mutations,
5. the role of ‘‘habitat islands’’,
6. the selection for certain traits among breeders, such as pigeon breeders,
7. the importance of identifying new species.
Science Friday: Sex, Lies and Orchids
Orchids utilize a wide variety of techniques to manip ulate other species into becoming their pollinators. In this video by Science
Friday, curator Marc Hachadourian describes some of these de ceptive methods.
Summary
Darwin's book On the Origin of Species clearly spells out his theory.
Darwin's book also provides evidence and logic to support that evolution occurs and that it occurs by natural selecti on.
Review
1. Define fitness.
2. Apply Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection to a specific case. For example, explain how Galápagos tortoises c ould
have evolved saddle-shaped shells.
3. Explain how the writings of Charles Lyell and Thomas Malthu s helped Darwin develop his theory of evolution by natural
selection.
4. Discuss the role artificial selection had on Darwin's theo ry.
Sc iF ri
Sex, Lies and Orchids
Sex, Lies and Orchids
Watch on

5.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12107Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: William Warby;Ernst
Haeckel;Common rock pigeon: Image
copyright Marketa Mark, 2014; Carrier
pigeon: Image copyright guentermanaus,
2014; Fantail pigeon: Image copyright
Ulrike Haberkorn, 2014
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wwarby/2405
281800/; en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ageof-Man-wiki.jpg;
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under licenses from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: William Warby
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wwarby/2405
281800/
License: CC BY 2.0
5.5: Theory of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
M ITK 12V ide os
Darwin, Mice, and P icky P eacocks
Darwin, Mice, and P icky P eacocks
Watch on

5.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121085.6: Fossils
Would this be evidence of evolution?
Fossils, like this dinosaur fossil, provide evidence of sp ecies that lived in the past and have since gone ex tinct. In other words, these
fossils are evidence of evolution.
Fossil Evidence
In his book On the Origin of Species, Darwin included evidence to show that evolution had t aken place. He also made logical
arguments to support his theory that evolution occur s by natural selection. Since Darwin’s time, much more evidence has been
gathered. The evidence includes a huge number of fossi ls. It also includes more detailed knowledge of living things, right down to
their DNA.
Fossils are a window into the past. They provide clear eviden ce that evolution has occurred. Scientists who find and st udy fossils
are called paleontologists. How do they use fossils to understand the past? Cons ider the example of the horse, shown in the Figure
below. The fossil record shows how the horse evolved.
Evolution of the horse. Fossil evidence, depicted by the skeletal fragme nts, demonstrates evolutionary milestones in this
process. Notice the 57 million year evolution of the horse leg bones a nd teeth. Especially obvious is the transformation of the
leg bones from having four distinct digits to that of today's horse.
The oldest horse fossils show what the earliest horses we re like. They were about the size of a fox, and they ha d four long toes.
Other evidence shows they lived in wooded marshlands, where they probably ate soft leaves. Through time, th e climate became
drier, and grasslands slowly replaced the marshes. Later f ossils show that horses changed as well.
They became taller, which would help them see predators while they fed in tall grasses.
They evolved a single large toe that eventually became a ho of. This would help them run swiftly and escape predators.
Their molars (back teeth) became longer and covered with ce ment. This would allow them to grind tough grasses and g rass
seeds without wearing out their teeth.
Similar fossil evidence demonstrates the evolution of the whale, moving from the land into the sea.

5.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12108Science Friday: Millions of Fossils Can't Be Wrong
What’s in a tar pit? In this video by Science Friday, Dr. John Harris describes how the La Brea Tar Pit has come t o accumulate so
many fossils.
Summary
Fossils provide a window into the past. They are evidence for evolution.
Scientists who find and study fossils are called paleontolog ists.
Review
1. What is a fossil?
2. How do paleontologists learn about evolution?
Sta te d Cle a rly
What is the Evidence for Evolution?
What is the Evidence for Evolution?
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Millions of Fossils Can 't Be Wrong
Millions of Fossils Can 't Be Wrong
Watch on

5.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121083. Describe what fossils reveal about the evolution of t he horse.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Ernst
Haeckel;Human: User:MrKimm/Wikimedia
Commons; Chimpanzee: Afrika Force;
Gorilla: Roger Luijten; Baboon: Birdseye
Maple;Hana Zavadska;Frog in resin: Image
copyright Galyna Andrushko, 2014;
Footprint: Edmondo Gnerre
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Age-of-Manwiki.jpg; Human:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humangender-neutral.png; Chimpanzee:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/afrikaforce/5
187391191; Gorilla:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/66555186@
N02/6312198231; Baboon:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/26198976@
N04/4007297452; Frog in resin:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Footprint:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tuba_Ci
ty_Dinosaur_Track.jpg
License: (Human) Public Domain;
(Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Baboon) CC BY 2.0;
CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Hana
Zavadska;Image copyright Galyna
Andrushko, 2014
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; License from
Shutterstock
5.6: Fossils is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121095.7: Comparative Anatomy
Is this evidence of evolution?
Take a close look at this gorilla hand. The similarit ies to a human hand are remarkable. Comparing anato my, and characterizing the
similarities and differences, provides evidence of evolut ion.
Evidence from Living Species
Just as Darwin did many years ago, today’s scientists stu dy living species to learn about evolution. They co mpare the anatomy,
embryos, and DNA of modern organisms to understand how they e volved.
Comparative Anatomy
Comparative anatomy is the study of the similarities and differences i n the structures of different species. Similar body par ts may
be homologies or analogies. Both provide evidence for ev olution.
Homologous structures are structures that are similar in related organisms because they were inherited from a common ancestor.
These structures may or may not have the same function in the descendants. Figure below shows the hands of several different
mammals. They all have the same basic pattern of bone s. They inherited this pattern from a common ancestor. However, their
forelimbs now have different functions.
The forelimbs of all mammals have the same basic bone structure.

5.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12109Analogous structures are structures that are similar in unrelated organ isms. The structures are similar because they evolved to do
the same job, not because they were inherited from a c ommon ancestor. For example, the wings of bats and bir ds, shown in Figure
below, look similar on the outside. They also have t he same function. However, wings evolved independently i n the two groups of
animals. This is apparent when you compare the pattern of bones inside the wings.
Wings of bats and birds serve the same function. Look closely at the bones inside the wings. The differences show they
developed from different ancestors.
Comparative Embryology
Comparative embryology is the study of the similarities and differences in the embryos of different species. Similarities in
embryos are evidence of common ancestry. All vertebrat e embryos, for example, have gill slits and tails. Most vertebrates, except
for fish, lose their gill slits by adulthood. Some of them also lose their tail. In humans, the tail is red uced to the tail bone. Thus,
similarities organisms share as embryos may be gone by adulthood. This is why it is valuable to compare orga nisms in the
embryonic stage.
Vestigial Structures
Structures like the human tail bone and whale pelvis are called vestigial structures. Evolution has reduced their size because the
structures are no longer used. The human appendix is another example of a vestigial structure. It is a tiny remnant of a once-larger
organ. In a distant ancestor, it was needed to digest food. It serves no purpose in humans today. Why do yo u think structures that
are no longer used shrink in size? Why might a full-sized, unused structure reduce an organism’s fitness?

5.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12109Comparing DNA
Darwin could compare only the anatomy and embryos of living things. Today, scientists can compare their DNA. Sim ilar DNA
sequences are the strongest evidence for evolution f rom a common ancestor. More similarities in the DNA se quence is evidence for
a closer evolutionary relationship. Look at the clado gram in the Figure below. It shows how humans and apes are related based on
their DNA sequences.
Cladogram of Humans and Apes. This cladogram is based on DNA comparisons. It shows how humans are related to apes
by descent from common ancestors.
Summary
Scientists compare the anatomy, embryos, and DNA of living t hings to understand how they evolved.
Evidence for evolution is provided by homologous structur es. These are structures shared by related organisms that were
inherited from a common ancestor.
Other evidence for evolution is provided by analogous st ructures. These are structures that unrelated organism s share because
they evolved to do the same job.
Comparing DNA sequences provided some of the strongest evi dence of evolutionary relationships.
Review
1. What are vestigial structures? Give an example.
2. Compare homologous and analogous structures.
3. Why do vertebrate embryos show similarities between organis ms that do not appear in the adults?
4. Humans and apes have five fingers they can use to grasp ob jects. Do you think these are analogous or homologous st ructures?
Explain.
SciSh ow
Vestigial Structures
Vestigial Structures
Watch on

5.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121095. What is the strongest evidence of evolution from a comm on ancestor?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Human: User:MrKimm/Wikimedia
Commons; Chimpanzee: Afrika Force;
Gorilla: Roger Luijten; Baboon: Birdseye
Maple;John Romanes, modified by CK-12
Foundation;Albert kok
Source: Human:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humangender-neutral.png; Chimpanzee:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/afrikaforce/5
187391191; Gorilla:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/66555186@
N02/6312198231; Baboon:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/26198976@
N04/4007297452;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Homolo
gy.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Caribbe
an_reef_shark.jpg
License: Human: Public Domain;
Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Baboon: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: John Romanes, modified by CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Homolo
gy.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4] Credit: Human: User:MrKimm/Wikimedia
Commons; Chimpanzee: Afrika Force;
Gorilla: Roger Luijten; Baboon: Birdseye
Maple
Source: Human:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humangender-neutral.png; Chimpanzee:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/afrikaforce/5
187391191; Gorilla:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/66555186@
N02/6312198231; Baboon:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/26198976@
N04/4007297452

5.7.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12109License: Human: Public Domain;
Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Baboon: CC BY 2.0
5.7: Comparative Anatomy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121105.8: Biogeography
Why would geography have anything to do with evolution?
Similar to "how did the chicken cross the road?" but o n a much grander scale. How did the animal cross Europe and into Asia? Or
Asia into America? How did anything get into Australia?
Evidence from Biogeography
Biogeography is the study of how and why plants and animals live where they do. It provides more evidence for e volution. Let’s
consider the camel family as an example.
Biogeography of Camels: An Example
Today, the camel family includes different types of camels. They are shown in Figure below. All of today’s camels are descended
from the same camel ancestors. These ancestors lived in North America about a million years ago.
Camel Migrations and Present-Day Variation. Members of the camel family now live in different parts of the world. They
differ from one another in a number of traits. However, they share bas ic similarities. This is because they all evolved from a
common ancestor. What differences and similarities do you see?
Early North American camels migrated to other places. Some went to East Asia. They crossed a land bridge duri ng the last ice age.
A few of them made it all the way to Africa. Others went t o South America. They crossed the Isthmus of Panama. Onc e camels
reached these different places, they evolved independ ently. They evolved adaptations that suited them for the particular

5.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12110environment where they lived. Through natural selecti on, descendants of the original camel ancestors evolve d the diversity they
have today.
Island Biogeography
The biogeography of islands yields some of the best evidence for evolution. Consider the birds called fi nches that Darwin studied
on the Galápagos Islands (see Figure below). All of the finches probably descended from o ne bird that arrived on the islands from
South America. Until the first bird arrived, there had ne ver been birds on the islands. The first bird was a s eed eater. It evolved into
many finch species. Each species was adapted for a dif ferent type of food. This is an example of adaptive radiation. This is the
process by which a single species evolves into many new speci es to fill available niches.
Galápagos finches differ in beak size and shape, depending on the type of f ood they eat.
Eyewitness to Evolution
In the 1970s, biologists Peter and Rosemary Grant went to the Galápagos Islands. They wanted to re-study Darwin’s finches. They
spent more than 30 years on the project. Their effo rts paid off. They were able to observe evolution by natural selection actually
taking place.
While the Grants were on the Galápagos, a drought occu rred. As a result, fewer seeds were available for finches to eat. Birds with
smaller beaks could crack open and eat only the smal ler seeds. Birds with bigger beaks could crack and eat seeds of all sizes. As a
result, many of the small-beaked birds died in the dr ought. Birds with bigger beaks survived and reproduced (see Figure below).
Within 2 years, the average beak size in the finch popul ation increased. Evolution by natural selection had oc curred.
Evolution of Beak Size in Galápagos Finches. The top graph shows the beak sizes o f the entire finch population studied by
the Grants in 1976. The bottom graph shows the beak sizes of the survivo rs in 1978. In just 2 years, beak size increased.

5.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12110Summary
Biogeography is the study of how and why plants and animals live where they do. It also provides evidence for evolution.
On island chains, such as the Galápagos, one species may evolve into many new species to fill available niches. Th is is called
adaptive radiation.
Review
1. Define biogeography.
2. Describe an example of island biogeography that prov ides evidence of evolution.
N OV A P B S O cia l
Biogeography: Where Life Lives
Biogeography: Where Life Lives
Watch on

5.8.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121103. Describe the effects of the drought on the Galápagos Isl ands observed by the Grants.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Map by CK-12 Foundation;
Camels (left to right):
User:Agadez/Wikimedia Commons; Adrian
Pingstone (User:Arpingstone/Wikimedia
Commons); User:PowersPhotos/Wikipedia;
Composite created by CK-12 Foundation
Source: Camels (left to right):
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Camelus
_dromedarius_at_Tierpark_Berlin_%281%
29.JPG;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bactrian
.camel.sideon.arp.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Guanaco
_09.24.jpg
License: (Map) CC BY-NC 3.0; Camels
left to right CC BY 2.5; Public Domain;
Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung;Human:
User:MrKimm/Wikimedia Commons;
Chimpanzee: Afrika Force; Gorilla: Roger
Luijten; Baboon: Birdseye Maple
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Human:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humangender-neutral.png; Chimpanzee:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/afrikaforce/5
187391191; Gorilla:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/66555186@
N02/6312198231; Baboon:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/26198976@
N04/4007297452
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Human: Public
Domain; Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Baboon: CC
BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
5.8: Biogeography is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121115.9: Population Genetics
Jeans vs. Genes. What's the difference?
Plenty. One you have for life, the other just lasts a fe w years. One is the basis for the passing of traits fr om one generation to the
next. Some jeans you change frequently. But what happe ns when you change a gene's frequency? Essentially, ev olution is a change
in gene frequencies within a population.
Genes in Populations
Darwin knew that heritable variations are needed for e volution to occur. However, he knew nothing about Mendel ’s laws of
genetics. Mendel’s laws were rediscovered in the early 190 0s. Only then could scientists fully understand the p rocess of evolution.
We now know that variations of traits are heritable. These variations are determined by different alleles. We also know that
evolution is due to a change in alleles over time. How long a time? That depends on the scale of evolution.
Microevolution occurs over a relatively short period of time within a population or species. The Grants observed this level of
evolution in Darwin’s finches (see the "Biogeography" conc ept).
Macroevolution occurs over geologic time above the level of the spe cies. The fossil record reflects this level of evolution. It
results from microevolution taking place over many gener ations.
Remember that individuals do not evolve. Their genes do not change over time. The unit of evolution is t he population. A
population consists of organisms of the same species that live in the same area. In terms of evolution, the populat ion is assumed to
be a relatively closed group. This means that most m ating takes place within the population. The science that focuses on evolution
within populations is population genetics. It is a combination of evolutionary theory and Mendelia n genetics.
Gene Pool
The genetic makeup of an individual is the individu al’s genotype. A population consists of many genotypes. Altogether, they make
up the population’s gene pool. The gene pool consists of all the genes of all the members of th e population. For each gene, the gene
pool includes all the different alleles for the gene that exist in the population. For a given gene, the p opulation is characterized by
the frequency of the different alleles in the gene pool.
Allele Frequencies
Allele frequency is how often an allele occurs in a gene pool relativ e to the other alleles for that gene. Look at the e xample in the
Table below. The population in the table has 100 members. In a sexually reproducing species, each member of th e population has
two copies of each gene. Therefore, the total number o f copies of each gene in the gene pool is 200. The ge ne in the example exists
in the gene pool in two forms, alleles A and a. Knowing the genotypes of each population member, we can count the number of
alleles of each type in the gene pool. The table shows how t his is done.

5.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12111GenotypeNumber of Individuals in the
Population with that
GenotypeNumber of Allele A
Contributed to the Gene Pool
by that GenotypeNumber of Allele a
Contributed to the Gene Pool
by that Genotype
AA 50 50 × 2 = 100 50 × 0 = 0
Aa 40 40 × 1 = 40 40 × 1 = 40
aa 10 10 × 0 = 0 10 × 2 = 20
Totals 100 140 60
Let the letter p stand for the frequency of allele A. Let the letter q stand for the frequency of allele a. We can calculate p and q as
follows:
p = number of A alleles/total number of alleles = 140/200 = 0.7
q = number of a alleles/total number of alleles = 60/200 = 0.3
Notice that p + q = 1.
Evolution occurs in a population when allele frequenc ies change over time. What causes allele frequencies to change? That
question was answered by Godfrey Hardy and Wilhelm Weinber g in 1908 (see the Hardy-Weinberg Theorem concept).
Further Reading
Hardy-Weinberg
Summary
Microevolution occurs over a short period of time in a pop ulation or species. Macroevolution occurs over geologic time above
the level of the species.
The population is the unit of evolution.
A population’s gene pool consists of all the genes of all t he members of the population.
For a given gene, the population is characterized by th e frequency of different alleles in the gene pool.
Review
1. Compare microevolution to macroevolution.
2. Why are populations, rather than individuals, the units of evolution?
3. What is a gene pool?
T e a ch e r's P e t
P opulation Genetics
P opulation Genetics
Watch on

5.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121114. Assume that a population of 50 individuals has the followi ng numbers of genotypes for a gene with two alleles, B and b: BB =
30, Bb = 10, and bb = 10. Calculate the frequencies of the two alleles in the population’s gene pool.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
5.9: Population Genetics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121125.10: Hardy-Weinberg
Why is balance important?
To these individuals, the importance of maintaining b alance is obvious. If balance, or equilibrium, is mai ntained within a
population's genes, can evolution occur? No. But maintai ning this type of balance today is difficult.
The Hardy-Weinberg Theorem
Godfrey Hardy was an English mathematician. Wilhelm Wein berg was a German doctor. Each worked alone to come up with the
founding principle of population genetics. Today, th at principle is called the Hardy-Weinberg theorem. It shows that allele
frequencies do not change in a population if certain conditions are met. Such a population is said to be in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium. The conditions for equilibrium are:
1. No new mutations are occurring. Therefore, no new alleles are being creat ed.
2. There is no migration. In other words, no one is moving into or out of the popula tion.
3. The population is very large.
4. Mating is at random in the population. This means that individuals do not choose mates based on genotype.
5. There is no natural selection. Thus, all members of the population have an equal chance of reproducing and passi ng their genes
to the next generation.
When all these conditions are met, allele frequencie s stay the same. Genotype frequencies also remain con stant. In addition,
genotype frequencies can be expressed in terms of allele frequencies, as the Table below shows.
Hardy and Weinberg used mathematics to describe an e quilibrium population (p = frequency of A, q = frequency of a, so p + q =
1): p + 2pq + q = 1. Using the genotype frequencies shown in Table below, if p = 0.4, what is the frequency of the AA genotype?
Genotype Genotype Frequency
AA p
Aa 2pq
aa q2 2

5.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12112Summary
The Hardy-Weinberg theorem states that, if a populati on meets certain conditions, it will be in equilibrium.
In an equilibrium population, allele and genotype frequ encies do not change over time.
The conditions that must be met are no mutation, no migrat ion, very large population size, random mating, and no nat ural
selection.
Review
1. Describe a Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium population. Wha t conditions must it meet to remain in equilibrium?
2. Assume that a population is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for a particular gene with two alleles, A and a. The frequency of A
is p, and the frequency of a is q. Because these are the only two alleles for this gene, p + q = 1.0. If the frequency of
homozygous recessive individuals (aa) is 0.04, what is the value of q? What is the value of p?
3. Use the values of p and q from question 2 to calculate the frequency of the heter ozygote genotype (Aa).
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
5.10: Hardy-Weinberg is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Th e P e n gu in P rof
The Hardy-Weinberg P rinciple | Bio B
The Hardy-Weinberg P rinciple | Bio B
Watch on

5.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14785.11: History of Life
How do we learn about the past?
We study the remains of things that existed many year s ago. The Ruins of Pompeii have given archeologists, historians, and other
scholars a tremendous amount of information about li fe two thousand years ago. This section discusses studying things that are
many thousands of years older than these remains.
Earth in a Day
It’s hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Ear th formed and life first appeared on its surface. It m ay help to think of Earth’s
history as a 24-hour day, as shown in Figure below. Humans would have appeared only during the la st minute of that day. If we are
such newcomers on planet Earth, how do we know about th e vast period of time that went before us? How have we l earned about
the distant past?
History of Earth in a Day. In this model of Earth’s history, the planet formed at midnight. What time was it when the first
prokaryotes evolved?
Learning About the Past
Much of what we know about the history of life on Earth is based on the fossil record. Detailed knowledge of m odern organisms
also helps us understand how life evolved.

5.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478The Fossil Record
Fossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms tha t lived in the past. The soft parts of organisms al most always
decompose quickly after death. On occasion, the hard p arts—mainly bones, teeth, or shells—remain long enough to mineralize and
form fossils. An example of a complete fossil skeleto n is shown in Figure below. The fossil record is the record of life that
unfolded over four billion years and pieced back tog ether through the analysis of fossils.
Extinct Lion Fossil. This fossilized skeleton represents an extinct lion species. It is rare for fossils to be so complete and well
preserved as this one.
To be preserved as fossils, remains must be covered q uickly by sediments or preserved in some other way. For ex ample, they may
be frozen in glaciers or trapped in tree resin, like the frog in Figure below. Sometimes traces of organisms—such as footprint s or
burrows—are preserved (see the fossil footprints in Figure below). The conditions required for fossils to form rarely occur.
Therefore, the chance of an organism being preserved as a f ossil is very low.
The photo on the left shows an ancient frog trapped in hardened tree resin, or amber. The photo on the right shows the
fossil footprints of a dinosaur.
In order for fossils to “tell” us the story of life, they must be dated. Then they can help scientists rec onstruct how life changed over
time. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: relative d ating and absolute dating. Both are described below.
Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other, but not their age in years. Relative dating is
based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower laye rs were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain old er
fossils. This is illustrated in Figure below.
Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years.
Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil.

5.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478
Relative Dating Using Rock Layers. Relative dating establishes which of two fossils is older than the other. It is based on the
rock layers in which the fossils formed.
Molecular Clocks
Evidence from the fossil record can be combined with data from molecular clocks. A molecular clock uses DNA sequences (or the
proteins they encode) to estimate relatedness among sp ecies. Molecular clocks estimate the time in geologic history when related
species diverged from a common ancestor. Molecular c locks are based on the assumption that mutations accu mulate through time
at a steady average rate for a given region of DNA. Spec ies that have accumulated greater differences in thei r DNA sequences are
assumed to have diverged from their common ancestor in the more distant past. Molecular clocks based on dif ferent regions of
DNA may be used together for more accuracy.
Consider the example in Table below. The table shows how similar the DNA of several an imal species is to human DNA. Based on
these data, which organism do you think shared the most rec ent common ancestor with humans?

5.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478Organism Similarity with Human DNA (percent)
Chimpanzee 98
Mouse 85
Chicken 60
Fruit Fly 44
Geologic Time Scale
Another tool for understanding the history of Earth a nd its life is the geologic time scale, shown in Figure below. The geologic
time scale divides Earth’s history into divisions (suc h as eons, eras, and periods) that are based on major cha nges in geology,
climate, and the evolution of life. It organizes Earth ’s history and the evolution of life on the basis of important events instead of
time alone. It also allows more focus to be placed on recen t events, about which we know the most.
Geologic Time Scale. The geologic time scale divides Earth’s histo ry into units that reflect major changes in Earth and its
life forms. During which eon did Earth form? What is the present era?
Summary
Much of what we know about the history of life on Earth is bas ed on the fossil record.
Molecular clocks are used to estimate how long it has been since two species diverged from a common ancestor.
The geologic time scale is another important tool for un derstanding the history of life on Earth.
Review
1. What are fossils?
2. Describe how fossils form.
3. Distinguish relative dating from absolute dating.
4. This table shows DNA sequence comparisons for some hy pothetical species. Based on the data, describe evol utionary
relationships between Species A and the other four species. Expl ain your answer.

5.11.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478Species DNA Similarity with Species A
Species B 42%
Species C 85%
Species D 67%
Species E 91%
5. Describe the geologic time scale.

5.11.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Hana
Zavadska;Ernst Haeckel
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Age-ofMan-wiki.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Karora/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Thylacol
eo_skeleton_in_Naracoorte_Caves.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Frog in resin: Image copyright
Galyna Andrushko, 2014; Footprint:
Edmondo Gnerre
Source: Frog in resin:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Footprint:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tuba_Ci
ty_Dinosaur_Track.jpg
License: (Frog in resin) License from
Shutterstock; (Footprint) CC BY 2.0
B e st0fScie n ce
Origin And Evolution Of Life
Origin And Evolution Of Life
Watch on

5.11.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1478
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 5.11: History of Life is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121135.12: Forces of Evolution
How do a population's genes change?
Remember, without change, there cannot be evolution. Together, the forces that change a population's gen e frequencies are the
driving mechanisms behind evolution.
Forces of Evolution
The conditions for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium are un likely to be met in real populations. The Hardy-Wein berg theorem also
describes populations in which allele frequencies ar e not changing. By definition, such populations are no t evolving. How does the
theorem help us understand evolution in the real world?
From the theorem, we can infer factors that cause allel e frequencies to change. These factors are the "forc es of evolution." There
are four such forces: mutation, gene flow, genetic d rift, and natural selection. Natural selection will be d iscussed in the "Natural
Selection" concept.
Mutation
Mutation creates new genetic variation in a gene pool. It is how all new alleles first arise. In sexually reproduci ng species, the
mutations that matter for evolution are those that oc cur in gametes. Only these mutations can be passed t o offspring. For any given
gene, the chance of a mutation occurring in a given gamete is very low. Thus, mutations alone do not have much effect on allele
frequencies. However, mutations provide the genetic variat ion needed for other forces of evolution to act.
Gene Flow
Gene flow occurs when individuals move into or out of a popul ation. If the rate of migration is high, this can ha ve a significant
effect on allele frequencies. The allele frequencies of both the population they leave and the population they ente r may change.
During the Vietnam War in the 1960s and 1970s, many Ame rican servicemen had children with Vietnamese women. Mo st of the
servicemen returned to the United States after the war. However, they left copies of their genes behind in th eir offspring. In this
way, they changed the allele frequencies in the Vietn amese gene pool. Was the gene pool of the American po pulation also affected?
Why or why not?
Genetic Drift
Genetic drift is a random change in allele frequencies that occur s in a small population. When a small number of pare nts produce
just a few offspring, allele frequencies in the offspring ma y differ, by chance, from allele frequencies in the parents.
This is like tossing a coin. If you toss a coin just a few times, you may, by chance, get more or less than t he expected 50 percent
heads or tails. In a small population, you may also, by chance, get different allele frequencies than expect ed in the next generation.

5.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12113In this way, allele frequencies may drift over time.
There are two special conditions under which genetic drift oc curs. They are called bottleneck effect and founder eff ect.
1. Bottleneck effect occurs when a population suddenly gets much smaller. This mig ht happen because of a natural disaster such
as a forest fire. By chance, allele frequencies of the s urvivors may be different from those of the original pop ulation.
2. Founder effect occurs when a few individuals start, or found, a new popul ation. By chance, allele frequencies of the founders
may be different from allele frequencies of the popula tion they left. An example is described in the Figure below.
Founder Effect in the Amish Population. The Amish population in the U.S. and Canada had a small number of founders.
How has this affected the Amish gene pool?
Summary
There are four forces of evolution: mutation, gene flow, g enetic drift, and natural selection.
Mutation creates new genetic variation in a gene pool.
Gene flow and genetic drift alter allele frequencies in a g ene pool.
Review
1. Identify the four forces of evolution.
2. Why is mutation needed for evolution to occur, even th ough it usually has little effect on allele frequencies?
3. What is founder effect? Give an example.
TED-Ed
Five   ngers of evolution - P aul Ander
Five   ngers of evolution - P aul Ander
Watch on

5.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121134. Explain why genetic drift is most likely to occur in a smal l population.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Horse and Buggy: Derek Jensen;
Hands: G Baujat and M Le Merrer;
Composite created by CK-12 Foundation
Source: Horse and Buggy:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shipshe
wana-indiana-amish-buggy.jpg; Hands:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polydact
yly_ECS.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Horse and Buggy: Derek Jensen;
Hands: G Baujat and M Le Merrer;
Composite created by CK-12 Foundation
Source: Horse and Buggy:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shipshe
wana-indiana-amish-buggy.jpg; Hands:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polydact
yly_ECS.jpg
License: Horse and Buggy: Public Domain;
Hands CC BY 2.0
5.12: Forces of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121145.13: Natural Selection
What is fitness?
Does this type of fitness have anything to do with natu ral selection? Usually not. There are countless ways i n which an organism
can be more "fit," or better adapted to its habitat. And we probably do not know about most of these adaptation s.
Natural Selection
Natural selection occurs when there are differences in fitness among me mbers of a population. As a result, some individuals p ass
more genes to the next generation. This causes allele frequ encies to change.
Sickle Cell and Natural Selection
The example of sickle-cell anemia is described in t he Figure below and Table below. It shows how natural selection can keep a
harmful allele in a gene pool.
Sickle Cell and Natural Selection. Notice the normal-shaped red blood cell on the left, and the sickle-shaped cell on the
right.
Genotype Phenotype Fitness
AA 100% normal hemoglobinSomewhat reduced fitness because of no
resistance to malaria
ASEnough normal hemoglobin to prevent
sickle-cell anemiaHighest fitness because of resistance to
malaria
SS100% abnormal hemoglobin, causing
sickle-cell anemiaGreatly reduced fitness because of sicklecell anemia

5.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12114Here’s how natural selection can keep a harmful allele in a gene pool:
The allele (S) for sickle-cell anemia is a harmful autosomal recessiv e. It is caused by a mutation in the normal allele (A) for
hemoglobin (a protein on red blood cells).
Malaria is a deadly tropical disease. It is common in Afri ca south of the Sahara, South and Southeast Asia and Norther n Brazil.
Heterozygotes (AS) with the sickle-cell allele are resistant to malaria. The refore, they are more likely to survive and reproduce.
This keeps the S allele in the gene pool.
There are three alleles found in Africa. A fourth thought to have arisen independently is found in India and Saudi Arab ia.
The allele (S) for sickle-cell anemia found in African descended peopl e in the Western Hemisphere is believed to have come
from West Africa as a result of the slave trade.
The sickle-cell example shows that fitness depends on phenotypes. It also shows that fitness may depend o n the environment. What
do you think might happen if malaria was eliminated in a population with a relatively high frequency of t he S allele? How might
the fitness of the different genotypes change? How might thi s affect the frequency of the S allele?
Natural Selection and Polygenic Traits
Sickle-cell trait is controlled by a single gene. Nat ural selection for polygenic traits is more complex, unless you just look at
phenotypes. Three ways that natural selection can aff ect phenotypes are shown in Figure below.
1. Stabilizing selection occurs when phenotypes at both extremes of the phenoty pic distribution are selected against. This narrows
the range of variation. An example is human birth weight. B abies that are very large or very small at birth are less likely to
survive. This keeps birth weight within a relatively narro w range.
2. Directional selection occurs when one of two extreme phenotypes is selected for. T his shifts the distribution toward that
extreme. This is the type of natural selection that the Grants observed in the beak size of Galápagos finches.
3. Disruptive selection occurs when phenotypes in the middle of the range are se lected against. This results in two overlapping
phenotypes, one at each end of the distribution. An exampl e is sexual dimorphism. This refers to differences between the
phenotypes of males and females of the same species. In humans, for example, males and females have different heights and
body shapes.
Natural selection may affect the distribution of a polygenic trait. These graphs show three ways this can happen.
Summary
Natural selection occurs when there are differences in fitne ss among members of a population.
T e a ch e r's P e t
T ypes of Natural Selection
T ypes of Natural Selection
Watch on

5.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12114Natural selection for a polygenic trait changes the dist ribution of phenotypes. It may have a stabilizing, directi onal, or disruptive
effect on the phenotype distribution.
Review
1. What is natural selection and what are its effects on allele frequencies?
2. Describe three types of natural selection for a polygen ic trait.
3. How does the recessive sickle-cell allele stay in the gene p ool?
On the distribution of the allele for sickle cell material has been added by LibreTexts (CC:BY) based on
Chebloune Y, Pagnier J, Trabuchet G, Faure C, Verdier G, L abie D, et al. Structural analysis of the 5’ flanking region of the betaglobin gene in African sickle cell anemia patients: further evidence for three origins of the sickle ce ll mutation in Africa. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 1988;85:4431–5.
Serjeant GR, Ghosh K, Patel J. Sickle cell disease in India: A perspective. Indian J Med Res. 2016 Jan;143(1):21-4.
Kulozik AE, Wainscoat JS, Serjeant GR, Kar BC, Al-Awamy B, Essan GJ, Falusi AG, Haque SK, Hilali AM, Kate S, et
al. Geographical survey of beta S-globin gene haplotypes: evidence for an independent Asian origin of the sick le-cell mutation. Am
J Hum Genet. 1986 Aug;39(2):239-44.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2013;U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arctic_
Hare.jpg
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com;Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
5.13: Natural Selection is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121155.14: Origin of Species
How can a river influence evolution?
Imagine a group of small organisms, such as mice, that become separated by a mighty river. This group has no w become isolated,
and formed two separate groups. The groups are obvio usly no longer able to breed together. Over many gener ations, each group
will evolve separately, eventually forming two completely new species of mice.
Origin of Species
Macroevolution is evolution over geologic time above the level of the species. One of the main topics in macroevolution is how
new species arise. The process by which a new species ev olves is called speciation. How does speciation occur? How does one
species evolve into two or more new species?
To understand how a new species forms, it’s important to review what a species is. A species is a group of organisms that can breed
and produce fertile offspring together in nature. Fo r a new species to arise, some members of a species m ust become reproductively
isolated from the rest of the species. This means t hey can no longer interbreed with other members of t he species. How does this
happen? Usually they become geographically isolated first.
Allopatric Speciation
Assume that some members of a species become geograph ically separated from the rest of the species. If t hey remain separated
long enough, they may evolve genetic differences. I f the differences prevent them from interbreeding wit h members of the original
species, they have evolved into a new species. Speciat ion that occurs in this way is called allopatric speciation. An example is
described in the Figure below.

5.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12115
Allopatric Speciation in the Kaibab Squirrel. The Kaibab squirrel is in the pr ocess of becoming a new species.
Sympatric Speciation
Less often, a new species arises without geographic separat ion. This is called sympatric speciation. The following example shows
one way this can occur.
1. Hawthorn flies lay eggs in hawthorn trees (see Figure below). The eggs hatch into larvae that feed on hawthor n fruits. Both the
flies and trees are native to the U.S.
2. Apple trees were introduced to the U.S. and often grow near ha wthorn trees. Some hawthorn flies started to lay eggs in nea rby
apple trees. When the eggs hatched, the larvae fed on apple s.
3. Over time, the two fly populations—those that fed on hawt horn trees and those that preferred apple trees—evolved reproductive
isolation. Now they are reproductively isolated because t hey breed at different times. Their breeding season mat ches the season
when the apple or hawthorn fruits mature.
4. Because they rarely interbreed, the two populations of flies are evolving other genetic differences. They ap pear to be in the
process of becoming separate species.

5.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12115
Sympatric Speciation in Hawthorn Flies. Hawthorn flies are diverging fr om one species into two. As this example shows,
behaviors as well as physical traits may evolve and lead to speciation.
Summary
New species arise in the process of speciation.
Allopatric speciation occurs when some members of a specie s become geographically separated. They then evolve gene tic
differences. If the differences prevent them from inter breeding with the original species, a new species has evolved.
Sympatric speciation occurs without geographic separat ion.
Review
1. Define speciation.
2. Describe how allopatric speciation occurs.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Speciation
Speciation
Watch on

5.14.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121153. Why is sympatric speciation less likely to occur tha n allopatric speciation?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hawthorn berries: Brian Clift;
Apples: Jennifer C.; Hawthorn fly: Joseph
Berger; Composite created by CK-12
Foundation
Source: Hawthorn berries:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/brianac37/60
52521522/; Apples:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/29638108@
N06/7714246618/; Hawthorn fly:
http://www.invasive.org/browse/detail.cfm?
imgnum=5402798
License: Hawthon berries and apples: CC
BY 2.0; Hawthorn fly: CC BY 3.0; Public
Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: From left to right: Allyson
Mathis/National Park Service; NASA;
Sally King/National Park Service;
Composite created by CK-12 Foundation
Source: From left to right:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/grand_canyo
n_nps/6171345968/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Grand_
Canyon_autumn_STS61A-48-91.jpg;
bandelier.areaparks.com/parkinfo.html?
pid=1789
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Hawthorn berries: Brian Clift;
Apples: Jennifer C.; Hawthorn fly: Joseph
Berger; Composite created by CK-12
Foundation
Source: Hawthorn berries:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/brianac37/60
52521522/; Apples:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/29638108@
N06/7714246618/; Hawthorn fly:
http://www.invasive.org/browse/detail.cfm?
imgnum=5402798
License: Hawthorn berries and apples: CC
BY 2.0; Hawthorn fly: CC BY 3.0
5.14: Origin of Species is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121165.15: Coevolution
How can a predator, such as a wolf, influence evolution?
Wolves hunt caribou, chasing them down to capture the m. The slower caribou are more likely to become lunc h or dinner, leaving
the faster individuals to reproduce. The resulting faster offspring will be even more difficult for the wolves to catch, and only the
fastest wolves - or perhaps the wolves who are genetical ly capable of developing methods to hunt very fast p rey - will get enough
food to survive. This is coevolution in action.
Coevolution
Evolution occurs in response to a change in the envi ronment. Environmental change often involves other s pecies of organisms. In
fact, species in symbiotic relationships tend to evolve together. This is called coevolution. As one species changes, the other
species must also change in order to adapt.
Coevolution occurs in flowering plants and the specie s that pollinate them. The flower and bird in Figure below are a good
example. They have evolved matching structures.
Results of Coevolution in a Flower and Its Pollinator. The very long mouth part of this hummingbird has coevolved with the
tubular flower it pollinates. Only this species of bird can reach the nect ar deep in the flower. What might happen to the
flower if the bird species went extinct?
In coevolution, relationships may be positive for on e species or both, or may be an evolutionary arms ra ce between predator and
prey. Flowering plants depend on insects for pollinatio n, so have evolved colors, shapes, scents, and even food supplies that are
attractive to certain insect species. Insects, in tur n, have evolved mouthparts, senses, and flight patt erns that allow them to respond
to and benefit from specific floral “offerings,” shown in the Figure below.

5.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12116
Impressive proboscis and vivid colors! Hawk moths and the zinnias influence each ot her’s evolution, because the flower
depends on the moth for pollination, and the moth feeds on the flower.
The endosymbiotic theory describes a special form of co-evolution: mitochondr ia and chloroplasts evolve within eukaryote cells,
yet because these organelles have their own DNA sequence, different from that of the nucleus in the “host” ce ll, the organelle and
host cell evolve in tandem – each influences the evolution o f the other.
Science Friday: Sex, Lies and Orchids
Orchids utilize a wide variety of techniques to manip ulate other species into becoming their pollinators. In this video by Science
Friday, curator Marc Hachadourian describes some of these de ceptive methods.
Summary
Coevolution occurs when species evolve together.
Coevolution often happens in species that have symbiotic re lationships. Examples include flowering plants and their pollinators.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Coevolution
Coevolution
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Sex, Lies and Orchids
Sex, Lies and Orchids
Watch on

5.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12116Review
1. Define coevolution.
2. Apply the concepts of fitness and natural selection to exp lain the coevolution of insects and flowering plants.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Horse and Buggy: Derek Jensen;
Hands: G Baujat and M Le Merrer;
Composite created by CK-12
Foundation;Michal Maňas
Source: Horse and Buggy:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shipshe
wana-indiana-amish-buggy.jpg; Hands:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polydact
yly_ECS.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macrogl
ossum_stellatarum.jpg
License: Horses and Buggy: Public
Domain; Hands: CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: Charles J. Sharp;Horse and Buggy:
Derek Jensen; Hands: G Baujat and M Le
Merrer; Composite created by CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Purplethroated_carib_hummingbird_feeding.jpg;
Horse and Buggy:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shipshe
wana-indiana-amish-buggy.jpg; Hands:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polydact
yly_ECS.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0; Horses and Buggy:
Public Domain; Hands: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Michal Maňas;Horse and Buggy:
Derek Jensen; Hands: G Baujat and M Le
Merrer; Composite created by CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macrogl
ossum_stellatarum.jpg; Horse and Buggy:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shipshe
wana-indiana-amish-buggy.jpg; Hands:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polydact
yly_ECS.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5; (Horse and Buggy)
Public Domain; (Hands) CC BY 2.0
5.15: Coevolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121175.16: Macroevolution
Fast or slow?
Which is better, the direct route or the scenic rout e? Each has its advantages, depending on the situation. And that describes
evolution. It can be fast or slow, depending on the situati on.
Timing of Macroevolution
Is evolution slow and steady? Or does it occur in fits and starts? It may depend on what else is going on, such as changes in climate
and geologic conditions.
When geologic and climatic conditions are stable, evolu tion may occur gradually. This is how Darwin thought evo lution
occurred. This model of the timing of evolution is called gradualism.
When geologic and climatic conditions are changing, evo lution may occur more quickly. Thus, long periods of li ttle change
may be interrupted by bursts of rapid change. This model of the timing of evolution is called punctuated equilibrium. It is
better supported by the fossil record than is gradualis m. This model suggests that niches left open by sudden geol ogic and
climatic changes may be rapidly filled by bursts of evolut ion.
Two theories of evolutionary change - gradualism vs. punctuated equilibrium - are still debated. The former proposes
continuous change, while the latter suggests that species remain constant for long periods of time and that change, when it
occurs, is rapid.

5.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12117Summary
Darwin thought that evolution occurs gradually. This mo del of evolution is called gradualism.
The fossil record better supports the model of punctuat ed equilibrium. In this model, long periods of little chan ge are
interrupted by bursts of rapid change.
Review
1. What is gradualism? When is it most likely to apply?
2. Describe the timing of evolutionary change according to the punctuated equilibrium model.
3. Which model of evolution would be predicted to follow th e extinction of the dinosaurs? Why?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Mchavez/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Punctuat
edequilibrium.png
License: Public Domain
5.16: Macroevolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121185.17: Animal Evolution
What are these? Are these organisms plants, fungi, protists, or animals?
This colony of tube sponges resembles the pipes of a m usical instrument. These sponges are actually animal s, although they are the
simplest animals on Earth. Sponges are frequently used a s shelter for small crabs, shrimps, and other invertebrate s.
Major Trends in Animal Evolution
The oldest animal fossils are about 630 million years old. By 500 million years ago, most modern phyla o f animals had evolved.
Figure below shows when some of the major events in animal evolution took place.
Partial Geologic Time Scale. This portion of the geologic tim e scale shows major events in animal evolution.
Animal Origins
Who were the ancestors of the earliest animals? They m ay have been marine protists that lived in colonies. Scientists think that
cells of some protist colonies became specialized for dif ferent jobs. After a while, the specialized cells came to need each other for
survival. Thus, the first multicellular animal evolved. Look at the cells in Figure below. One type of sponge cell, the choanocyte,
looks a lot like the protist cell. How does this support th e hypothesis that animals evolved from protists?

5.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12118
Choanoflagellate Protist and Choanocyte Cells in Sponges. Sponge choanocyt es look a lot like choanoflagellate protists.
Evolution of Invertebrates
Many important animal adaptations evolved in inverte brates. Without these adaptations, vertebrates would n ot have been able to
evolve. They include:
Tissues, organs, and organ systems.
A symmetrical body.
A brain and sensory organs.
A fluid-filled body cavity.
A complete digestive system.
A body divided into segments.
Moving from Water to Land
When you think of the first animals to colonize the land, you may think of amphibians. It’s true that ance stors of amphibians were
the first vertebrates to move to land. However, the very first animals to go ashore were invertebrates, most likely a rthropods.
The move to land required new adaptations. For exampl e, animals needed a way to keep their body from dryi ng out. They also
needed a way to support their body on dry land withou t the buoyancy of water. One way early arthropods solved these problems
was by evolving an exoskeleton. This is a non-bony skeleton that forms on the outsi de of the body. It supports the body and helps
retain water. The ability to breath oxygen without gills was another necessary adaptation.
Evolution of Chordates
Another major step in animal evolution was the evolut ion of a notochord. A notochord is a rigid rod that runs the length of the
body. It supports the body and gives it shape (see Figure below). It also provides a place for muscles to anch or, and
counterbalances them when they contract. Animals with a notochord are called chordates. They also have a hollow nerve cord that
runs along the top of the body. Gill slits and a tail are two other chordate features. Many modern chordate s have some of these
structures only as embryos.

5.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12118
This tunicate is a primitive, deep-sea chordate. It is using its notoc hord to support its head, while it waits to snatch up prey
in its big mouth.
Evolution of Vertebrates
Vertebrates evolved from primitive chordates. This o ccurred about 550 million years ago. The earliest v ertebrates may have been
jawless fish, like the hagfish in Figure below. Vertebrates evolved a backbone to replace t he notochord after the embryo stage.
They also evolved a cranium, or bony skull, to enclose and protect the brain.
Hagfish are very simple vertebrates.
As early vertebrates evolved, they became more comple x. Around 365 million years ago, they finally made the transition from
water to land. The first vertebrates to live on land we re amphibians. They evolved from lobe-finned fish. You can compare a lobefinned fish and an amphibian in Figure below.
From Lobe-Finned Fish to Early Amphibian. Lobe-finned fish evolved into the e arliest amphibians. A lobe-finned fish could
breathe air for brief periods of time. It could also use its fins to walk on land for short distances. What similarities do you
see between the lobe-finned fish and the amphibian?
Evolution of Amniotes
Amphibians were the first animals to have true lungs an d limbs for life on land. However, they still had to return to water to
reproduce. That’s because their eggs lacked a waterpro of covering and would dry out on land. The first ful ly terrestrial vertebrates
were amniotes. Amniotes are animals that produce eggs with internal membrane s. The membranes let gases but not water pass
through. Therefore, in an amniotic egg, an embryo can breathe without drying out. Amniotic eggs were the fir st eggs that could be
laid on land.
The earliest amniotes evolved about 350 million year s ago. They may have looked like the animal in Figure below. Within a few
million years, two important amniote groups evolved: syn apsids and sauropsids. Synapsids evolved into mammals. The
sauropsids gave rise to reptiles, dinosaurs, and birds.

5.17.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12118
Early Amniote. The earliest amniotes probably looked something like t his. They were reptile-like, but not actually reptiles.
Reptiles evolved somewhat later.
Further Reading
Animals
Summary
The earliest animals evolved from colonial protists more than 600 million years ago.
Many important animal adaptations evolved in invertebrat es, including tissues and a brain.
The first animals to live on land were invertebrates.
Amphibians were the first vertebrates to live on land.
Amniotes were the first animals that could reproduce on land.
Review
1. List three traits that evolved in invertebrate anima ls.
2. Assume that a new species of animal has been discovered. It is an egg-laying animal that lives and reproduces on land. Explain
what you know about its eggs without ever seeing them.
3. Relate similarities between choanoflagellates and ch oanocytes to animal origins.
TED-Ed
Evolution in a Big City
Evolution in a Big City
Watch on

5.17.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121184. What was important about the evolution of an exoskeleton?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:ArthurWeasley/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Archaeo
thyris_BW.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Chika Watanabe
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/chikawatanab
e/61157859/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Courtesy of the US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pacific_
hagfish_Myxine.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 6]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 7]Credit: User:ArthurWeasley/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Archaeo
thyris_BW.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
5.17: Animal Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14775.18: Formation of Earth
What alien planet is represented by this picture?
Would it surprise you to learn that the picture rep resents Earth? After Earth first formed about 4.6 bil lion years ago, it may well
have looked like this. Instead of rivers of water, rivers of molten rock flowed over its surface. Life as we know it could not have
survived in such a place. How did this fiery hot plane t become today’s Earth, covered with water and teeming with life? The long
and incredible story of Earth’s history starts with this s ection.
How Earth Formed: We Are Made of Stardust!
We’ll start the story of life at the very beginning, when Earth and the rest of the solar system first for med. The solar system began
as a rotating cloud of stardust. “Dust, rocks, and gas” may not sound inspiring, but this cloud contained the elements which
somehow combine to form every corner – living and no nliving – of Earth. Initially, the Big Bang (14 billion years ago) gave rise to
the building blocks of matter – the quarks and electrons of which we are all made. Quarks aggregat ed producing protons and
neutrons which combined into nuclei, ultimately formin g the first atoms which were mainly hydrogen and heliu m. Stars such as red
giants fused hydrogen and helium nuclei to form ele ments from carbon (the foundation of life) to calci um (now our bones and
teeth). Supernova explosions formed and ejected heavi er elements such as iron (for red blood cells). We are not just “dust.” We and our world - are stardust!
How did this rotating cloud of stardust become our sola r system? About 4.5 billion years ago, a nearby star exploded and sent a
shock wave through the dust cloud, increasing its rat e of spin. As a result, most of the mass became concen trated in the middle,
forming the sun. Smaller concentrations of mass rotating a round the center formed the planets, including Earth.
At first, Earth was molten and lacked an atmosphere a nd oceans. Gradually, the planet cooled and formed a solid crust. As the
planet continued to cool, volcanoes released gases, wh ich eventually formed an atmosphere. The early atmosphere contained
ammonia, methane, water vapor, and carbon dioxide but only a trace of oxyg en. As the atmosphere became denser, clouds formed
and rain fell. Water from rain, and perhaps from co mets and asteroids that struck Earth as well, eventual ly formed the oceans. The
ancient atmosphere and oceans represented by the pic ture in Figure below would be toxic to today’s life, but they set t he stage for
life to begin.

5.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1477
Ancient Earth. This is how ancient Earth may have looked after its atmo sphere and oceans formed.
Summary
Earth formed about 4.5 to 4.6 billion years ago.
At first, Earth was molten and lacked an atmosphere and oc eans.
Gradually, the atmosphere formed, followed by the oceans.
Review
1. Give an overview of how Earth formed.
2. How did Earth's atmosphere form?
3. How did Earth's oceans form?
Ge ologia ES
How the Earth was formed - The P ow
How the Earth was formed - The P ow
Watch on

5.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14774. Describe Earth's early atmosphere.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:BrendelSignature/Wikimedia
Commons;Frog in resin: Image copyright
Galyna Andrushko, 2014; Footprint:
Edmondo Gnerre
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sunset_
Marina.JPG; Frog in resin:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Footprint:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tuba_Ci
ty_Dinosaur_Track.jpg
License: (Frog in resin) License from
Shutterstock; (Footprint) CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:BrendelSignature/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sunset_
Marina.JPG
License: CC BY 3.0
This page titled 5.18: Formation of Earth is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

5.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14795.19: First Organic Molecules
How do you make large molecules?
From smaller ones. The first organic molecules were p robably very simple carbon-based molecules made of few atoms. These
molecules then combined with other simple molecules to form more complex molecules. Over many years and pro bably trillions
and trillions of chemical reactions, more complex molecul es, and more stable molecules, formed.
The First Organic Molecules
All living things consist of organic molecules, centered around the element carbon. Therefore, it i s likely that organic molecules
evolved before cells, perhaps as long as 4 billion years ago. How did these bui lding blocks of life first form?
Scientists think that lightning sparked chemical reac tions in Earth’s early atmosphere. The early atmospher e contained gases such
as ammonia, methane, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. Scientists hypothesize t hat this created a “soup” of organic molecules from
inorganic chemicals. In 1953, scientists Stanley Mille r and Harold Urey used their imaginations to test this hypothesis. They
created a simulation experiment to see if organic molecules could arise in this way (see Figure below). They used a mixture of
gases to represent Earth’s early atmosphere. Then, t hey passed sparks through the gases to represent ligh tning. Within a week,
several simple organic molecules had formed.
Miller and Urey’s Experiment. Miller and Urey demonstrated that or ganic molecules could form under simulated
conditions of early Earth. What assumptions were their simulation base d upon?
Which Organic Molecule Came First?
Living things need organic molecules to store genet ic information and to carry out the chemical work of cells. Modern organisms
use DNA to store genetic information and proteins to catalyze chemical reactions. So, did DNA or proteins ev olve first? This is like
asking whether the chicken or the egg came first. DNA e ncodes proteins and proteins are needed to make DNA, so e ach type of

5.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1479organic molecule needs the other for its own existence. How could either of these two molecules have evolved before the other?
Did some other organic molecule evolve first, instead of DNA or proteins?
RNA World Hypothesis
Some scientists speculate that RNA may have been the fi rst organic molecule to evolve. In fact, they think that early life was based
solely on RNA and that DNA and proteins evolved later. This is called the RNA world hypothesis. Why RNA? It can encode
genetic instructions (like DNA), and some RNAs can carry out chemical reactions (like proteins). Therefore, it sol ves the chickenand-egg problem of which of these two molecules came first. Other evidence also suggests that RNA may be th e most ancient of
the organic molecules.
Summary
The first organic molecules formed about 4 billion years a go.
This may have happened when lightning sparked chemical reactions in Earth’s early atmosphere.
RNA may have been the first organic molecule to form as well as the basis of early life.
Review
1. Describe Miller and Urey’s experiment. What did it demonstrate?
2. State the RNA world hypothesis.

5.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1479Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Carny/He.Wikipedia,
modified by CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MUexpe
riment.png
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Carny/He.Wikipedia,
modified by CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MUexpe
riment.png
License: CC BY 2.5
This page titled 5.19: First Organic Molecules is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
B ou lde r N e wsT e a m
RNA World
RNA World
Watch on

5.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14815.20: First Cell
How do you make complex cells?
You start with simple ones. The first cells were most likely primitive prokaryotic-like cells, e ven more simplistic than these E. coli
bacteria. The first cells were probably no more than organic compounds, such as a simplistic RNA, surrounded by a membr ane.
Was it a phospholipid bilayer membrane? Probably not — it was likely a simplistic membrane able to separa te the inside from the
outside. Over time, as other organic compounds such as DNA and proteins developed, cells also evolved into m ore complex
structures. Once a cell was able to be stable, reprodu ce itself, and pass its genetic information to the n ext generation, then there was
life.
The First Cells
What was needed for the first cell? Some sort of membrane s urrounding organic molecules? Probably.
How organic molecules such as RNA developed into cells is not known for certain. Scientists speculate that l ipid membranes grew
around the organic molecules. The membranes prevented the molecules from reacting with other molecules, so they did not form
new compounds. In this way, the organic molecules persi sted, and the first cells may have formed. The Figure below shows a
model of the hypothetical first cell. Were these first cells the first living organisms? Were they able to live and reproduce while
passing their genetic information to the next gener ation? If so, then yes, these first cells could be cons idered the first living
organisms.
Hypothetical First Cell. The earliest cells may have consisted of little more than RNA inside a lipid membrane.
LUCA
No doubt there were many early cells of this type. Howev er, scientists think that only one early cell (or g roup of cells) eventually
gave rise to all subsequent life on Earth. That one ce ll is called the Last Universal Common Ancestor, or LUCA. It probably

5.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1481existed around 3.5 billion years ago. LUCA was one of th e earliest prokaryotic cells. It would have lacked a nucleus and other
membrane-bound organelles.
Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
The earliest cells were probably heterotrophs. Most likely they got their energy from other molec ules in the organic “soup.”
However, by about 3 billion years ago, a new way of obta ining energy evolved. This new way was photosynthesis. Through
photosynthesis, organisms could use sunlight to make foo d from carbon dioxide and water. These organisms were the first
autotrophs. They provided food for themselves and for other orga nisms that began to consume them.
After photosynthesis evolved, oxygen started to accumu late in the atmosphere. This has been dubbed the “oxyg en catastrophe.”
Why? Oxygen was toxic to most early cells because they had evolved in its absence. As a result, many of them died out. The few
that survived evolved a new way to take advantage of the oxygen. This second major innovation was cellular respiration. It
allowed cells to use oxygen to obtain more energy from o rganic molecules.
Summary
The first cells consisted of little more than an organi c molecule such as RNA inside a lipid membrane.
One cell (or group of cells), called the last universal c ommon ancestor (LUCA), gave rise to all subsequent life on E arth.
Photosynthesis evolved by 3 billion years ago and released oxygen into the atmosphere.
Cellular respiration evolved after that to make use of t he oxygen.
Review
1. What was LUCA? What were its characteristics?
2. Which evolved first, autotrophs or heterotrophs? Why?
Se e ke r
How Did Life Begin?
How Did Life Begin?
Watch on

5.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14813. Why could cellular respiration evolve only after photo synthesis had evolved?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson;Frog in resin:
Image copyright Galyna Andrushko, 2014;
Footprint: Edmondo Gnerre
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Frog in resin:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Footprint:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tuba_Ci
ty_Dinosaur_Track.jpg
License: (Frog in resin) License from
Shutterstock; (Footprint) CC BY 2.0; CC
BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 5.20: First Cell is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

5.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14805.21: Eukaryote Evolution
Why can this fish live in these tentacles, but other fish cannot?
Anemones and Clown Fish have a well-known symbiotic relat ionship. In the ocean, the Clown Fish are protected fr om predator
fish by the stinging tentacles of the anemone, and the anemone receives protection from polyp-eating fi sh, which the Clown Fish
chases away. But what about symbiotic relationships at a much smaller scale? Is it possible for two single-c elled organisms to have
a symbiotic relationship? As you will find out, yes it is!
Evolution of Eukaryotes
Our own eukaryotic cells protect DNA in chromosomes with a nuclear membrane, ma ke ATP with mitochondria, move with
flagella (in the case of sperm cells), and feed on cells which make our food with c hloroplasts. All multicellular organisms and the
unicellular Protists share this cellular intricacy. B acterial (prokaryotic) cells are orders of magnitude smaller and have none of this
complexity. What quantum leap in evolution created this v ast chasm of difference?
The first eukaryotic cells - cells with a nucleus and internal membrane-bound organelles - probably evolved about 2 billion years
ago. This is explained by the endosymbiotic theory. As shown in the Figure below, endosymbiosis came about when large cells
engulfed small cells. The small cells were not digested by the large cells. Instead, they lived within the large cells and evolved into
organelles.
From Independent Cell to Organelle. The endosymbiotic theory explains how eukaryotic cells evolved.
The large and small cells formed a symbiotic relationship in which both cells benefited. Some of the small cells were able to break
down the large cell’s wastes for energy. They supplied energy not only to themselves but also to the large c ell. They became the
mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. Other small cells we re able to use sunlight to make food. They shared th e food with the large cell.
They became the chloroplasts of eukaryotic cells.

5.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1480Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
What is the evidence for this evolutionary pathway? B iochemistry and electron microscopy provide convincing support. The
mitochondria and chloroplasts within our eukaryotic cel ls share the following features with prokaryotic cells:
Their organelle DNA is short and circular, and the DNA sequence s do not match DNA sequences found in the nucleus.
Molecules that make up organelle membranes resemble tho se in prokaryotic membranes – and differ from those in eu karyotic
membranes.
Ribosomes in these organelles are similar to those of bacte rial ribosomes, and different from eukaryotic ribosomes.
Reproduction is by binary fission, not by mitosis.
Biochemical pathways and structures show closer relat ionships to prokaryotes.
Two or more membranes surround these organelles.
The "host" cell membrane and biochemistry are more si milar to those of Archaebacteria, so scientists believ e eukaryotes descended
more directly from that major group (Figure below). The timing of this dramatic evolutionary event (m ore likely a series of events)
is not clear. The oldest fossil clearly related to modern eukaryotes is a red alga dating back to 1.2 bi llion years ago. However, many
scientists place the appearance of eukaryotic cells at about 2 billion years. Some time within Proterozoic Eon, then, all three major
groups of life – Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukaryotes – became well established.
What Does It All Mean?
Eukaryotic cells, made possible by endosymbiosis, were powerful and efficient. That power and efficiency gave them the potential
to evolve new characteristics: multicellularity, cell specialization, and large size. They were the key to the spectacular diversity of
animals, plants, and fungi that populate our world today. Ne vertheless, as we close the history of early life, ref lect once more on the
remarkable but often unsung patterns and processes of early evolution. Often, as humans, we focus our att ention on plants and
animals, and ignore bacteria. Our human senses cannot directly perceive the unim aginable variety of single cells, the architecture of
organic molecules, or the intricacy of biochemical pa thways. Let your study of early evolution give you a new perspective – a
window into the beauty and diversity of unseen worlds, no w and throughout Earth’s history. In addition to the mitochondria that
call your 100 trillion cells home, your body contain s more bacterial cells than human cells. You, mitoch ondria, and your resident
bacteria share common ancestry – a continuous history of the gift of life.
The three major domains of life had evolved by 1.5 billion years ago. Bio chemical similarities show that eukaryotes share
more recent common ancestors with the Archaea, but our organelles probably descended from bacteria by endosymbiosis.

5.21.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1480Summary
Eukaryotic cells probably evolved about 2 billion years ago. Their evolution is explained by endosymbiotic theo ry.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved from prokaryotic or ganisms.
Eukaryotic cells would go on to evolve into the diversity of eukaryotes we know today.
Review
1. When did the first eukaryotic cells evolve?
2. Describe the endosymbiotic theory.
3. Discuss the evidence for the evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: LadyofHats;Eric Gaba
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phyloge
netic_tree.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: LadyofHats
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Eric Gaba
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phyloge
netic_tree.svg
License: Public Domain
B B C
How did the evolution of complex life
How did the evolution of complex life
Watch on

5.21.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1480This page titled 5.21: Eukaryote Evolution is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14825.22: Late Precambrian
What did early eukaryotic life look like?
Some looked like this. This is a fossil of an ammoni te. Ammonites are excellent index fossils, and it is oft en possible to link the
rock layer in which they are found to specific geologica l time periods.
Multicellular Life: Setting the Stage
Nearly 80% of Earth’s history passed before multicellu lar life evolved. Up until then, all organisms existed as single cells. Why did
multicellular organisms evolve? What led up to this ma jor step in the evolution of life? To put the evolu tion of multicellularity in
context, let’s return to what was happening on planet Earth du ring this part of its history.
The Late Precambrian
The late Precambrian is the time from about 2 billion to half a billion years ago. During this long span of time, Earth experi enced
many dramatic geologic and climatic changes.
Continents drifted. They collided to form a gigantic supe rcontinent and then broke up again and moved apart. Co ntinental drift
changed climates worldwide and caused intense volcanic act ivity.
Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere rose and fell. Th is was due to volcanic activity and other factors. When the levels were
high, they created a greenhouse effect. More heat was trapped on Earth’s surface, and the climate became warmer. When the
levels were low, less heat was trapped and the planet cool ed. Several times, cooling was severe enough to plunge Earth i nto an
ice age. One ice age was so cold that snow and ice completely cover ed the planet. Earth during this ice age has been called
snowball Earth (see Figure below).
Snowball Earth. During the late Precambrian, Earth grew so cold that it was cove red with snow and ice. Earth during this
ice age has been called snowball Earth.

5.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1482Life During the Late Precambrian
The dramatic changes of the late Precambrian had a ma jor impact on Earth’s life forms. Living things that could not adapt died out.
They were replaced by organisms that evolved new adapta tions. These adaptations included sexual reproduction, specialization of
cells, and multicellularity.
Sexual reproduction created much more variety among offs pring. This increased the chances that at least some of them would
survive when the environment changed. It also increased the speed at which evolution could occur.
Some cells started to live together in colonies. In some colonies, c ells started to specialize in doing different jobs. This made the
cells more efficient as a colony than as individual cells.
By 1 billion years ago, the first multicellular organisms had evolved. They may have developed from colonies of s pecialized
cells. Their cells were so specialized they could no lo nger survive independently. However, together they were mi ghty. They
formed an organism that was bigger, more efficient, and ab le to do much more than any single-celled organism ev er could.
The Precambrian Extinction
At the close of the Precambrian 544 million years ago, a mass extinction occurred. In a mass extinction, many or even most
species abruptly disappear from Earth. There have be en five mass extinctions in Earth’s history. Many sci entists think we are
currently going through a sixth mass extinction. Wha t caused the Precambrian mass extinction? A combinatio n of climatic and
geologic events was probably responsible. No matter what the cause, the extinction paved the way for a burst o f new life, called the
Cambrian explosion, during the following Paleozoic Era.
Summary
During the late Precambrian, continents drifted, carbon dio xide levels fluctuated, and climates changed. Many organis ms could
not survive the changes and died out.
Other organisms evolved important new adaptations. These in clude sexual reproduction, cell specialization, and mult icellularity.
The Precambrian ended with a mass extinction, which paved th e way for the Cambrian explosion.
Review
1. When was the late Precambrian?
2. Describe geologic and climatic changes that occurre d during the late Precambrian.
3. What is a greenhouse effect?
4. What three significant evolutionary events occurred d uring the late Precambrian?
n a tu re vide o
Gentle giants of the Cambrian
Gentle giants of the Cambrian
Watch on

5.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14825. What is a mass extinction?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Neethis
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fictional
_Snowball_Earth_1_Neethis.jpg
License: The copyright holder of this work
allows anyone to use it for any purpose
including unrestricted redistribution,
commercial use, and modification
[Figure 2]Credit: Neethis
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fictional
_Snowball_Earth_1_Neethis.jpg
License: The copyright holder of this work
allows anyone to use it for any purpose
including unrestricted redistribution,
commercial use, and modification
This page titled 5.22: Late Precambrian is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

5.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120995.23: Paleozoic Era
What was early life like?
Prehistoric underwater life exploded with amazing new c reatures during the Paleozoic Era. Evolution allowed l ife to take many
diverse forms, eventually developing the necessary adaptat ions to move from the ocean onto land.
Life During the Paleozoic
The Paleozoic Era is literally the era of “old life.” It lasted from 544 to 245 million years ago and is divided into s ix periods.
Major events in each period of the Paleozoic Era are described in Figure below. The era began with a spectacular burst of ne w life.
This is called the Cambrian explosion. The era ended with the biggest mass extinction the wo rld had ever seen. This is known as
the Permian extinction.

5.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12099
The paleozoic era includes the six periods described here.
The Paleozoic Era
The Cambrian Period: Following the Precambrian mass extinction, there was a n explosion of new kinds of organisms in the
Cambrian Period (544–505 million years ago). Many type s of primitive animals called sponges evolved. Small ocean invertebrates
called trilobites became abundant.

5.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12099
Two representatives of more than fifty modern animal phyla from the Ca mbrian explosion are reef-building sponges (left)
and early arthropods known as trilobites (right). Both were abundant during the Ca mbrian and later became extinct;
however, the phyla they represent persist to this day.
The Ordovician Period: During the next period, the Ordovician Period (505–440 million years ago), the oceans became filled
with invertebrates of many types. Also during this peri od, the first fish evolved and plants colonized the la nd for the first time. But
animals still remained in the water.
The Silurian Period: During the Silurian Period (440–410 million years ago), corals appeared in the oceans, and fish continued to
evolve. On land, vascular plants appeared. With speci al tissues to circulate water and other materials, these plants could grow larger
than the earlier nonvascular plants.
Cooksonia
, a branching vascular plant with sporangia at the tips of each branch.
Cooksonia
fossils measure just centimeters in height and date from the Siluria n period.
The Devonian Period: During the Devonian Period (410–360 million years ago), the first seed plants evolved. Seeds have a
protective coat and stored food to help these plants survive. Seed plants eventually became the most common t ype of land plants. In
the oceans, fish with lobe fins evolved. They could bre athe air when they raised their heads above water. Breathing would be
necessary for animals to eventually colonize the land.
On land, club mosses, horsetails, and ferns joined primitive seed plants and e arly trees to form the first forests.
The Carboniferous Period: Next, during the Carboniferous Period (360–290 mill ion years ago), widespread forests of huge plants
left massive deposits of carbon that eventually turn ed to coal. The first amphibians evolved to move out of the water and colonize
land, but they had to return to the water to reprodu ce. Soon after amphibians arose, the first reptiles evo lved. They were the first
animals that could reproduce on dry land.

5.23.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12099The Permian Period: During the Permian Period (290–245 million years ago), all the major land masses collided to form a
supercontinent called Pangaea. Temperatures were extreme, and the climate was dry. Pl ants and animals evolved adaptations to
dryness, such as waxy leaves or leathery skin to prevent water loss. The Permian Period ended with a mass extinction.
The supercontinent Pangaea encompassed all of today’s continents in a single land mass. This configuration limited shallow
coastal areas which harbor marine species, and may have contributed to the dram atic event which ended the Permian - the
most massive extinction ever recorded.
In the mass extinction that ended the Permian, the ma jority of species went extinct. Many hypotheses have been offered to explain
why this mass extinction occurred. These include huge meteorites striking Earth and enormous volcanoes spewi ng ashes and gases
into the atmosphere. Both could have darkened the s kies with dust for many months. This, in turn, would ha ve shut down
photosynthesis and cooled the planet.
Despite the great loss of life, there was light at th e end of the tunnel. The Permian extinction paved the way for another burst of
new life at the start of the following Mesozoic Era. This included the evolution of the dinosaurs.
Summary
The Paleozoic Era began with the Cambrian explosion. It ende d with the Permian extinction.
During the era, invertebrate animals diversified in the oceans. Plants, amphibians, and reptiles also moved to the land.
Review
1. What was the Cambrian explosion?
2. What was the Permian extinction?
3. List important evolutionary events that occurred duri ng the Cambrian Period.
SciSh ow
When Did Life on Earth Really T ake O
When Did Life on Earth Really T ake O
Watch on

5.23.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/120994. List important evolutionary events that occurred duri ng the Ordovician Period.
5. List important evolutionary events that occurred duri ng the Carboniferous Period.
6. Describe Pangaea. When did Pangaea form?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Christopher Auyeung, based on
information from US Geological Survey
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats)
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3] Credit: Left: Stanton F. Fink; Right:
User:TheoricienQuantique/Wikimedia
Commons;By Martin R. Smith - Smith MR,
Harvey THP, Butterfield NJ (2015) Data
from: The macro- and microfossil record of
the middle Cambrian priapulid Ottoia.
Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109,
CC0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=40
Source: Left:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Archaeo
cyatha.jpg; Right:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Asaphis
cus_Wheeleri_3.jpg; By Martin R. Smith Smith MR; Harvey THP; Butterfield NJ
(2015) Data from: The macro- and

5.23.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12099microfossil record of the middle Cambrian
priapulid Ottoia. Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109;
CC0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=40128882
License: Left CC BY 2.5; Right Public
Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Eduard Riou
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Devonia
nscene.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 6]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
5.23: Paleozoic Era is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.24.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121005.24: Mesozoic Era
What exactly is a dinosaur?
Two dinosaurs wade through shallow waters to get to the vegetation on this island. The Mesozoic Era is the ag e of dinosaurs. These
animals grew so large they dominated the planet. Dinosaurs wer e so dominant that it took a catastrophic, environme nt-changing
event for mammals to be able to take over.
Mesozoic Era: The Age of Dinosaurs
The Mesozoic Era is literally the era of “middle life.” It is also kn own as the age of dinosaurs. It lasted from 245 to 65 million
years ago and is divided into the three periods desc ribed in Figure below. The Mesozoic began with the supercontinent Pangaea.
Then, during the era, Pangaea broke up and the conti nents drifted apart. The movement of continents chang ed climates. It also
caused tremendous volcanic activity.
Mass extinctions occurred at the end of the Triassic and Cretaceous Pe riods. The first extinction paved the way for a dinosau r
takeover. In the second extinction, the dinosaurs finally d isappeared.

5.24.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12100
The Mesozoic Era consists of the three periods described here.
The Triassic Period: During the Triassic Period (245–200 million years ag o), the first dinosaurs branched off from the reptiles and
colonized the land, air, and water. Huge seed ferns and conifers dominated the forests, and modern corals, fish, and insects evolved.
The supercontinent Pangaea started to separate into Laurasia (today’s Northern Hemisphere continents) and Gondwanaland
(today’s Southern Hemisphere continents). The Triassic Peri od ended with a mass extinction.
The Jurassic Period: The next period, the Jurassic Period (200–145 mill ion years ago), began after the mass extinction tha t ended
the Triassic Period. This mass extinction allowed dinos aurs to flourish in the Jurassic Period. This was the gold en age of dinosaurs.
Also during the Jurassic, the earliest birds evolved from reptile ancestors, and all the major groups of ma mmals evolved, though
individual mammals were still small in size. Flowering plants appeared for the first time, and new insects al so evolved to pollinate
the flowers. The continents continued to move apart, an d volcanic activity was especially intense.
The Cretaceous Period: During the Cretaceous Period (145–65 million years a go), dinosaurs reached their peak in size and
distribution. Tyrannosaurus Rex, weighed at least 7 tons. By the end of the Cretaceou s, the continents were close to their present
locations. Earth’s overall climate was warm; even the p oles lacked ice. The period ended with the dramatic e xtinction of the
dinosaurs.
What happened to the dinosaurs? Why did they go extin ct at the end of the Cretaceous Period? Some scientists think a comet or
asteroid may have collided with Earth, causing skies to darken, photosynthesis to shut down, and climates to change. A collision
was probably at least a contributing factor. Without the dinosaurs, there were many opportunities for new orga nisms to exploit in
the next era, the Cenozoic. Which living things do you think took over where the dinosaurs left off?

5.24.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12100Summary
The Mesozoic Era is the age of dinosaurs. They evolved f rom earlier reptiles to fill niches on land, in the water, and in the air.
Mammals also evolved but were small in size.
Flowering plants appeared for the first time.
Dinosaurs went extinct at the end of the Mesozoic.
Review
1. Describe how the continents shifted during the Mesozoic Era.
2. Create a timeline of major evolutionary events during the Mesozoic Era.
SciSh ow
A Brief History of Life: Dinosaur Time
A Brief History of Life: Dinosaur Time
Watch on

5.24.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121003. Explain why scientists believe dinosaurs went extinct.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Dinosaur images from top to
bottom: Nobu Tamura; Image copyright
Computer Earth, 2014; Charles R.
Knight;By Martin R. Smith - Smith MR,
Harvey THP, Butterfield NJ (2015) Data
from: The macro- and microfossil record of
the middle Cambrian priapulid Ottoia.
Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109,
CC0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=40
Source: Dinosaur images from top to
bottom:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stauriko
saurus_BW.jpg;
http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:T._rex_o
ld_posture.jpg; By Martin R. Smith Smith MR; Harvey THP; Butterfield NJ
(2015) Data from: The macro- and
microfossil record of the middle Cambrian
priapulid Ottoia. Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109;
CC0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=40128882
License: Dinosaur(s) (top) CC BY 3.0;
Dinosaur(s) (middle) License from
Shutterstock; Dinosaur(s) (bottom) Public
Domain
5.24: Mesozoic Era is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.25.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121015.25: Cenozoic Era
What allowed mammals to outlast the dinosaurs?
With dinosaurs around, mammals could not thrive. It t ook a catastrophic event to rid the planet of dinosa urs. Luckily for mammals,
the extinction of the dinosaurs left many opportunitie s for mammals to take over and flourish.
The Cenozoic Era: Age of Mammals
The Cenozoic Era literally means the era of “modern life.” It is al so called the age of mammals. Mammals took advantag e of the
extinction of the dinosaurs. They flourished and soo n became the dominant animals on Earth. You can learn more about the
evolution of mammals during the Cenozoic at the lin k below. The Cenozoic began 65 million years ago an d continues to the
present. It may be divided into the two periods described in Figure below.
One way of dividing the Cenozoic Era is into the two periods described here.
The Tertiary Period: During the Tertiary Period (65–1.8 million years ago), Earth’s climate was generally warm and humid. This
allowed mammals to evolve further and fill virtually all niches vacated by the dinosaurs. Many mammals inc reased in size.
Mammals called primates evolved, including human ancestors. Modern rain forests and grasslands appeared, and flowering plants
and insects were numerous and widespread.
The Quaternary Period: During the Quaternary Period (1.8 million years ago– present), Earth’s climate cooled, leading to a serie s
of ice ages. Sea levels fell because so much water was frozen in glaciers. This created land bridges be tween continents, allowing

5.25.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12101land animals to move to new areas. Some mammals, like the woolly ma mmoths adapted to the cold by evolving very large si ze and
thick fur. Other animals moved closer to the equator or went extinct, along with many plants.
The last ice age ended about 12,000 years ago. By t hat time, our own species, Homo sapiens, had evolved. After that, we were
witnesses to the unfolding of life’s story. Although we don’t know all the details of the recent past, it is far less of a mystery than
the billions of years that preceded it.
KQED: The Last Ice Age
Imagine a vast grassy ecosystem covered with herds of elephants, bison, and camels stretching as far as the e ye can see. Africa?
Maybe. But this also describes Northern California at the end of the last Ice Age. What happened to all thi s wildlife? Were they
over-hunted and killed off? Did global warming destro y their populations? Scientists are not sure, but thi s relatively recent loss of
life does raise many interesting questions.
Summary
The Cenozoic Era is the age of mammals. They evolved to fill virtually all the niches vacated by dinosaurs.
The ice ages of the Quaternary Period of the Cenozoic led to many extinctions.
The last ice age ended 12,000 years ago. By that time, Homo sapiens had evolved.
Review
1. What explains why mammals were able to flourish during Ce nozoic Era?
2. Create a timeline of major evolutionary events during the Cenozoic Era.
K QED
Ice Age Bay Area - KQED QUEST
Ice Age Bay Area - KQED QUEST
Watch on

5.25.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121013. Discuss climate changes during the Tertiary and Quatern ary Periods, and the effects of these changes on geology and
vegetation.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Top image: Gustav Mützel; Bottom
image: Mauricio Antón;Christopher
Auyeung, based on information from US
Geological Survey;By Martin R. Smith Smith MR, Harvey THP, Butterfield NJ
(2015) Data from: The macro- and
microfossil record of the middle Cambrian
priapulid Ottoia. Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109,
CC0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=40
Source: Top image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gelber_
Babuin-drawing.jpg; Bottom image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Woolly_
mammoth_siberian_tundra.jpg; CK-12
Foundation; By Martin R. Smith - Smith
MR; Harvey THP; Butterfield NJ (2015)
Data from: The macro- and microfossil
record of the middle Cambrian priapulid
Ottoia. Dryad Digital Repository.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.km109;
CC0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=40128882
License: Top Public Domain; Bottom CC
BY 2.5; CC BY-NC 3.0
5.25: Cenozoic Era is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Ecology
6.1: Aquatic Biomes
6.2: Freshwater and Wetland Biomes
6.3: Aquatic Organisms
6.4: Predation
6.5: Competition
6.6: Symbiosis
6.7: Succession
6.8: Population
6.9: Population Structure
6.10: Population Growth
6.11: Ecosystems
6.12: Population Growth Patterns
6.13: Human Population
6.14: Demographic Transition
6.15: Recent and Future Population Growth
6.16: Biodiversity
6.17: Importance of Biodiversity
6.18: Mass Extinction
6.19: Resources
6.20: Soil and Water
6.21: Air Pollution
6.22: Energy Flow
6.23: Global Warming
6.24: Food Chain
6.25: Trophic Level
6.26: Water Cycle
6.27: Carbon Cycle
6.28: Nitrogen Cycle
6.29: Biomes and Climate
6.30: Terrestrial Biomes
This page titled 6: Ecology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

6.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121296.1: Aquatic Biomes
Do aquatic ecosystems need sunlight?
Of course. The sunlight - in part - allows the diversit y of life seen in this ecosystem. If the available su nlight was less, could this
ecosystem still thrive? Maybe, but the ecosystem would p robably be very different. Sunlight, of course, is ne cessary for
photosynthesis, which brings energy into an ecosystem. So, the availability of that sunlight has a direct impa ct on the productivity
and biodiversity of aquatic ecosystems.
Aquatic Biomes
Terrestrial organisms are generally limited by temperature and moisture. Therefore, terrestrial biomes are defi ned in terms of these
abiotic factors. Most aquatic organisms do not have to deal with extremes of temperature or moisture. Instead, their main limiting
factors are the availability of sunlight and the con centration of dissolved oxygen and nutrients in the water. These factors vary from
place to place in a body of water and are used to define aquatic biomes.
Aquatic Biomes and Sunlight
In large bodies of standing water, including the ocean and lakes, the water can be div ided into zones based on the amount of
sunlight it receives:
1. The photic zone extends to a maximum depth of 200 meters (656 feet) below t he surface of the water. This is where enough
sunlight penetrates for photosynthesis to occur. Algae and other photosynthetic organisms can make food and support fo od
webs.
2. The aphotic zone is water deeper than 200 meters. This is where too little sunlight penetrates for photosynthesis to occur. As a
result, food must be made by chemosynthesis or else drif t down from the water above.
These and other aquatic zones in the ocean are identi fied in Figure below.

6.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12129
The ocean is divided into many different zones, depending on distance from s hore and depth of water.
Aquatic Biomes and Dissolved Substances
Water in lakes and the ocean also varies in the amount of diss olved oxygen and nutrients it contains:
1. Water near the surface of lakes and the ocean usuall y has more dissolved oxygen than does deeper water. This is because
surface water absorbs oxygen from the air above it.
2. Water near shore generally has more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore. This is because most nutri ents enter the
water from land. They are carried by runoff, streams, and rivers that empty into a body of water.
3. Water near the bottom of lakes and the ocean may cont ain more nutrients than water closer to the surface. Whe n aquatic
organisms die, they sink to the bottom. Decomposers near the bottom of the water break down the dead organisms and releas e
their nutrients back into the water.
Marine Biomes
Anglerfish live in the ocean. Aquatic biomes in the oc ean are called marine biomes. Organisms that live in marine biomes must be
adapted to the salt in the water. For example, many h ave organs for excreting excess salt. Two ocean zones are particularly
challenging to marine organisms: the intertidal zone and the deep ocean.
The intertidal zone is the narrow strip along the coastline that is cover ed by water at high tide and exposed to air at low ti de (see
Figure below). There are plenty of nutrients and sunlight in th e intertidal zone. However, the water is constantly movin g in and
out, and the temperature keeps changing. These conditions require adaptation s in the organisms that live there, such as the
barnacles in Figure below.
These pictures show the intertidal zone of the Bay of Fundy, on the Atlantic coast in Maine. Can you identify the intertidal
zone from the pictures?

6.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12129
Barnacles secrete a cement-like substance that anchors them to rocks in the intertidal zone.
Organisms that live deep in the ocean must be able t o withstand extreme water pressure, very cold water, and complete darkness.
However, even here, thriving communities of living thing s can be found. Organisms cluster around hydrothermal vents in the ocean
floor. The vents release hot water containing chemical s that would be toxic to most other living things. T he producers among them
are single-celled chemoautotrophs. They make food us ing energy stored in the chemicals.
Monitoring Marine Protected Areas
Is overfishing an important issue? What would happen if fish populations dwindled? Marine Protected Areas are no-fishing zones
that have recently been established up and down the California coast, in the hope of allowing fish to breed, grow large, and
replenish state waters. Scientists monitor these areas to determine if this process is working.
Further Reading
Chemosynthesis
Summary
Aquatic biomes are determined mainly by sunlight and conce ntrations of dissolved oxygen and nutrients in the water.
Marine biomes are found in the salt water of the ocean.
Review
1. How are aquatic biomes defined?
2. What is the photic zone of the ocean?
K QED
One Fish Two Fish: Monitoring Marin
One Fish Two Fish: Monitoring Marin
Watch on

6.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121293. Where does food come from in the aphotic zone?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Dylan Kereluk
Source: Left:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bay_of_
Fundy_-_Tide_Out.jpg; Right:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bay_of_
Fundy_-_Tide_In.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mo Riza;Dylan Kereluk
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/modomatic/2
394983702/; By NOAA (From here)
[Public domain]; via Wikimedia Commons
License: CC BY 2.0
6.1: Aquatic Biomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121306.2: Freshwater and Wetland Biomes
What may be the most biologically diverse type of ecosystem?
These are wetland marshes in Delaware. Notice the abundan ce of vegetation mixed with the water. And of course, where there are
plants, there are animals. Wetlands are considered the most biologically dive rse of all ecosystems. Plant life found in wetlands
includes mangrove, water lilies, cattails, black spru ce, cypress, and many others. Animal life includes many different amphibians,
reptiles, birds, insects, and mammals.
Freshwater Biomes
Freshwater biomes have water that contains little or no salt. They include standing and running freshwater biomes. Standing
freshwater biomes include ponds and lakes. Lakes are generally bigger and deeper than ponds. Some of the water in lakes is in the
aphotic zone, where there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis. Plankton and plants, such as the duckwe ed in Figure below, are
the primary producers in standing freshwater biomes.
The pond on the left has a thick mat of duckweed plants. They cover the surface of the water and use sunlight for
photosynthesis. The cattails on the right grow along a stream bed. They have tough, slender leaves that can withstand
moving water.
Running freshwater biomes include streams and rivers. Rivers are usually larger than streams. Streams may sta rt with runoff or
water seeping out of a spring. The water runs downhill and joins other running water to become a stream. A strea m may flow into a
river that empties into a lake or the ocean. Running water is better able to dissolve oxygen and nutrient s than standing water.
However, the moving water is a challenge to many living things. Algae and plants, such as the cattails in Figure above, are the
primary producers in running water biomes.

6.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12130Wetlands
A wetland is an area that is saturated with water or covered b y water for at least one season of the year. The water may be
freshwater or salt water. Wetlands are extremely important biomes for several reasons:
They store excess water from floods.
They slow down runoff and help prevent erosion.
They remove excess nutrients from runoff before it emptie s into rivers or lakes.
They provide a unique habitat that certain communiti es of plants need to survive.
They provide a safe, lush habitat for many species of animals, so they have high biodiversity.
KQED: San Francisco Bay: A Unique Estuary
An estuary is a partly enclosed coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it, and with a fr ee connection
to the ocean. Estuaries can be thought of as the mos t biologically productive regions on Earth, with very high biodiversity.
Estuaries are zones where land and sea come together, and wher e fresh and salt water meet.
The San Francisco Bay is one of the great estuaries of the wo rld.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Aquatic Biomes Freshwater | Biology
Aquatic Biomes Freshwater | Biology
Watch on
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Aquatic Biomes Wetlands | Biology |
Aquatic Biomes Wetlands | Biology |
Watch on

6.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12130Science Friday: Poop and Paddle: An Eco-Friendly Floating Toilet
How do wetlands filter water? In this video by Science Fr iday, inventor Adam Katzman describes how his toilet-boa t converts
human waste into cattails and clean water.
Summary
Freshwater biomes include standing water and running wate r biomes.
Wetlands are extremely important biomes. They may have f reshwater or salt water.
Review
1. Describe a freshwater biome.
2. Define a wetland.
3. Why do wetlands have high biodiversity?
K QED
Saving the Bay - San Francisco Bay: A
Saving the Bay - San Francisco Bay: A
Watch on
Sc iF ri
P oop and P addle: An Eco-Friendly Flo
P oop and P addle: An Eco-Friendly Flo
Watch on

6.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121304. A developer wants to extend a golf course into a wetland. Outline environmental arguments you could make against t his plan.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Duckweed: Jonathan Jordan;
Cattails: User:JoJan/Wikimedia Commons
Source: Duckweed:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jjordan64816/
7251615240/; Cattails:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gi
rona_009.JPG
License: Duckweed: CC BY 2.0; Cattails:
CC BY 3.0
6.2: Freshwater and Wetland Biomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121316.3: Aquatic Organisms
What is this? Plant or animal?
It is actually the Yellow Christmas tree worm. These animals are colorful, and can be red, orange, yellow, blue, a nd white. The
Christmas tree worm lives on tropical coral reefs th roughout the world. The Christmas tree worm's plumes ar e used for feeding and
respiration. These worms use their plumes to catch pla nkton and other small particles passing in the water. Cilia then pass the food
to the worm's mouth.
Aquatic Organisms
Aquatic organisms generally fall into three broad grou ps: plankton, nekton, and benthos. They vary in how they move and where
they live.
1. Plankton are tiny aquatic organisms that cannot move on their o wn. They live in the photic zone. They include phytoplank ton
and zooplankton. Phytoplankton are bacteria and algae that use sunlight to make food. Zooplankton are tiny animals that feed
on phytoplankton.
2. Nekton are aquatic animals that can move on their own by “swimming” through the water. They may live in the photic or
aphotic zone. They feed on plankton or other nekton. Exam ples of nekton include fish and shrimp.
3. Benthos are aquatic organisms that crawl in sediments at the botto m of a body of water. Many are decomposers. Benthos
include sponges, clams, and anglerfish like the one in Figure below. How has this fish adapted to a life in the dark?
Anglerfish. This anglerfish lives between 1000 and 4000 meters belo w sea level. No sunlight penetrates to this depth. The
rod-like structure on its face has a glow-in-the-dark tip. It is cover ed with microorganisms that give off their own light. The
fish wiggles the structure like a worm to attract prey. In the darkness, o nly the rod-like worm is visible.
KQED: Studying Aquatic Animals
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of our planet, yet t hey are some of the least explored regions on Earth. Who better to unlock the
mysteries of the ocean than marine animals themselve s? Marine scientists have been tagging and tracking sharks, leatherback
turtles, and other sea life to learn more about mari ne ecosystems. Through the Tagging of Pacific Predator s program (TOPP),
scientists hope to assess and explain the migration ro utes, ecosystems, and diversity of our oceans’ species.
Beginning in 2000, scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Stanford University, and the University
of California, Santa Cruz combined to form TOPP. As par t of TOPP, researchers attach satellite tags to elepha nt seals, white sharks,

6.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12131giant leatherback turtles, bluefin tuna, swordfish, a nd other marine animals. The tags collect informati on, such as how deep each
animal dives, the levels of ambient light (to help determine an animal’s location), and interior and e xterior body temperature. Some
tags also collect information about the temperature, s alinity, and depth of the water surrounding an animal to help scientists identify
ocean currents. The tags send the data to a satellite, which in turn sends the data the scientists. They u se this information to create
maps of migration patterns and discover new informati on about different marine ecosystems. The information collected by TOPP
offers rare insights into the lives of marine animal s. Without TOPP, that information would otherwise remain un known. With TOPP,
scientists are developing a working knowledge of the particular migration routes animals take, as well as the locations of popular
breeding grounds and the environmental dangers face d by different species. TOPP has shed light on how we ca n better protect the
leatherback turtle and other endangered species.
Summary
Aquatic organisms are either plankton, nekton, or benthos.
Review
1. Compare plankton, nekton, and benthos.
2. Give an example of plankton, nekton, and benthos.
3. What are phytoplankton and zooplankton?
K QED
T agging P aci  c P redators | KQED QU
T agging P aci  c P redators | KQED QU
Watch on

6.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12131Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: August Brauer
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humpba
ck_anglerfish.png
License: Public Domain
6.3: Aquatic Organisms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
N ASA Godda rd
NASA | In The Zone
NASA | In The Zone
Watch on

6.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121326.4: Predation
What may be the most common way different species interact?
Biomes as different as deserts and wetlands share someth ing very important. All biomes have populations of in teracting species.
Species interact in the same basic ways in all biomes. For ex ample, all biomes have some species that prey on others fo r food.
Predation
Predation is a relationship in which members of one species (th e predator) consume members of another species (the prey). The
lionesses and zebra in Figure below are classic examples of predators and prey. In a ddition to the lionesses, there is another
predator in this figure. Can you spot it? The other predator is the zebra. Like the lionesses, it consumes prey species, in this case
species of grass. However, unlike the lionesses, the ze bra does not kill its prey. Predator-prey relationshi ps such as these account
for most energy transfers in food chains and food webs.
Predators and Their Prey. These lionesses feed on the carcass of a zebra.
Predation and Population
A predator-prey relationship tends to keep the popu lations of both species in balance. This is shown by th e graph in Figure below.
As the prey population increases, there is more food for predators. So, after a slight lag, the predator populati on increases as well.
As the number of predators increases, more prey are capt ured. As a result, the prey population starts to decrea se. What happens to
the predator population then?

6.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12132
Predator-Prey Population Dynamics. As the prey population increases, why does the predator population also increase?
In the predator-prey example, one factor limits the growth of the other factor. As the prey population dec eases, the predator
population begins to decrease as well. The prey popul ation is a limiting factor. A limiting factor limits the growth or development
of an organism, population, or process.
Keystone Species
Some predator species are known as keystone species. A keystone species is one that plays an especially important role in its
community. Major changes in the numbers of a keystone species affect the populations of many other specie s in the community.
For example, some sea star species are keystone species in coral reef communities. The sea stars prey on mu ssels and sea urchins,
which have no other natural predators. If sea stars were removed from a coral reef community, mussel and sea urchin populations
would have explosive growth. This, in turn, would drive out most other species. In the end, the coral reef comm unity would be
destroyed.
Adaptations to Predation
Both predators and prey have adaptations to predatio n that evolve through natural selection. Predator ad aptations help them capture
prey. Prey adaptations help them avoid predators. A co mmon adaptation in both predator and prey is camouflage. Several examples
are shown in Figure below. Camouflage in prey helps them hide from pre dators. Camouflage in predators helps them sneak up o n
prey.
Camouflage in Predator and Prey Species. Can you see the crab in the photo on the left? It is camouflaged with the sand.
The preying mantis in the middle photo looks just like the dead leaves in the background. Can you tell where one zebra
ends and another one begins? This may confuse a predator and give the zebras a chance to run away.

6.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12132Science Friday: Can Underwater Parks Protect Coral?
Coral communities are incredibly important for marin e life. In this video by Science Friday, Marine scientis ts John Bruno and
Elizabeth Selig describe the effects of local Marine Protect ion Areas on preserving coral.
Summary
Predation is a relationship in which members of one species (the predator) consume members of another species (the prey).
A predator-prey relationship keeps the populations of both species in balance.
Review
1. Describe the relationship between a predator populati on and the population of its prey.
2. What is a keystone species? Give an example.
3. What is a limiting factor?
Cra sh Cou rse
Community Ecology II: P redators - Cr
Community Ecology II: P redators - Cr
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Can Underwater P arks P rotect Coral?
Can Underwater P arks P rotect Coral?
Watch on

6.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121324. What is the role of camouflage in prey and predator?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Crab: Thomas Hubauer; Mantis:
Adrian Pingstone; Zebra: Paul Maritz,
edited by User:Pharaoh Hound/Wikimedia
Commons and User:Fir0002/Wikimedia
Commons;Viceroy: James D Rucker;
Monarch: William Warby (Flickr:wwarby)
Source: Crab:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/drth80/87545
97558/; Mantis:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bristol.z
oo.dead.leaf.mantis.arp.jpg; Zebra:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zebra_B
otswana_edit02.jpg; Viceroy:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/25183035@
N03/7438612588/; Monarch:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wwarby/8190
412331/
License: Crab: CC BY 2.0; Mantis: Public
Domain; Zebra: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: Patti Sandoval;(a) Jan Tik; (b)
Flickr:qorize; (c) Courtesy of Prof. Gordon
T. Taylor, Stony Brook University/NSF
Polar Programs
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/thomsonsafaris/8377408989/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Crab: Thomas Hubauer; Mantis:
Adrian Pingstone; Zebra: Paul Maritz,
edited by User:Pharaoh Hound/Wikimedia
Commons and User:Fir0002/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: Crab:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/drth80/87545
97558/; Mantis:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bristol.z
oo.dead.leaf.mantis.arp.jpg; Zebra:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zebra_B
otswana_edit02.jpg
License: Crab: CC BY 2.0; Mantis: Public
Domain; Zebra: CC BY 2.5

6.4.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121326.4: Predation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121336.5: Competition
Does there have to be a winner?
When animals compete? Yes. Animals, or other organisms, will comp ete when both want the same thing. One must "lose" so th e
winner can have the resource. But competition doesn't n ecessarily involve physical altercations.
Competition
Competition is a relationship between organisms that strive for the same resources in the same place. The resources m ight be food,
water, or space. There are two different types of competition:
1. Intraspecific competition occurs between members of the same species. For example, two m ale birds of the same species
might compete for mates in the same area. This type of compe tition is a basic factor in natural selection. It leads to t he evolution
of better adaptations within a species.
2. Interspecific competition occurs between members of different species. For example, predators of different species might
compete for the same prey.
Interspecific Competition and Extinction
Interspecific competition often leads to extinction. The species that is less well adapted may get fewer of the resources that both
species need. As a result, members of that species are less likely to survive, and the species may go extinct.
Interspecific Competition and Specialization
Instead of extinction, interspecific competition may lead to greater specialization. Specialization occurs when competing species
evolve different adaptations. For example, they may evolve adaptations that allow them to use different f ood sources. Figure below
describes an example.

6.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12133
Specialization lets different species of anole lizards live in the s ame area without competing.
Watch the beginning of the following video to learn more about competition.
Summary
Competition is a relationship between organisms that strive for the same resources in the same place.
Intraspecific competition occurs between members of the same species. It improves the species’ adaptations.
Interspecific competition occurs between members of diff erent species. It may lead to one species going extinc t or both
becoming more specialized.
Review
1. What is competition?
T e a ch e r's P e t
Species Interactions
Species Interactions
Watch on

6.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121332. Describe the evolutionary effects of intraspecific an d interspecific competition.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Ground Anole: Flickr:pondhawk;
Tree Anole: Jordan Walmsley
Source: Ground Anole:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/38686613@
N08/4750887836/; Tree Anole:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/champofsome
thing/8658719965/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Ground Anole: Flickr:pondhawk;
Tree Anole: Jordan Walmsley
Source: Ground Anole:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/38686613@
N08/4750887836/; Tree Anole:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/champofsome
thing/8658719965/
License: CC BY 2.0
6.5: Competition is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121346.6: Symbiosis
Do interactions between species always result in harm?
A commensal shrimp sits on another sea organism, a sea slug. As a commensal shrimp, it neither brings a bene fit nor has a negative
effect on its host.
Symbiotic Relationships
Symbiosis is a close relationship between two species in which at least one species benefits. For the other species, th e relationship
may be positive, negative, or neutral. There are three basic types of symbiosis: mutualism, commensalism, and pa rasitism.
Mutualism
Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship in which both species be nefit. An example of mutualism involves goby fish and shrimp (see
Figure below). The nearly blind shrimp and the fish spend mo st of their time together. The shrimp maintains a bu rrow in the sand
in which both the fish and shrimp live. When a preda tor comes near, the fish touches the shrimp with its tail as a warning. Then,
both fish and shrimp retreat to the burrow until the predator is gone. From their relationship, the shrimp gets a warning of
approaching danger. The fish gets a safe retreat and a place to lay its eggs.

6.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12134
The multicolored shrimp in the front and the green goby fish behind it have a mutualistic relationship.
Commensalism
Commensalism is a symbiotic relationship in which one species be nefits while the other species is not affected. One speci es
typically uses the other for a purpose other than fo od. For example, mites attach themselves to larger f lying insects to get a “free
ride.” Hermit crabs use the shells of dead snails for homes.
Parasitism
Parasitism is a symbiotic relationship in which one species (the parasite) benefits while the other species (the host) is harmed.
Many species of animals are parasites, at least during some stage of their life. Most species are also hosts to one or more parasites.
Some parasites live on the surface of their host. Other s live inside their host. They may enter the host thro ugh a break in the skin or
in food or water. For example, roundworms are parasites of mammals, inclu ding humans, cats, and dogs (see Figure below). The
worms produce huge numbers of eggs, which are passed in the host’s feces to the environment. Other individ uals may be infected
by swallowing the eggs in contaminated food or water.
Roundworms like this one might eventually fill a dog’s intestine unless it gets medical treatment.
Some parasites kill their host, but most do not. It’ s easy to see why. If a parasite kills its host, the par asite is also likely to die.
Instead, parasites usually cause relatively minor damage to their host.

6.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12134Science Friday: Invasion of the Zombees: A Bee Horror Film
What would cause bees to suddenly drop dead? In this video by Science Friday, Lila Higgins discusses the paras ite this is quietly
causing these bees to die.
Summary
Symbiosis is a close relationship between two species in which a t least one species benefits.
Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship in which both species be nefit.
Commensalism is a symbiotic relationship in which one species b enefits while the other species is not affected.
Parasitism is a symbiotic relationship in which one species (the parasite) benefits while the other species (the hos t) is harmed.
Review
1. Define mutualism and commensalism.
2. Give examples of mutualism.
TED-Ed
Symbiosis: A surprising tale of speci
Symbiosis: A surprising tale of speci
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Invasion of the Zombees: A Bee Horr
Invasion of the Zombees: A Bee Horr
Watch on

6.6.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121343. Explain why most parasites do not kill their host. Why is it in their own best interest to keep their host alive?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Carsten Medom
Madsen, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Haplochromis/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpheus
_bellulus.JPG
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Carsten Medom
Madsen, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
6.6: Symbiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121356.7: Succession
Can a plant really grow in hardened lava?
It can if it is very hardy and tenacious. And that i s how succession starts. It begins with a plant that m ust be able to grow on new
land with minimal soil or nutrients.
Ecological Succession
Communities are not usually static. The numbers and ty pes of species that live in them generally change o ver time. This is called
ecological succession. Important cases of succession are primary and secondary succession.
Primary Succession
Primary succession occurs in an area that has never before been coloni zed. Generally, the area is nothing but bare rock. Thi s type
of environment may come about when
lava flows from a volcano and hardens into rock.
a glacier retreats and leaves behind bare rock.
a landslide uncovers an area of bare rock.
The first species to colonize a disturbed area such a s this are called pioneer species (see Figure below). They change the
environment and pave the way for other species to co me into the area. Pioneer species are likely to includ e bacteria and lichens that
can live on bare rock. Along with wind and water, they help weather the rock and form soil. Once soil b egins to form, plants can
move in. At first, the plants include grasses and other species that can grow in thin, poor soil. As more pla nts grow and die, organic
matter is added to the soil. This improves the soil and helps it hold water. The improved soil allows shrub s and trees to move into
the area.
Primary Succession. New land from a volcanic eruption is slowly being c olonized by a pioneer species.
Secondary Succession
Secondary succession occurs in a formerly inhabited area that was distur bed. The disturbance could be a fire, flood, or human
action such as farming. This type of succession is fa ster because the soil is already in place. In this ca se, the pioneer species are

6.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12135plants such as grasses, birch trees, and fireweed. Organic matter from the pioneer species improves the soil. Thi s lets other plants
move into the area. An example of this type of succession is shown in Figure below.
Secondary Succession. Two months after a forest fire, new plants are alre ady sprouting among the charred logs.
Climax Communities
Many early ecologists thought that a community always goes through the same series of stages during success ion. They also
assumed that succession always ends with a final stabl e stage. They called this stage the climax community. Today, most
ecologists no longer hold these views. They believe that continued change is normal in most ecosystems. Th ey think that most
communities are disturbed too often to become climax com munities.
0:00

6.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12135Summary
Ecological succession is the process in which a community changes through time.
Primary succession occurs in an area that has never befor e been colonized.
Secondary succession occurs in a formerly inhabited area that was disturbed.
Review
1. What is ecological succession?
2. Describe the main difference between primary and sec ondary succession.
3. Give two examples of habitats that will go through primary succession.
4. What is a climax community?
5. Summarize how ideas about ecological succession and climax communities have changed.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Pi-Lens, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright E. Glanfield, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com0:00

6.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12135
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Pi-Lens, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
6.7: Succession is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121366.8: Population
Is this any way to live?
It is if you're a penguin. This population of pengui ns is made of all the individuals of the same species of penguins who live
together. They seem to exist in a very crowded - or densely pop ulated - environment, and in a random configuration.
Population Size, Density, and Distribution
Communities are made up of populations of different species. In biology, a population is a group of organisms of the same species
that live in the same area. The population is impacted by natural selection and evolution. How large a popul ation is and how fast it
is growing are often used as measures of its health.
Population Size
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. For e xample, a population of insects might consist of 10 0 individual
insects, or many more. Population size influences the c hances of a species surviving or going extinct. Genera lly, very small
populations are at greatest risk of extinction. However, the size of a population may be less important than its density.
Population Density
Population density is the average number of individuals in a population per unit of area or volume. For example, a populati on of
100 insects that live in an area of 100 square meter s has a density of 1 insect per square meter. If the same population lives in an
area of only 1 square meter, what is its density? Which population is more crowded? How might crowding affect t he health of a
population?
Population Distribution
Population density just represents the average number of individuals per unit of area or volume. Often, ind ividuals in a population
are not spread out evenly. Instead, they may live in clumps or some other pattern (see Figure below). The pattern may reflect
characteristics of the species or its environment. Population distribution describes how the individuals are distributed, or spr ead
throughout their habitat.

6.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12136
Patterns of Population Distribution. What factors influence the pattern o f a population over space?
Further Reading
Population Structure
Summary
Population size is the number of individuals in a populatio n.
Population density is the average number of individuals per unit of area or volume.
The pattern of spacing of individuals in a population ma y be affected by the characteristics of a species or its en vironment.
Review
1. What is population density?
2. What are the differences between population density and d istribution?
3. A population of 820 insects lives in a 1.2-acre area. They gather nectar from a population of 560 flowering pl ants. The plants
live in a 0.2-acre area. Which population has greater de nsity, the insects or the plants? Why?
Ch u ck B u n tin g
P opulation Density
P opulation Density
Watch on

6.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121364. What can you infer about a species that has a random patte rn of distribution over space? A uniform pattern?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;By (Image:
James Gathany, CDC) - A New Model for
Predicting Outbreaks of West Nile Virus.
Gross L, PLoS Biology V ol. 4/4/2006,
e101.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040
101. See also: Kilpatrick AM, Kramer LD,
Jones MJ, Marra PP, Daszak P (2006) West
Nile Virus Epidemics in North America Are
Driven by Shifts in Mosquito Feeding
Behavior. PLoS Biol 4(4): e82
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040082, CC BY
2.5,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=1441809
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By (Image:
James Gathany; CDC) - A New Model for
Predicting Outbreaks of West Nile Virus.
Gross L; PLoS Biology V ol. 4/4/2006;
e101. See also: Kilpatrick
AMdx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.004010
1.; Kramer LD; Jones MJ; Marra PP;
Daszak P (2006) West Nile Virus
Epidemics in North America Are Driven by
Shifts in Mosquito Feeding Behavior. PLoS
Biol 4(4): e82
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040082; CC BY
2.5; commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=1441809
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.8: Population is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121376.9: Population Structure
Young vs. old. Does it matter?
When it comes to populations, yes it does. The age structure (and the sex structure) of a population in fluences population growth.
Can you explain why?
Population Structure
Population growth is the change in the size of the population over ti me. An important factor in population growth is age-sex
structure. This is the number of individuals of each sex and age in the population. The age-sex structure influe nces population
growth. This is because younger people are more likely to re produce, while older people have higher rates of dying.
Population Pyramids
Age-sex structure is represented by a population pyramid. This is a bar graph, like the one Figure below. In this example, the bars
become narrower from younger to older ages. Can you explai n why?
A
population pyramid represents the age-sex structure of a population. What does a large base represent?
Survivorship Curves
Another way to show how deaths affect populations is wit h survivorship curves. These are graphs that represent the number of
individuals still alive at each age. Examples are shown in Figure below.

6.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12137
Survivorship curves reflect death rates at different ages.
The three types of curves shown in the figure actually rep resent different strategies species use to adapt to their environment:
Type I: Parents produce relatively few offspring and prov ide them with a lot of care. As a result, most of the offsprin g survive to
adulthood so they can reproduce. This pattern is typical of large animals, including humans.
Type II: Parents produce moderate numbers of offspring and provide some parental care. Deaths occur more unifor mly
throughout life. This pattern occurs in some birds and man y asexual species.
Type III: Parents produce many offspring but provide them with little or no care. As a result, relatively few offspring survive to
adulthood. This pattern is typical of plants, invertebrat es, and many species of fish.
The Type I strategy occurs more often in stable envi ronments. The Type III strategy is more likely in unst able environments. Can
you explain why?
Summary
The age-sex structure of a population is the number of i ndividuals of each sex and age in the population.
Age-sex structure influences population growth. It is repr esented by a population pyramid.
The number of survivors at each age is plotted on a surv ivorship curve.
Review
1. How does the age-sex structure of a population influence gr owth?
2. Assume that a population pyramid has a very broad base. What does that tell you about the population it represen ts?
TED-Ed
P opulation pyramids: P owerful predi
P opulation pyramids: P owerful predi
Watch on

6.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121373. Compare and contrast Type I and Type III survivorshi p curves.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Moodboard Photography
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/67835627@
N05/7301111312/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.9: Population Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121386.10: Population Growth
What would old luggage have to do with population growth?
Moving into an area, or immigration, is a key factor i n the growth of populations. Shown above is actual vintag e luggage left by
some of the millions of immigrants who came through Ell is Island and into the United States.
Population Growth
Populations gain individuals through births and immi gration. They lose individuals through deaths and em igration. These factors
together determine how fast a population grows.
Population Growth Rate
Population growth rate (r) is how fast a population changes in size over time. A positive growth rate means a population is
increasing. A negative growth rate means it is decreas ing. The two main factors affecting population growth a re the birth rate (b)
and death rate (d). Population growth may also be affected by people c oming into the population from somewhere else
(immigration, i) or leaving the population for another area (emigration, e). The formula for population growth takes all these
factors into account.
r = (b + i) - (d + e)
r = population growth rate
b = birth rate
i = immigration rate
d = death rate
e = emigration rate
Dispersal
Other types of movements may also affect population s ize and growth. For example, many species have some mean s of dispersal.
This refers to offspring moving away from their parent s. This prevents the offspring from competing with the parents for resources
such as light or water. For example, dandelion seeds have “parachutes.” They allow the wind to carry the seeds far from the parent s
(see Figure below).

6.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12138
Dandelion Seeds. These dandelion seeds may disperse far from the parent plant. Why might this be beneficial to both
parents and offspring?
Migration
Migration is another type of movement that changes p opulation size. Migration is the regular movement of individuals or
populations each year during certain seasons. The pu rpose of migration usually is to find food, mates, or other resources. For
example, many northern hemisphere birds migrate tho usands of miles south each fall. They go to areas wher e the weather is
warmer and more resources are available (see Figure below). Then they return north in the spring to nest. Some animals, such as
elk, migrate vertically. They go up the sides of mo untains in spring as snow melts. They go back down the mountain sides in fall as
snow returns.
Swainson’s hawks migrate from North to South America and back again each year. This map shows where individual
hawks have been identified during their migration.

6.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12138Summary
Population growth rate is how fast a population changes in size over time.
Population growth is determined by rates of birth, death, im migration, and emigration.
Review
1. Define immigration and emigration.
2. What is migration? Give an example.
3. Write the formula for the population growth rate. Iden tify all the variables.0:00

6.10.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121384. What is dispersal? State why dispersal of offspring away f rom their parents might be beneficial
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: U.S. Geological Survey;National
Institutes of Health (NIH)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Swainso
n%27s_hawk_migration_route.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Commu
nity_Immunity.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: John Liu;CK-12 Foundation
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/8047705@N
02/5572197407/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: U.S. Geological Survey
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Swainso
n%27s_hawk_migration_route.jpg
License: Public Domain
6.10: Population Growth is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14896.11: Ecosystems
What lives in the forest?
Take a close look at this ecosystem. Obviously there are deer and many types of plants. But there are orga nisms that live there that
cannot be seen in the picture. Many other animals, such as rabbits, mice, and countless insects. There are also bacteria and fungi.
Add in the nonliving aspects of the area, such as the water, and you have an ecosystem.
The Ecosystem
Ecology is the study of how living things interact with each other and with their environment. It is a major bran ch of biology, but
has areas of overlap with geography, geology, climatolo gy, and other sciences. The study of ecology begins with two fundamental
concepts in ecology: the ecosystem and their organisms.
Organisms are individual living things. Despite their tremendo us diversity, all organisms have the same basic need s: energy and
matter. These must be obtained from the environment. Therefore, organisms are not closed systems. They depend on and are
influenced by their environment. The environment incl udes two types of factors: abiotic and biotic.
1. Abiotic factors are the nonliving aspects of the environment. They inclu de factors such as sunlight, soil, temperature, and
water.
2. Biotic factors are the living aspects of the environment. They consist of other organisms, including members of the same and
different species.
An ecosystem is a unit of nature and the focus of study in ecolo gy. It consists of all the biotic and abiotic factor s in an area and
their interactions. Ecosystems can vary in size. A lake could be considered an ecosystem. So could a dead lo g on a forest floor.
Both the lake and log contain a variety of species t hat interact with each other and with abiotic factors. Another example of an
ecosystem is pictured in Figure below.
A desert ecosystem. What are some of the biotic and abiotic facto rs in this desert ecosystem?

6.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1489When it comes to energy, ecosystems are not closed. T hey need constant inputs of energy. Most ecosystems g et energy from
sunlight. A small minority get energy from chemical compounds. Unlike energy, matter is not constantly added to ecosystems.
Instead, it is recycled. Water and elements such as carbon and nitrogen are used over and o ver again.
Niche
One of the most important concepts associated with the ecosystem is the niche. A niche refers to the role of a species in its
ecosystem. It includes all the ways that the species in teracts with the biotic and abiotic factors of the e nvironment. Two important
aspects of a species’ niche are the food it eats and how the food is obtained. Look at Figure below. It shows pictures of birds that
occupy different niches. Each species eats a different ty pe of food and obtains the food in a different way.
Bird Niches. Each of these species of birds has a beak that suits it for its ni che. For example, the long slender beak of the
nectarivore allows it to sip liquid nectar from flowers. The short sturdy beak of the granivore allows it to crush hard, tough
grains.
Habitat
Another aspect of a species’ niche is its habitat. The habitat is the physical environment in which a species lives a nd to which it is
adapted. A habitat’s features are determined mainly by abiotic factors such as temperature and rainfall. These factors also influence
the traits of the organisms that live there.
Competitive Exclusion Principle
A given habitat may contain many different species, but each species must have a different niche. Two diff erent species cannot
occupy the same niche in the same place for very lo ng. This is known as the competitive exclusion principle. If two species were
M a rk Drollin ge r
Abiotic and Biotic Factors
Abiotic and Biotic Factors
Watch on

6.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1489to occupy the same niche, what do you think would happe n? They would compete with one another for the same f ood and other
resources in the environment. Eventually, one species would be likely to outcompete and replace the other.
Summary
Ecology is the study of how living things interact with e ach other and with their environment.
The environment includes abiotic (nonliving) and biot ic (living) factors.
An ecosystem consists of all the biotic and abiotic factor s in an area and their interactions.
A niche refers to the role of a species in its ecosystem.
A habitat is the physical environment in which a species lives and to which it is adapted.
Two different species cannot occupy the same niche in the same place for very long.
Review
1. Define ecology.
2. Define biotic and abiotic factors of the environment. Give an example of each.
3. How do ecologists define the term ecosystem? What makes up an ecosystem?
4. State the competitive exclusion principle.
5. Compare and contrast the ecosystem concepts of niche and habitat.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Amy Goldstein;Jodi So
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Jon DeJong
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jondejong/66
61379095/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Jodi So;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 6.11: Ecosystems is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121396.12: Population Growth Patterns
What starts out very small and has the potential to grow considerably larger?
Trees, of course. But also populations. Give a populati on everything it needs to survive, and the growth of that population will be
tremendous.
Patterns of Population Growth
Populations may show different patterns of growth. The g rowth pattern depends partly on the conditions under which a population
lives.
Exponential Growth
Under ideal conditions, populations of most species can grow at exponential rates. Curve A in Figure below represents exponential
growth. The population starts out growing slowly. As population size increases, the growth rate also increases. The l arger the
population becomes, the faster it grows.
Exponential and Logistic Growth. Curve A shows exponential growth. Curve B shows lo gistic growth.
Logistic Growth
Most populations do not live under ideal conditions. Therefore, most do not grow exponentially. Certainly, no population can keep
growing exponentially for very long. Many factors may limit growth. Often, the factors are density dependent (known as densitydependent factors). These are factors that are influential when the po pulation becomes too large and crowded. For example, th e
population may start to run out of food or be poisone d by its own wastes. As a result, population growth slows a nd population size
levels off. Curve B in Figure above represents this pattern of growth, which is called logistic growth.

6.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12139At what population size does growth start to slow in the logistic model of growth? That depends on the populat ion’s carrying
capacity (see Figure above). The carrying capacity (K) is the largest population size that can be suppo rted in an area without
harming the environment. Population growth hits a ceiling at that size in the logistic growth model.
K-Selected and r-Selected Species
Species can be divided into two basic types when it comes to how their populations grow.
Species that live in stable environments are likely to be K-selected. Their population growth is controlled by density-depe ndent
factors. Population size is generally at or near the ca rrying capacity. These species are represented by curve B i n Figure above.
Species that live in unstable environments are likely to be r-selected. Their potential population growth is rapid. For examp le,
they have large numbers of offspring. However, individuals are likely to die young. Thus, population size is usuall y well below
the carrying capacity. These species are represented b y the lower part of curve A in Figure above. (r is the population growth
rate. See the "Population Growth" concept.)
Summary
Under ideal conditions, populations can grow exponential ly.
The growth rate increases as the population gets larger.
Most populations do not live under ideal conditions and gr ow logistically instead.
Density-dependent factors slow population growth as populati on size nears the carrying capacity.
Review
1. Describe exponential population growth.
2. Describe logistic growth.
3. What are density-dependent factors?
4. What does the carrying capacity refer to?
5. What are K-selected and r-selected species?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: FocalPoint, 2014
Source: www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.12: Population Growth Patterns is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
T e a ch e r's P e t
P opulation Dynamics
P opulation Dynamics
Watch on

6.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121406.13: Human Population
How do humans adapt to their environment?
It could be said that the human population does not have to adapt to its environment, but forces the envi ronment to change to suit
us. We can live practically anywhere we want, eat all t ypes of food, and build all types of housing. Because of all of these
"adaptations," our population has grown, after a slow start, considerably fast.
The Human Population
Humans have been called the most successful "weed spec ies" Earth has ever seen. Like weeds, human populations a re fast
growing. They also disperse rapidly. They have coloni zed habitats from pole to pole. Overall, the human popu lation has had a
pattern of exponential growth, as shown in Figure below. The population increased very slowly at first. As it increased in size, so
did its rate of growth.
Growth of the Human Population. This graph gives an overview of human popul ation growth since 10,000 BC. It took until
about 1800 AD for the number of humans to reach 1 billion. It took only a lit tle over 100 years for the number to reach 2
billion. The human population recently passed the 7 billion mark! Why do yo u think the human population began growing
so fast?
Early Population Growth
Homo sapiens arose about 200,000 years ago in Africa. Early human s lived in small populations of nomadic hunters and g atherers.
They first left Africa about 40,000 years ago. They s oon moved throughout Europe, Asia, and Australia. By 10,000 years ago, they
had reached the Americas. During this long period, birt h and death rates were both fairly high. As a result, population growth was
slow.
Humans invented agriculture about 10,000 years ago. T his provided a bigger, more dependable food supply. It also let them settle
down in villages and cities for the first time. The de ath rate increased because of diseases associated wit h domestic animals and
crowded living conditions. The birth rate increased be cause there was more food and settled life offered ot her advantages. The
combined effect was continued slow population growth.

6.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12140Summary
Early humans lived in small populations of nomadic hunter s and gatherers. Both birth and death rates were fairly hig h. As a
result, human population growth was very slow.
The invention of agriculture increased both birth and d eath rates. The population continued to grow slowly.
Review
1. Describe human population growth rates.
2. How did the invention of agriculture affect human birth a nd death rates? How did it affect human population growth?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: James Cridland
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/jamescridlan
d/613445810/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.13: Human Population is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
NPR i s a n
Ame ri ca n …N P R
7 Billion: How Did We Get So Big So F
7 Billion: How Did We Get So Big So F
Watch on

6.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121416.14: Demographic Transition
Do populations continuously grow?
Not necessarily. The growth of a population depends on a number of issues. Obviously, the average age of the ind ividuals of that
population is important. But other factors, such as th e local economy, also play a role.
Demographic Transition
Major changes in the human population first began dur ing the 1700s in Europe and North America. First death rates fell, followed
somewhat later by birth rates.
Death Rates Fall
Several advances in science and technology led to lower deat h rates in 18 century Europe and North America:
New scientific knowledge of the causes of disease led to impr oved water supplies, sewers, and personal hygiene.
Better farming techniques and machines increased the food supply.
The Industrial Revolution of the 1800s led to new sources o f energy, such as coal and electricity. This increased the efficiency
of the new agricultural machines. It also led to train t ransport, which improved the distribution of food.
For all these reasons, death rates fell, especially i n children. This allowed many more children to surviv e to adulthood, so birth
rates increased. As the gap between birth and death rates widened, the human population grew faster.
Birth Rates Fall
It wasn’t long before birth rates started to fall as we ll in Europe and North America. People started having f ewer children because
large families were no longer beneficial for several reaso ns.
As child death rates fell and machines did more work, farming families no longer needed to have as many children to wor k in
the fields.
Laws were passed that required children to go to school. Therefore, they could no longer work and contribute to their own
support. They became a drain on the family’s income.
Eventually, birth rates fell to match death rates. As a resu lt, population growth slowed to nearly zero.
Stages of the Demographic Transition
These changes in population that occurred in Europe a nd North America have been called the demographic transition. The
transition can be summarized in the following four stage s, which are illustrated in Figure below:
Stage 1—High birth and death rates lead to slow population growth.
Stage 2—The death rate falls but the birth rate remains high, leading to faster population growth.
Stage 3—The birth rate starts to fall, so population gr owth starts to slow.
Stage 4—The birth rate reaches the same low level as the de ath rate, so population growth slows to zero.th

6.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12141
Stages of the Demographic Transition. In the demographic transition, the death rate falls first. After a lag, the birth rate
also falls. How do these changes affect the rate of population growth o ver time?
Summary
Major changes in the human population first began durin g the 1700s. This occurred in Europe and North America.
First, death rates fell while birth rates remained high. Th is led to rapid population growth.
Later, birth rates also fell. As a result, population growth slo wed.
Review
1. How did science and technology affect the human populati on?
2. List two important scientific changes that affected the hu man growth rate.
3. Outline the four stages of the demographic transition as it occurred in Europe and North America.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Charmed88/Wikipedia and
User:NikNaks/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stage5.s
vg
License: Public Domain
6.14: Demographic Transition is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121426.15: Recent and Future Population Growth
Should the population of the planet by characterized by individual country, or as one general
population?
How many people is too many? Is there a limit? Is the re a carrying capacity for humans? These are importa nt questions that do not
have an easy answer. But as our population continues to gr ow, these questions and others should be discussed.
Recent Population Growth
At one time, scientists predicted that all human popul ations would pass through the same demographic transition as Europe and
North America. Now, they are not so sure. Death rates have fallen throughout the world. No country today remain s in Stage 1 of the
transition. However, birth rates are still high in many poor countries. These populations seem to be stuck i n Stage 2. An example is
the African country of Angola. Its population pyramid for 2005 is shown in Figure below. The wide base of the pyramid base
reflects the high birth rate of this population.
Angola’s population pyramid is typical of Stage 2 of the demographic transi tion.
Many other countries have shifted to Stage 3 of the t ransition. Birth rates have started to fall. As a result, population growth is
slowing. An example is Mexico. Its population pyramid for 1998 is shown in Figure below. It reflects a recent fall in the birth rate.

6.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12142
Mexico’s 1998 population pyramid is typical of Stage 3 population. Ho w can you tell that the birth rate has started to fall?
Most developed nations have entered Stage 4. Sweden is an example (see Figure below). The birth rate has been low for many
years in Sweden. Therefore, the rate of population growth is near zero.
Sweden’s 1998 population pyramid shows a population in Stage 4.
In some countries, birth rates have fallen even lower than death rates. As result, their population growth ra tes are negative. In other
words, the populations are shrinking in size. These po pulations have top-heavy population pyramids, like the one for Italy shown in
Figure below. This is a new stage of the demographic transi tion, referred to as Stage 5. You might think that a n egative growth rate
would be a good thing. In fact, it may cause problems. For example, growth-dependent industries decline. Support ing the large
aging population is also a burden for the shrinking you nger population of workers.
This 1998 population pyramid for Italy represents a Stage 5 population.
Future Population Growth
During the month of October 2011, the world's populati on surpassed 7 billion people. It took just 12 years for the population to
increase by a billion people. At this rate, there may be well over 9 billion people by 2050, and easily 10 billion people by 2100.
This raises many questions for both people and the planet.
The human population is now growing by more than 200,0 00 people a day. The human population may well be clo se to its carrying
capacity. It has already harmed the environment. An ev en larger human population may cause severe environ mental problems. This
could lead to outbreaks of disease, starvation, and global conflict. There are three potential solutions:
1. Use technology to make better use of resources to supp ort more people.
2. Change behaviors to reduce human numbers and how much h umans consume.
3. Distribute resources more fairly among all the world’s people.
Which solution would you choose?

6.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12142"If growth continued at this rate...by 2600 we would all be standing literally shoulder to
shoulder" - Steven Hawking
Census Update: What the World Will Look like in 2050
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2050, there will be 9.4 billion people:
India will be the most populous nation, surpassing China sometime around 2025.
The U.S. will remain the third most populous nation, with a po pulation of 423 million (up from 308 million in 2010).
Declining birth rates in Japan and Russia will cause them t o fall from their current positions as the 9th and 10th m ost populous
nations, respectively, to 16th and 17th.
Nigeria will have a population of 402 million, up from 166 mi llion people.
Ethiopia's population will likely triple, from 91 million to 278 million, making the East African nation one of the t op 10 most
populous countries in the world.
So what does all this mean?
The African continent is expected to experience signif icant population growth in the coming decades, which coul d compound
existing food supply problems in some African nations.
Immigration and differing birth rates among races will ch ange the ethnic composition of the U.S.
Population booms in Africa and India, the decline of Russi a, and the expected plateau of China will all change the m akeup of
the estimated 9.4 billion people who will call Earth home i n 2050.
Summary
Other countries have completed similar demographic tra nsitions. However, some countries seem stalled at early s tages. They
have high birth rates and rapidly growing populations.
The total human population may have to stop growing eve ntually. Even if we reduce our use of resources and distri bute them
more fairly, at some point the carrying capacity will be reached.
Review
1. Why was a fifth stage added to the demographic transiti on model? Describe a population at this stage.
2. Which stage of the demographic transition is represen ted by the population pyramid in the Figure below? Why?
N a tion a l Ge ogra ph ic
7 Billion, National Geographic Magaz
7 Billion, National Geographic Magaz
Watch on

6.15.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12142
3. Evaluate how well the original demographic transition model represents human populations today.
4. What is the human population problem? What are som e potential solutions? Which solution do you think is b est?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: ARENA Creative, 2014
Source: www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on data
from the U.S. Census Bureau
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: U.S. Census Bureau
Source:
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb/country.php
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: U.S. Census Bureau
Source:
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb/country.php
License: Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: U.S. Census Bureau
Source:
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb/country.php
License: Public Domain
[Figure 6]Credit: U.S. Census Bureau
Source:
www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb/country.php
License: Public Domain
6.15: Recent and Future Population Growth is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121436.16: Biodiversity
What is biodiversity?
How many species exist? We don't really know for sure. But all those species together, from the smallest bacteria, the deadliest
protist, the most bizarre fungi, the prettiest plant, and t he biggest mammal, compile the diversity of life, or bio diversity.
What Is Biodiversity?
Biodiversity refers to the variety of life and its processes, incl uding the variety of living organisms, the genetic dif ferences among
them, and the communities and ecosystems in which they occur. Scientists have identified about 1.9 million sp ecies alive today.
They are divided into the six kingdoms of life shown in Figure below. Scientists are still discovering new species. Th us, they do
not know for sure how many species really exist today. Most est imates range from 5 to 30 million species.
Known species represent only a fraction of all species that exist on E arth.
Cogs and Wheels
“The first rule of intelligent tinkering is to save all the pieces.” --attributed to Aldo Leopold, but probably a shorte ned version of:
“To save every cog and wheel is the first precaution of int elligent tinkering.” - Aldo Leopold, Round River: from the Journals
of Aldo Leopold, 1953
What are the “cogs” and “wheels” of life?
Although the concept of biodiversity did not become a vital component of biology and political science un til nearly 40 years after
Aldo Leopold’s death in 1948, Leopold – often conside red the father of modern ecology - would have likely found the term an
appropriate description of his “cogs and wheels.” Lite rally, biodiversity is the many different kinds (diversity) of life (bio-).
Biologists, however, always alert to levels of organiza tion, have identified three measures of life’s variati on. Species diversity best
fits the literal translation: the number of differen t species in a particular ecosystem or on Earth. A se cond measure recognizes
variation within a species: differences among individ uals or populations make up genetic diversity. Finally, as Leopold clearly
understood, the “cogs and wheels” include not only li fe but also the land, sea, and air that support life. Ecosystem diversity
describes the many types of functional units formed by living communities interacting with their environ ments. Although all three
levels of diversity are important, the term biodiversity usually refers to species diversity.

6.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12143Science Friday: The Unlikely Tale of a Tenacious Snail
For over 70 years, no one had seen the oblong rocksn ail. Declared extinct in 2000, the species was consider ed to be another native
Alabaman mollusk gone and forgotten. But one day in t he spring of 2011, biology grad student Nathan Whela n picked up a tiny
rock and got a big surprise.
Further Reading
Importance of Biodiversity
Summary
Biodiversity refers to the number of species in an ecosystem or the biosphere as a whole.
Review
1. What is biodiversity?
2. What are the three measures of life’s variations?
Scie n ce F ilm m a kin g Tips
Biodiversity - from "The Wild Classro
Biodiversity - from "The Wild Classro
Watch on
Sc iF ri
The Unlikely T ale of a T enacious Sna
The Unlikely T ale of a T enacious Sna
Watch on

6.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121433. What is meant by ecosystem diversity?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Barbara Akre and Jin Yu, based on
data from
http://cnx.org/content/m12174/latest/ and
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodiversity;Flower:
User:Ulhaspa/Wikimedia Commons; Fish:
J. Petersen; Car: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Flower:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rosy_pe
riwinkle.jpg; Fish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ostracio
n_cubicus.JPG
License: CC BY-NC; (Flower) CC BY 3.0;
(Fish) CC BY 2.5; (Car) CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Barbara Akre and Jin Yu, based on
data from
http://cnx.org/content/m12174/latest/ and
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodiversity;Flower:
User:Ulhaspa/Wikimedia Commons; Fish:
J. Petersen; Car: CK-12
Foundation;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Flower:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rosy_pe
riwinkle.jpg; Fish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ostracio
n_cubicus.JPG
License: CC BY-NC; (Flower) CC BY 3.0;
(Fish) CC BY 2.5; (Car) CC BY-NC 3.0
6.16: Biodiversity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121446.17: Importance of Biodiversity
Why is biodiversity important?
Think about how many species exist. Most likely well ov er 5 million. Now think about how much information abou t those species
we do not yet understand. We do not know what we can learn fr om them.
Why Is Biodiversity Important?
Human beings benefit in many ways from biodiversity. Biodiversity has direct economic benefits. It also p rovides services to
entire ecosystems.
Economic Benefits of Biodiversity
The diversity of species provides humans with a wide rang e of economic benefits:
Wild plants and animals maintain a valuable pool of genetic variation. This is important because domestic species are
genetically uniform. This puts them at great risk of dyi ng out due to disease.
Other organisms provide humans with many different products. Timb er, fibers, adhesives, dyes, and rubber are just a few.
Certain species may warn us of toxins in the environmen t. When the peregrine falcon nearly went extinct, for exam ple, it
warned us of the dangers of DDT.
More than half of the most important prescription drugs come from wild species. Only a fraction of species have yet be en
studied for their medical potential.
Other living things provide inspiration for engineerin g and technology. For example, the car design in Figure below was based
on a fish.

6.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12144
From flowers to fish, biodiversity benefits humans in many ways.
Ecosystem Services of Biodiversity
Biodiversity generally increases the productivity a nd stability of ecosystems. It helps ensure that at least some species will survi ve
environmental change. It also provides many other ecosystem services. For example:
Plants and algae maintain the atmosphere. During photosynth esis, they add oxygen and remove carbon dioxide.
Plants help prevent soil erosion. They also improve soil qual ity when they decompose.
Microorganisms purify water in rivers and lakes. They also return nutrients to the so il.
Bacteria fix nitrogen and make it available to plants. Other bact eria recycle the nitrogen from organic wastes and remains of
dead organisms.
Insects and birds pollinate flowering plants, including cr op plants.
Natural predators control insect pests. They reduce the nee d for expensive pesticides, which may harm people and othe r living
things.
Summary
Biodiversity has direct economic benefits. It also prov ides services to entire ecosystems.
Review
1. List three economic benefits of biodiversity.
2. Identify three ecosystem services of biodiversity.
TED-Ed
Why is biodiversity so important? - K
Why is biodiversity so important? - K
Watch on

6.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121443. Predict what would happen to other organisms in an ecosys tem in which all the decomposers went extinct?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flower: User:Ulhaspa/Wikimedia
Commons; Fish: J. Petersen; Car: CK-12
Foundation
Source: Flower:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rosy_pe
riwinkle.jpg; Fish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ostracio
n_cubicus.JPG
License: Flower: CC BY 3.0; Fish: CC BY
2.5; Car: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Flower: User:Ulhaspa/Wikimedia
Commons; Fish: J. Petersen; Car: CK-12
Foundation;Barbara Akre and Jin Yu, based
on data from
http://cnx.org/content/m12174/latest/ and
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Biodiversity
Source: Flower:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rosy_pe
riwinkle.jpg; Fish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ostracio
n_cubicus.JPG; CK-12 Foundation
License: Flower: CC BY 3.0; Fish: CC BY
2.5; Car: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
6.17: Importance of Biodiversity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121456.18: Mass Extinction
This is one of the most powerful birds in the world. Could it go extinct?
The Philippine Eagle, also known as the Monkey-eating E agle, is among the rarest, largest, and most powerful birds in the world. It
is critically endangered, mainly due to massive loss of habitat due to deforestation in most of its range. Killing a Philippine Eagle is
punishable under Philippine law by twelve years in jail a nd heavy fines.
Human Actions and the Sixth Mass Extinction
Over 99 percent of all species that ever lived on Ear th have gone extinct. Five mass extinctions are record ed in the fossil record.
They were caused by major geologic and climatic event s. Evidence shows that a sixth mass extinction is occurring now. Unlike
previous mass extinctions, the sixth extinction is due to human actions.
Some scientists consider the sixth extinction to have begun with early hominids during the Pleistocene. They are blamed for overkilling big mammals such as mammoths. Since then, human actions have had an ever greater impact on other s pecies. The present
rate of extinction is between 100 and 100,000 species per year. In 100 years, we could lose more than half of Earth’s remaining
species.
Causes of Extinction
The single biggest cause of extinction today is habitat loss. Agriculture, forestry, mining, and urbanization hav e disturbed or
destroyed more than half of Earth’s land area. In t he U.S., for example, more than 99 percent of tall-grass prairies have been lost.
Other causes of extinction today include:
Exotic species introduced by humans into new habitats. They may carry d isease, prey on native species, and disrupt food webs.
Often, they can out-compete native species because they l ack local predators. An example is described in Figure below.
Over-harvesting of fish, trees, and other organisms. This thre atens their survival and the survival of species that depend on
them.
Global climate change, largely due to the burning of fos sil fuels. This is raising Earth’s air and ocean temperatu res. It is also
raising sea levels. These changes threaten many species.
Pollution, which adds chemicals, heat, and noise to the en vironment beyond its capacity to absorb them. This caus es widespread
harm to organisms.
Human overpopulation, which is crowding out other species. I t also makes all the other causes of extinction worse.

6.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12145
The brown tree snake is an exotic species that has caused many extinc tions on Pacific islands such as Guam.
Effects of Extinction
The results of a study released in the summer of 201 1 have shown that the decline in the numbers of large predators like sharks,
lions and wolves is disrupting Earth's ecosystem in all kinds of unusual ways. The study, conducted by scient ists from 22 different
institutions in six countries, confirmed the sixth mass extinction. The study states that this mass extinction differs from previous
ones because it is entirely driven by human activit y through changes in land use, climate, pollution, hu nting, fishing and poaching.
The effects of the loss of these large predators can be seen in the oceans and on land.
Fewer cougars in the western US state of Utah led to an expl osion of the deer population. The deer ate more vegetatio n, which
altered the path of local streams and lowered overall biodiversity.
In Africa, where lions and leopards are being lost to poac hers, there is a surge in the number of olive baboons, who are
transferring intestinal parasites to humans living nearby.
In the oceans, industrial whaling led a change in the diets of killer whales, who eat more sea lions, seals, and otters a nd have
dramatically lowered the population counts of those specie s.
The study concludes that the loss of big predators ha s likely driven many of the pandemics, population col lapses and ecosystem
shifts the Earth has seen in recent centuries.
Disappearing Frogs
Around the world, frogs are declining at an alarming rate due to threats like pollution, disease, and clim ate change. Frogs bridge the
gap between water and land habitats, making them the first indicators of ecosystem changes.

6.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12145Nonnative Species
Scoop a handful of critters out of the San Francisco Ba y and you'll find many organisms from far away shores. Invasive kinds of
mussels, fish, and more are choking out native speci es, challenging experts around the state to change th e human behavior that
brings them here.
How You Can Help Protect Biodiversity
There are many steps you can take to help protect biodiversi ty. For example:
Consume wisely. Reduce your consumption wherever possible. Re-use or recycle rather than throw out and buy new. Whe n you
do buy new, choose products that are energy efficient and durable.
Avoid plastics. Plastics are made from petroleum and produce toxic waste.
Go organic. Organically grown food is better for your health. It also protects the environment from pesticides and excessiv e
nutrients in fertilizers.
Save energy. Unplug electronic equipment and turn off lig hts when not in use. Take mass transit instead of driving.
K QED
Disappearing Frogs | KQED QUEST
Disappearing Frogs | KQED QUEST
Watch on
K QED
San Francisco Bay Invaders - KQED Q
San Francisco Bay Invaders - KQED Q
Watch on

6.18.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12145Lost Salmon
Why is the salmon population of Northern California s o important? Salmon do not only provide food for huma ns, but also supply
necessary nutrients for their ecosystems. Because of a sharp decline in their numbers, in part due to human interference, the entire
salmon fishing season off California and Oregon was ca nceled in both 2008 and 2009. The species in the mos t danger of extinction
is the California coho salmon.
Summary
Evidence shows that a sixth mass extinction is occurring. The single biggest cause is habitat loss caused by human actions.
There are many steps you can take to help protect biodiversi ty. For example, you can use less energy.
Review
1. How is human overpopulation related to the sixth mass ext inction?
2. Why might the brown tree snake or the Philippine Eagle serv e as “poster species” for causes of the sixth mass extin ction?
3. Describe a hypothetical example showing how rising sea l evels due to global warming might cause extinction.
4. Create a poster that conveys simple tips for protecting biodiversity.
K QED
California' s Lost Salmon - KQED QUE
California' s Lost Salmon - KQED QUE
Watch on

6.18.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12145Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: National Park Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brown_t
ree_snake_Boiga_irregularis_2_USGS_Pho
tograph.jpg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/wanderingse
oul61/1503897694/in/photolist-3hTSoA7x5ZxA-9Dvc1e-ph1dwn-74oBbvfpLRzV-a16W4D-tdfXGw-p56eYijARvmo-HH38a-6S8Xdn-p5FcdJ-5Y1mxr6mvhzP-fqjAPz-jEuSET-9futhb-6mzsgN6mzrEb-6mvgUH-6mzpHf-6mzp4C7eEmr1-8WXynB-8X1zb7-qNsmVr8PJopF-8DNGbR-7Pv1sV-8vtfL9-3qaAqq94f7sQ-9ww1cx-9ZKqjM-8QT5i7aGXVj6-8SzxVu-jEu3Nn-9ah1WHDYcJB-9f18hz-7ehNNi-9iA9HM-78U7Ru3qaARy-kGnUpR-5Q7pL8-5RCgGX9V2J3X
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: National Park Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brown_t
ree_snake_Boiga_irregularis_2_USGS_Pho
tograph.jpg
License: Public Domain
6.18: Mass Extinction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Elle n M a cArth u r F ou n da tion
Explaining the Circular Economy and
Explaining the Circular Economy and
Watch on

6.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121526.19: Resources
Renewable or nonrenewable, what's the difference?
That's like asking the difference between having an endless supply and having a limited supply. Will this planet eventually run out
of oil? Probably. So oil is a nonrenewable resource.
Renewable and Nonrenewable Resources
A natural resource is something supplied by nature that helps support l ife. When you think of natural resources, you may th ink of
minerals and fossil fuels. However, ecosystems and the s ervices they provide are also natural resources. Biodiversity is a natural
resource as well.
Renewable Resources
Renewable resources can be replenished by natural processes as quickly as humans use them. Examples include sunlight and
wind. They are in no danger of being used up (see Figure below). Metals and other minerals are renewable too. They are not
destroyed when they are used and can be recycled.
Wind is a renewable resource. Wind turbines like this one harness just a tiny f raction of wind energy.
Living things are considered to be renewable. This is b ecause they can reproduce to replace themselves. However, they can be
over-used or misused to the point of extinction. To b e truly renewable, they must be used sustainably. Sustainable use is the use of
resources in a way that meets the needs of the present and also preserves the resources for future generations.

6.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12152Nonrenewable Resources
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that exist in fixed amounts an d can be used up. Examples include fossil fuels such
as petroleum, coal, and natural gas. These fuels form ed from the remains of plants over hundreds of mill ions of years. We are using
them up far faster than they could ever be replaced. At current rates of use, petroleum will be used up i n just a few decades and coal
in less than 300 years. Nuclear power is also considered to be a nonrenewable resource because it uses up ur anium, which will
sooner or later run out. It also produces harmful wastes t hat are difficult to dispose of safely.
Gasoline is made from crude oil. The crude oil pumped out of the gro und is a black liquid called petroleum, which is a
nonrenewable resource.
Coal is another nonrenewable resource.
Doodle Scie n ce
Renewable Energy Resources: P art 1
Renewable Energy Resources: P art 1
Watch on

6.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12152Turning Trash Into Treasure
Scientists at the Massachusetts of Technology are turni ng trash into coal, which can readily be used to heat homes and cook food in
developing countries. This coal burns cleaner than that f rom fossil fuels. It also save a tremendous amount of ene rgy.
Summary
Renewable resources can be replaced by natural processes a s quickly as humans use them. Examples include sunlight and wind.
Nonrenewable resources exist in fixed amounts. They can be use d up. Examples include fossil fuels such as coal.
Review
1. Define natural resource. Give an example.
2. Distinguish between renewable and nonrenewable resources and give examples.
Doodle Scie n ce
Non-Renewable Energy Resources | G
Non-Renewable Energy Resources | G
Watch on
M ITK 12V ide os
Engineering T rash Into T reasure (Scie
Engineering T rash Into T reasure (Scie
Watch on

6.19.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121523. Infer factors that determine whether a natural resour ce is renewable or nonrenewable.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Richard Lewis
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oatsy40/9333
525319/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Patrick Finnegan;Richard Lewis
Source: http://www.flickr.com/photos/vaxo-matic/2621902438/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oatsy40/9333
525319/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:Images_of_Money
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/59937401@
N07/5857082765/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Richard Lewis
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oatsy40/9333
525319/
License: CC BY 2.0
6.19: Resources is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121546.20: Soil and Water
Could this land be used for agriculture?
Probably not. The quality of soil is very important in determining what can grow in a particular area. Good soil is not so easy to
come by. Soil should be considered another resource that we, as a population, must strive to protect.
Soil and Water Resources
Theoretically, soil and water are renewable resources. Howe ver, they may be ruined by careless human actions.
Soil
Soil is a mixture of eroded rock, minerals, partly decomp osed organic matter, and other materials. It is essent ial for plant growth, so
it is the foundation of terrestrial ecosystems. Soil is important for other reasons as well. For example, it removes toxins from water
and breaks down wastes.
Although renewable, soil takes a very long time to fo rm—up to hundreds of millions of years. So, for human purposes, soil is a
nonrenewable resource. It is also constantly depleted of nutrients through careless use, and eroded by wind a nd water. For example,
misuse of soil caused a huge amount of it to simply blow away in the 1930s during the Dust Bowl (see Figure below). Soil must be
used wisely to preserve it for the future. Conservation practices include contour plowing and terracing. Bo th reduce soil erosion.
Soil also must be protected from toxic wastes.
The Dust Bowl occurred between 1933 and 1939 in Oklahoma and other southwester n U.S. states. Plowing had exposed
prairie soil. Drought turned the soil to dust. Intense dust storms blew away vast quantities of the soil. Much of the soil blew
all the way to the Atlantic Ocean.

6.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12154Water
Water is essential for all life on Earth. For human u se, water must be fresh. Of all the water on Earth, only 1 percent is fresh, liquid
water. Most of the rest is either salt water in the ocean o r ice in glaciers and ice caps.
Although water is constantly recycled through the water cycle, it is in danger. Over-use and pollution of freshwat er threaten the
limited supply that people depend on. Already, more t han 1 billion people worldwide do not have adequate f reshwater. With the
rapidly growing human population, the water shortage is li kely to get worse.
Too Much of a Good Thing
Water pollution comes from many sources. One of the b iggest sources is runoff. Runoff picks up chemicals such as fertilizer from
agricultural fields, lawns, and golf courses. It car ries the chemicals to bodies of water. The added nutr ients from fertilizer often
cause excessive growth of algae, creating algal blooms (see Figure below). The algae use up oxygen in the water so that other
aquatic organisms cannot survive. This has occurred ov er large areas of the ocean, creating dead zones, where low oxygen levels
have killed all ocean life. A very large dead zone e xists in the Gulf of Mexico. Measures that can help prev ent these problems
include cutting down on fertilizer use. Preserving wetland s also helps because wetlands filter runoff water.
Algal Bloom. Nutrients from fertilizer in runoff caused this algal bloo m.
F ood a n d Agricu ltu re Orga n iza tion of th e Un ite d N a t …
The Status of the World’ s Soil Resour
The Status of the World’ s Soil Resour
Watch on
N a tion a l Ge ogra ph ic
Our Thirsty World | National Geograp
Our Thirsty World | National Geograp
Watch on

6.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12154Summary
Soil and water are renewable resources but may be ruined by careless human actions. Soil can be depleted of nutrien ts. It can
also be eroded by wind or water.
Over-use and pollution of freshwater threaten the limite d supply that people depend on.
Review
1. What is soil?
2. Why is soil considered a nonrenewable resource?
3. How much water is drinkable?
4. Why would you expect a dead zone to start near the mouth of a river, where the river flows into a body of water?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Dr. Jennifer L. Graham/U.S.
Geological Survey
Source:
gallery.usgs.gov/photos/06_30_2010_hLc5
FSq11Y_06_30_2010_11#.T767jMV62Sp
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Left: National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration; Right: U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Source: Left:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dust_St
orm_Texas_1935.jpg; Right:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dust_Bo
wl_-_Dallas; _South_Dakota_1936.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Dr. Jennifer L. Graham/U.S.
Geological Survey
Source:
gallery.usgs.gov/photos/06_30_2010_hLc5
FSq11Y_06_30_2010_11#.T767jMV62Sp
License: Public Domain
6.20: Soil and Water is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121556.21: Air Pollution
Why is the atmosphere important?
Well, it contains all of the air that we breathe. The atmosphere also has other roles and functions, so whe n we interfere with the
atmosphere, we interfere with some important biological p rocesses. And this can have consequences.
The Atmosphere
The atmosphere plays an important part in maintaining Earth’s freshwa ter supply. It is part of the water cycle. It refills lakes and
rivers with precipitation. The atmosphere also provid es organisms with gases needed for life. It contains ox ygen for cellular
respiration and carbon dioxide for photosynthesis.
Air Pollution
Air pollution comes from many sources, including waste expelled into the atmosphere by numerous factories.
Earth’s atmosphere is vast. However, it has been seriously polluted by human activities. Air pollution consists of chemical
substances and particles released into the atmosphere, mainly by human actions. The major cause of outdoo r air pollution is the
burning of fossil fuels. Power plants, motor vehicles, an d home furnaces all burn fossil fuels and contribute to the problem (see
Table below). Ranching and using chemicals such as fertilize rs also cause air pollution. Erosion of soil in farm fields and
construction sites adds dust particles to the air as well. Fumes from building materials, furniture, carpets, and paint add toxic
chemicals to indoor air.

6.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12155Pollutant Example/Major Source Problem
Sulfur oxides (SO) Coal-fired power plants Acid Rain
Nitrogen oxides (NO) Motor vehicle exhaust Acid Rain
Carbon monoxide (CO) Motor vehicle exhaust Poisoning
Carbon dioxide (CO) All fossil fuel burning Global Warm ing
Particulate matter (smoke, dust) Wood and coal burning R espiratory disease, Global Dimming
Mercury Coal-fired power plants, medical waste Neurotoxi city
Smog Coal burning Respiratory problems; eye irritation
Ground-level ozone Motor vehicle exhaust Respiratory pr oblems; eye irritation
In humans, air pollution causes respiratory and card iovascular problems. In fact, more people die each ye ar from air pollution than
automobile accidents. Air pollution also affects ecosy stems worldwide by causing acid rain, ozone depletion, and global warming.
Ways to reduce air pollution from fossil fuels inclu de switching to nonpolluting energy sources (such as s olar energy) and using
less energy. What are some ways you could use less energy?
Acid Rain
All life relies on a relatively narrow range of pH, or acidity. That’s because protein structure and funct ion are very sensitive to pH.
Air pollution can cause precipitation to become acid ic. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides, mainly from motor vehic le exhaust and coal
burning, create acids when they combine with water in the air. The acids lower the pH of precipitation, f orming acid rain. If acid
rain falls on the ground, it may damage soil and soil organisms. If it falls on plants, it may kill them (see Figure below). If it falls
into lakes, it lowers the pH of the water and kills aquatic organisms.
Effects of Acid Rain. These trees in a European forest were killed by ac id rain.
Ozone Depletion
There are two types of ozone. You can think of them as bad ozone and good ozone. Bot h are affected by air pollution.
Bad ozone forms near the ground when sunlight reacts with po llutants in the air. Ground-level ozone is harmful to the
respiratory systems of humans and other animals.
Good ozone forms in a thin layer high up in the atmosphere, be tween 15 and 35 kilometers above Earth’s surface. This ozon e
layer shields Earth from most of the sun’s harmful UV radi ation. It plays an important role in preventing mutati ons in the DNA
of organisms.
Unfortunately, the layer of good ozone is being destro yed by air pollution. The chief culprits are chlori ne and bromine gases. They
are released in aerosol sprays, coolants, and other p roducts. Loss of ozone has created an ozone hole over Antarctica. Ozonex
x

6.21.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12155depletion results in higher levels of UV radiation re aching Earth. In humans, this increases skin cancers and eye cataracts. It also
disturbs the nitrogen cycle, kills plankton, and dis rupts ocean food webs. The total loss of the ozone la yer would be devastating to
most life. Its rate of loss has slowed with restrictions on p ollutants, but it is still at risk.
Summary
Air pollution consists of chemical substances and particl es released into the air, mainly by human actions.
The major cause of outdoor air pollution is the burning o f fossil fuels.
Indoor air can also be polluted.
Air pollution causes acid rain, ozone depletion, and glob al warming.
Review
1. What two environmental effects are mainly associated with the burning of fossil fuels?
2. Explain how air pollution is related to acid rain and oz one depletion.
3. What benefits does the ozone layer provide?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Nipik/Wikimedia
Commons;Courtesy of Pat Temple, US
Forest Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acid_rai
n_woods1.JPG;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alder_s
howing_ozone_discolouration.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Flickr:kishjar
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kishjar/12240
056764/
License: CC BY 2.0; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Nipik/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acid_rai
n_woods1.JPG
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
6.21: Air Pollution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Air P ollution
Air P ollution
Watch on

6.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14916.22: Energy Flow
What is happening inside each leaf and blade of grass?
Photosynthesis. Maybe the most important biochemical r eaction of Earth. As sunlight shines down on this for est, the sunlight is
being absorbed, and the energy from that sunlight is being transformed into chemical energy. That chemi cal energy is then
distributed to all other living organisms in the ecosystem.
Flow of Energy
To survive, ecosystems need a constant influx of energ y. Energy enters ecosystems in the form of sunlight o r chemical compounds.
Some organisms use this energy to make food. Other organisms g et energy by eating the food.
Producers
Producers are organisms that produce food for themselves and other organisms. They use energy and simple inorganic molecules
to make organic compounds. The stability of producers is vital to ecosystems because all organisms need org anic molecules.
Producers are also called autotrophs. There are two basic types of autotrophs: photoautotrop hs and chemoautotrophs.
1. Photoautotrophs use energy from sunlight to make food by photosynthe sis. They include plants, algae, and certain bacteria
(see Figure below).
2. Chemoautotrophs use energy from chemical compounds to make food by che mosynthesis. They include some bacteria and
also archaea. Archaea are microorganisms that resemble bacteria.

6.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1491
Different types of photoautotrophs are important in different ecosyst ems.
Consumers
Consumers are organisms that depend on other organi sms for food. They take in organic molecules by esse ntially “eating” other
living things. They include all animals and fungi. (Fungi don't really “eat”; they absorb nut rients from other organisms.) They also
include many bacteria and even a few plants, such as the pitcher plant shown in Figure below. Consumers are also called
heterotrophs. Heterotrophs are classified by what they eat:
Herbivores consume producers such as plants or algae. They are a ne cessary link between producers and other consumers.
Examples include deer, rabbits, and mice.
Carnivores consume animals. Examples include lions, polar bears, hawks, frogs, salmon, an d spiders. Carnivores that are
unable to digest plants and must eat only animals are called obligate carnivores. Other carnivores can digest plan ts but do not
commonly eat them.
Omnivores consume both plants and animals. They include humans, pigs, brown bears, gulls, crows, and som e species of fish.
Pitcher Plant. Virtually all plants are producers. This pitcher plant i s an exception. It consumes insects. It traps them in a
sticky substance in its “pitcher.” Then it secretes enzymes that break down the insects and release nutrients. Which type of
consumer is a pitcher plant?
Decomposers
When organisms die, they leave behind energy and mat ter in their remains. Decomposers break down the remains and other wastes
and release simple inorganic molecules back to the environment. Producers can then use the molecules to make new organic
compounds. The stability of decomposers is essential t o every ecosystem. Decomposers are classified by the ty pe of organic matter
they break down:
Scavengers consume the soft tissues of dead animals. Examples of scav engers include vultures, raccoons, and blowflies.
Detritivores consume detritus —the dead leaves, animal feces, and other organic debris th at collects on the soil or at the bottom
of a body of water. On land, detritivores include earthworms, millipedes, a nd dung beetles (see Figure below). In water,
detritivores include “bottom feeders” such as sea cucumbe rs and catfish.

6.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1491Saprotrophs are the final step in decomposition. They feed on any remaining organic matter that is left after other decompo sers
do their work. Saprotrophs include fungi, bacteria and s ingle-celled protozoa. Fungi are the only organisms that ca n decompose
wood.
Dung Beetle. This dung beetle is rolling a ball of feces to its nest to feed its young.
KQED: Banana Slugs: The Ultimate Recyclers
One of the most beloved and iconic native species wit hin the old growth redwood forests of California is t he Pacific Banana Slug.
These slimy friends of the forest are the ultimate recy clers. Feeding on fallen leaves, mushrooms or even dead animals, they play a
pivotal role in replenishing the soil. QUEST goes to He nry Cowell Redwoods State Park near Santa Cruz, Californi a on a hunt to
find Ariolimax dolichophallus, a bright yellow slug with a very big personality.
Summary
Ecosystems require constant inputs of energy from sunlig ht or chemicals.
Producers use energy and inorganic molecules to make fo od.
Consumers take in food by eating producers or other living things.
Decomposers break down dead organisms and other organic was tes and release inorganic molecules back to the environm ent.
Review
1. Identify three different types of consumers. Name an exa mple of each type.
2. What are photoautotrophs? Give an example of one.
3. What can you infer about an ecosystem that depends on chemoautotrophs for food?
4. What is the role of decomposers?
K QED
Banana Slugs Unpeeled: Science on
Banana Slugs Unpeeled: Science on
Watch on

6.22.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14915. What do scavengers do? Give an example of a scavenger.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Amy Goldstein
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Tree: User:Haabet/Wikimedia
Commons; Grass:
User:Polishname/Wikipedia; Diatoms:
Gordon T. Taylor/Stony Brook
University/NOAA; Seaweed:
User:Flyingdream/Wikipedia;
Cyanobacteria: Barry H. Rosen/USGS;
Purple bacteria: Janice Carr/CDC
Source: Tree:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Raunkia
er.jpg; Grass:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TallWild
Grass.jpg; Diatoms:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diatoms
_through_the_microscope.jpg; Seaweed:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Codiumf
ragile.jpg; Cyanobacteria:
http://microbiology.usgs.gov/image_gallery
_cyanobacteria_phormidium.html; Purple
bacteria: (ID
9999)phil.cdc.gov/phil/details.asp
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Tim Mansfield
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/timbomb/406
235908/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Amy Goldstein
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 6.22: Energy Flow is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121566.23: Global Warming
Is the Earth really fragile?
Maybe not the planet, but how about the ecosystems? It may soon be hard to argue that global climate chan ge does not exist.
Climate change can definitely be seen in numerous ecosyste ms. So what will we do about it?
Global Climate Change
Another major problem caused by air pollution is glob al climate change. Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil
fuels increase the natural greenhouse effect. This raises the temperature of Earth’s surface.
What Is The Greenhouse Effect?
The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of Earth’s atmosphere. It occu rs when gases in the atmosphere radiate the sun’s hea t
back down to Earth’s surface (see Figure below). Otherwise, the heat would escape into space. Wit hout the greenhouse effect,
Earth’s surface temperature would be far cooler than it is. In fact, it would be too col d to support life as we know it.
The Greenhouse Effect. Without greenhouse gases, most of the sun’s ener gy would be radiated from Earth’s surface back
out to space.

6.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12156Global Warming
Global warming refers to a recent increase in Earth’s average surf ace temperature (see Figure below). During the past century, the
temperature has risen by almost 1°C (about 1.3°F). Th at may not seem like much. But consider that just 10° C is the difference
between an ice-free and an ice-covered Earth.
The average annual temperature on Earth has been rising for the past 100 years.
Most scientists agree that global warming is caused by m ore carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (see Figure below). This increases
the greenhouse effect. There is more carbon dioxide m ainly because of the burning of fossil fuels. Destroyin g forests is another
cause. With fewer forests, less carbon dioxide is removed fro m the atmosphere by photosynthesis.
This graph shows the recent trend in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Effects of Climate Change
How has global warming affected Earth and its life? Some of its e ffects include:
Decline in cold-adapted species such as polar bears.
Melting of glaciers and rising sea levels.
Coastal flooding and shoreline erosion.
Heat-related human health problems.
More droughts and water shortages.
Changing patterns of precipitation.
Increasing severity of storms.
Major crop losses.
KQED: Climate Watch: California at the Tipping Point
The world's climate is changing and California is no w being affected in both dramatic and subtle ways. In 20 08, scientists
determined that California’s temperatures increased b y more than 2.1°F during the last century. What’s more, the data showed that
human activity has played a significant role in tha t climate change. "What's just 2 degrees?" you may wond er. But, as the science
shows, just 2 degrees is extremely significant.

6.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12156What does all this temperature change mean? For start ers, declining mountain snowpack and prolonged droug ht conditions could
pose a threat to limited water supplies. Heat waves are projected to be longer, bring ing increased danger from wildfires and heatrelated deaths. Rising sea levels due to temperature s hifts jeopardize life in coastal areas, both for human communities and the
plants and animals that rely on intertidal and rich wetland ecosystems. Also, more precipitation is expected to fall as rain rather
than snow, thereby increasing the risk of floods. And, as heat increases the formation of smog, poor air qu ality could get even
worse.
Climate change may also profoundly affect the econo my in California and elsewhere. Shorter ski seasons and damage to the marine
ecosystem mean a reduction in tourism. Water shortages mean issues with the commercial and recrea tional fishing industry, and
higher temperatures will affect crop growth and quali ty, weakening the agricultural industry, to name just a few of the economic
issues associated with climate change.
KQED: Acidic Seas
Melting glaciers, rising temperatures and droughts ar e all impacts of global warming. But how does global war ming actually affect
the oceans? The sea, it turns out, absorbs carbon diox ide emissions. The ocean acts like a giant sponge, ab sorbing carbon dioxide
emissions from the air. And as we add more and more carb on dioxide to air by burning fossil fuels, the ocea n is absorbing it. On
one level, it's done us a big favor. Scientists say that we would be experiencing much more extreme climate c hange were it not for
the ocean's ability to remove the heat-trapping gas. Ho wever, these emissions are causing the oceans to become more acidic.
Changing pH levels threaten entire marine food webs, from coral reefs to salmon.
K QED
Climate Watch: California at the Tipp
Climate Watch: California at the Tipp
Watch on
K QED
Acidic Seas - KQED QUEST
Acidic Seas - KQED QUEST
Watch on

6.23.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12156As carbon dioxide levels increase in the atmosphere, the levels also increase in the oceans. What effect s does this have? Can ocean
acidification make it difficult for sea life to produc e their hard exoskeletons?
What Can Be Done?
Efforts to reduce future global warming mainly involv e energy use. We need to use less energy, for example, by driving more fuelefficient cars. We also need to switch to energy sourc es that produce less carbon dioxide, such as solar and wi nd energy. At the
same time, we can increase the amount of carbon dioxi de that is removed from air. We can stop destroying f orests and plant new
ones.
Summary
Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the natural greenhouse effect. This is raisi ng the
temperature of Earth’s surface, and is called global warmin g.
Review
1. How does air pollution contribute to global warming?
2. What is the greenhouse effect?
K QED
Y our Videos on QUEST: Dan Gri n of
Y our Videos on QUEST: Dan Gri n of
Watch on

6.23.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121563. What are three effects of global warming?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Steven Lai and Zachary Wilson,
based on data from the Carbon Dioxide
Information Analysis Center
(cdiac.ornl.gov/ftp/trends/co2/maunaloa.co
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency
Source:
http://epa.gov/climatechange/indicators/slid
eshow.html?
placeValuesBeforeTB_=savedValues&#38;
TB_iframe=true&#38; height=550&#38;
width=800
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: NASA, modified by Zachary
Wilson/CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tempera
ture_global.gif
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Steven Lai and Zachary Wilson,
based on data from the Carbon Dioxide
Information Analysis Center
(cdiac.ornl.gov/ftp/trends/co2/maunaloa.co
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.23: Global Warming is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.24.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14926.24: Food Chain
Who eats whom?
Describing the flow of energy within an ecosystem essent ially answers this question. To survive, one must eat. Why? To get energy.
Food chains and webs describe the transfer of energy wi thin an ecosystem, from one organism to another. In ot her words, they
show who eats whom.
Food Chains and Food Webs
Food chains and food webs are diagrams that represent feeding relationships. Essentially, they show who eats whom. In this way,
they model how energy and matter move through ecosystems.
Food Chains
A food chain represents a single pathway by which energy and matt er flow through an ecosystem. An example is shown in Figure
below. Food chains are generally simpler than what real ly happens in nature. Most organisms consume—and are consumed by—
more than one species.
This food chain includes producers and consumers. How could you add decomposers t o the food chain?
Food Webs
A food web represents multiple pathways through which energy and matter flow through an ecosystem. It includes many
intersecting food chains. It demonstrates that most organisms eat, and are eaten, by more than one specie s. Examples are shown in
the Figures below.

6.24.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1492
Food Web. This food web consists of several different food chains. Which o rganisms are producers in all of the food chains
included in the food web?
Examples of food webs.
Science Friday: Can Underwater Parks Protect Coral?
Coral communities are incredibly important for marin e life. In this video by Science Friday, Marine scientis ts John Bruno and
Elizabeth Selig describe the effects of local Marine Protect ion Areas on preserving coral.
scie n ce m u sicvide os
Food Chains: Mr W' s T rophic Levels a
Food Chains: Mr W' s T rophic Levels a
Watch on

6.24.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1492Summary
Food chains and food webs are diagrams that represent feedi ng relationships.
Food chains and webs model how energy and matter move th rough ecosystems.
Review
1. What is a food chain?
2. Describe the role of decomposers in food webs.
3. Why is a food web more realistic than a food chain?
4. Draw a terrestrial food chain that includes four feeding levels.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: flowcomm
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/flowcomm/8
553119542/in/photostream/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 6.24: Food Chain is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
Sc iF ri
Can Underwater P arks P rotect Coral?
Can Underwater P arks P rotect Coral?
Watch on

6.25.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14956.25: Trophic Level
Why are pyramids important in ecology?
The classic example of a pyramid is shown here. But t he pyramid structure can also represent the decrease in a measured substance
from the lowest level on up. In ecology, pyramids model the use of energy from the producers through the ecosystem.
Trophic Levels
The feeding positions in a food chain or web are cal led trophic levels. The different trophic levels are defined in the Table below.
Examples are also given in the table. All food chains and webs have at least two or three trophic levels. Gener ally, there are a
maximum of four trophic levels.
Trophic Level Where It Gets Food Example
1st Trophic Level: Producer Makes its own food Plants make food
2nd Trophic Level: Primary Consumer Consumes producers Mi ce eat plant seeds
3rd Trophic Level: Secondary Consumer Consumes primary c onsumers Snakes eat mice
4th Trophic Level: Tertiary Consumer Consumes secondary consumers Hawks eat snakes
Many consumers feed at more than one trophic level. Hu mans, for example, are primary consumers when they ea t plants such as
vegetables. They are secondary consumers when they eat c ows. They are tertiary consumers when they eat salmon.
Trophic Levels and Energy
Energy is passed up a food chain or web from lower to higher trophic levels. However, generally only about 1 0 percent of the
energy at one level is available to the next level. This is represented by the ecological pyramid in Figure below. What happens to
the other 90 percent of energy? It is used for metab olic processes or given off to the environment as hea t. This loss of energy
explains why there are rarely more than four trophic levels in a food chain or web. Sometimes there may be a fifth trophic level, but
usually there’s not enough energy left to support any additional levels.

6.25.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1495
Ecological Pyramid. This pyramid shows how energy and biomass decrease from lower to higher trophic levels. Assume that
producers in this pyramid have 1,000,000 kilocalories of e nergy. How much energy is available to primary consumers?
Ecological pyramids can demonstrate the decrease in ener gy, biomass or numbers within an ecosystem.
Trophic Levels and Biomass
With less energy at higher trophic levels, there are usually fewer organisms as well. Organisms tend to be l arger in size at higher
trophic levels, but their smaller numbers result in less biomass. Biomass is the total mass of organisms at a trophic level. The
decrease in biomass from lower to higher levels is also re presented by Figure above.
dm ickowski
Energy P yramid and Food Web
Energy P yramid and Food Web
Watch on

6.25.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1495Summary
The different feeding positions in a food chain or web ar e called trophic levels.
Generally, there are no more than four trophic levels becau se energy and biomass decrease from lower to higher leve ls.
Review
1. What is a trophic level?
2. What do energy pyramids depict?
3. Explain how energy limits the number of trophic level s in a food chain or web.
4. Draw a terrestrial food chain that includes four trophic levels. Identify the trophic level of each organism in the food chain.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Jodi
So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Amy
Goldstein;SeaWiFS Project,
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center and
ORBIMAGE
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Seawi
fs_global_biosphere.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0
This page titled 6.25: Trophic Level is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
m a h a lodotcom
Learn Biology: T rophic Levels and P r
Learn Biology: T rophic Levels and P r
Watch on

6.26.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14906.26: Water Cycle
Where does the water come from that is needed by your cells?
Unlike energy, matter is not lost as it passes through an ecosystem. Instead, matter, including water, is recycled. This recycling
involves specific interactions between the biotic and abiotic factors in an ecosystem. Chances are, the water you drank this morning
has been around for millions of years, or more.
The Water Cycle
The chemical elements and water that are needed by organisms continuously recycle in ecosystems. They pass through biotic and
abiotic components of the biosphere. That’s why their cycles are called biogeochemical cycles. For example, a chemical might
move from organisms (bio) to the atmosphere or ocean (geo) and back to organisms again. Elements or water may be held for
various periods of time in different parts of a cycle.
Part of a cycle that holds an element or water for a short period of time is called an exchange pool. For example, the
atmosphere is an exchange pool for water. It usually ho lds water (in the form of water vapor) for just a few days.
Part of a cycle that holds an element or water for a long p eriod of time is called a reservoir. The ocean is a reservoir for water.
The deep ocean may hold water for thousands of years.
Water on Earth is billions of years old. However, indi vidual water molecules keep moving through the water cycle. The water
cycle is a global cycle. It takes place on, above, and below Ear th’s surface, as shown in Figure below.

6.26.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1490
Like other biogeochemical cycles, there is no beginning or end to the water cycle. It just keeps repeating.
During the water cycle, water occurs in three different states: gas (water vapor), liquid (water), and solid (ice). Many processes are
involved as water changes state in the water cycle.
Evaporation, Sublimation, and Transpiration
Water changes to a gas by three different processes:
1. Evaporation occurs when water on the surface changes to water vapor. The sun heats the water and gives water molecules
enough energy to escape into the atmosphere.
2. Sublimation occurs when ice and snow change directly to water vapor. T his also happens because of heat from the sun.
3. Transpiration occurs when plants release water vapor through leaf por es called stomata (see Figure below).
Plant leaves have many tiny stomata. They release water vapor into the air.
Condensation and Precipitation
Rising air currents carry water vapor into the atmosp here. As the water vapor rises in the atmosphere, it co ols and condenses.
Condensation is the process in which water vapor changes to tiny d roplets of liquid water. The water droplets may form clouds. If
the droplets get big enough, they fall as precipitation —rain, snow, sleet, hail, or freezing rain. Most precip itation falls into the
ocean. Eventually, this water evaporates again and rep eats the water cycle. Some frozen precipitation become s part of ice caps and
glaciers. These masses of ice can store frozen water for hun dreds of years or longer.

6.26.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1490Groundwater and Runoff
Precipitation that falls on land may flow over the sur face of the ground. This water is called runoff. It may eventually flow into a
body of water. Some precipitation that falls on land ma y soak into the ground, becoming groundwater. Groundwater may seep out
of the ground at a spring or into a body of water suc h as the ocean. Some groundwater may be taken up by p lant roots. Some may
flow deeper underground to an aquifer. This is an underground layer of rock that stores water, sometimes for thousands of years.
Science Friday: Forecasting the Meltdown: The Aerial Snow Observatory
75% of Southern California's water supply comes from th e snowpack in the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range. This vid eo by Science
Friday explains how NASA uses the Airborne Snow Observatory t hat uses specialized instrumentation to carefully me asure the
water content.
Summary
Chemical elements and water are recycled through biogeoch emical cycles. The cycles include both biotic and abiotic p arts of
ecosystems.
The water cycle takes place on, above, and below Earth’s surface. In the cycle, water occurs as water vapor, liquid wat er, and
ice. Many processes are involved as water changes state in the cycle.
The atmosphere is an exchange pool for water. Ice masses, aquifers, and the deep ocean are water reservoirs.
Review
1. What is a biogeochemical cycle? Name an example.
2. Identify and define two processes by which water natural ly changes from a solid or liquid to a gas.
3. Define exchange pool and reservoir, and identify an e xample of each in the water cycle.
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
What Is The Water Cycle | Environme
What Is The Water Cycle | Environme
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Forecasting the Meltdown: The Aeria
Forecasting the Meltdown: The Aeria
Watch on

6.26.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14904. Assume you are a molecule of water. Describe one way you could g o through the water cycle, starting as water vapor in the
atmosphere.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright mosista,
2014;Stomata: Dartmouth Electron
Microscope Facility; Leaf: Jon Sullivan
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com;
Stomata:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tomato_
leaf_stomate_1-color.jpg; Leaf:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leaf_1_
web.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;Top 3
images courtesy of NOAA; bottom left
image by CK-12 Foundation - Christopher
Auyeung; bottom right courtesy of National
Severe Storms Laboratory;Amy
Goldstein;Stomata: Dartmouth Electron
Microscope Facility; Leaf: Jon Sullivan
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Top 3 images:
www.srh.noaa.gov/jetstream//synoptic/preci
p.htm; Bottom right image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Granizo.
jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/; Stomata:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tomato_
leaf_stomate_1-color.jpg; Leaf:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leaf_1_
web.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY-NC 3.0;
Top 3 images and bottom right images:
Public Domain; CC BY 2.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3] Credit: Stomata: Dartmouth Electron
Microscope Facility; Leaf: Jon
Sullivan;Top 3 images courtesy of NOAA;
bottom left image by CK-12 Foundation Christopher Auyeung; bottom right
courtesy of National Severe Storms
Laboratory;Amy Goldstein
Source: Stomata:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tomato_
leaf_stomate_1-color.jpg; Leaf:

6.26.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1490commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leaf_1_
web.jpg; Top 3 images:
www.srh.noaa.gov/jetstream//synoptic/preci
p.htm; Bottom right image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Granizo.
jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/
3945525048/
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0;
(Top 3 and bottom right images) Public
Domain; CC BY 2.0
This page titled 6.26: Water Cycle is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.27.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121256.27: Carbon Cycle
How could releasing this much pollution into the atmosphere not be a poor idea?
Burning fossil fuels, such as oil, releases carbon into the a tmosphere. This carbon must be cycled - removed from the atmosphere - back into living organisms, or it stays in th e atmosphere. Increased
carbon in the atmosphere contributes to the greenhouse effect on E arth.
The Carbon Cycle
Flowing water can slowly dissolve carbon in sedimentary rock. Most of t his carbon ends up in the ocean. The deep ocean can s tore carbon for thousands of years or more. Sedimentary rock a nd the
ocean are major reservoirs of stored carbon. Carbon is also stored for varying lengths of time in the atmosphere, in l iving organisms, and as fossil fuel deposits. These are al l parts of the carbon cycle,
which is shown in Figure below.
The Carbon Cycle. Carbon moves from one reservoir to another in the carbon cycle. What r ole do organisms play in this cycle?
Why is recycling carbon important? Recall that carbon i s the cornerstone of organic compounds, the compounds necessary for life. But do organisms make their own carbon? Do they have the genes
that encode proteins necessary to make carbon? No. In fact, there are no such genes. Carbon must be recycled from o ther living organisms, from carbon in the atmosphere, and fro m carbon in other
parts of the biosphere.
Carbon in the Atmosphere
Though carbon can be found in ocean water, rocks and sediment and other parts of the biosphere, t he atmosphere may be the most recognizable reservoir of c arbon. Carbon occurs in various forms in
different parts of the carbon cycle. Some of the different forms in whic h carbon appears are described in Table below. KEY: C = Carbon, O = Oxygen, H = Hydrogen

6.27.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12125F
o
r
m
o
f
C
a
r
b
o
nChemical Formula State Main Reservoir
C
a
r
b
o
n
D
i
o
x
i
d
eCO Gas Atmosphere
C
a
r
b
o
n
i
c
A
c
i
dH CO Liquid Ocean
B
i
c
a
r
b
o
n
a
t
e
I
o
nHCO Liquid(dissolved ion) Ocean
O
r
g
a
n
i
c
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
sExamples: C H O (Glucose), CH (Methane) Solid Gas Biosphere Organic Sediments (Fossil Fuels)
O
t
h
e
r
C
a
r
bExamples: CaCO (Calcium Carbonate), CaMg(CO) (Calcium Magnesium Carbonat e) Solid Solid Sedimentary Rock, Shells, Sedimentary Rock2
2 3
3−
6 12 6 4
3 3 2

6.27.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12125F
o
r
m
o
f
C
a
r
b
o
nChemical Formula State Main Reservoir
o
n
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
s
Carbon in Carbon Dioxide
Carbon cycles quickly between organisms and the atmo sphere. In the atmosphere, carbon exists primarily as carbo n dioxide (CO). Carbon dioxide cycles through the atmosp here by several different
processes, including those listed below.
Living organisms release carbon dioxide as a byproduct of cellular respiration.
Photosynthesis removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and uses it to make organi c compounds.
Carbon dioxide is given off when dead organisms and other organic m aterials decompose.
Burning organic material, such as fossil fuels, releases carbon dioxid e.
Carbon cycles far more slowly through geological processes such as sedimentation. Carbon may be stored in sedimentary rock for millions of years.
When volcanoes erupt, they give off carbon dioxide that is stored in the mantle.
Carbon dioxide is released when limestone is heated during the pro duction of cement.
Ocean water releases dissolved carbon dioxide into the atmosphere when water temperature rises.
Carbon dioxide is also removed when ocean water cools and dissolves more carbon dioxide from the air.
Because of human activities, there is more carbon dioxi de in the atmosphere today than in the past hundreds of thousands of years. Burning fossil fuels has released great quantities of carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere. Cutting forests and clearing land ha s also increased carbon dioxide into the atmosphere beca use these activities reduce the number of autotrophic org anisms that use up carbon
dioxide in photosynthesis. In addition, clearing often involves burn ing, which releases carbon dioxide that was previously stored in autotr ophs.
Summary
Carbon must be recycled through living organisms or it stays in th e atmosphere.
Carbon cycles quickly between organisms and the atmosphere.
Due to human activities, there is more carbon dioxide in the atmosph ere today than in the past hundreds of thousands of years.
Review
1. What is the role of the carbon cycle?
2. Why is cycling carbon important?
3. Describe a major method that carbon is cycled.2
TED-Ed
The carbon cycle - Nathaniel Manning
The carbon cycle - Nathaniel Manning
Watch on

6.27.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121254. How have human activities increased atmospheric carbon dioxide l evels?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Stomata: Dartmouth Electron Microscope Facility;
Leaf: Jon Sullivan
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Stomata:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tomato_leaf_stomate_1color.jpg; Leaf:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leaf_1_web.jpg
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Amy Goldstein;Jami Dwyer
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amylovesyah/3945525048/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lacanja_burn.JPG
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0; Public Domain
6.27: Carbon Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.28.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121266.28: Nitrogen Cycle
Alfalfa, clover, peas, beans, lentils, lupins, mesquite, carob, soy, and peanuts. What are these?
Legumes. Legume plants have the ability to fix atmos pheric nitrogen, due to a mutualistic symbiotic rela tionship with bacteria
found in root nodules of these plants.
The Nitrogen Cycle
Nitrogen makes up 78 percent of Earth’s atmosphere. It’s also an important part of living things. Nitroge n is found in proteins,
nucleic acids, and chlorophyll. The nitrogen cycle moves nitrogen through the abiotic and biotic part s of ecosystems. Figure
below shows how nitrogen cycles through a terrestrial ecosystem. Nitrogen passes through a similar cycle in aquat ic ecosystems.
Nitrogen Cycle in a Terrestrial Ecosystem. Nitrogen cycles between the atmosphere and living things.
Even though nitrogen gas makes up most of Earth's a tmosphere, plants cannot use this nitrogen gas to make organic compounds for
themselves and other organisms. The two nitrogen atoms in a molecule of nitrogen gas are held together by a very stable triple
bond. This bond must be broken for the nitrogen to be used. The nitrogen gas must be changed to a form c alled nitrates, which
plants can absorb through their roots. The process of changing nitrogen gas to nitrates is called nitrogen fixation. It is carried out
by nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The bacteria live in soil and roots of legumes, such as peas.
When plants and other organisms die, decomposers bre ak down their remains. In the process, they release ni trogen in the form of
ammonium ions. This process is called ammonification. Nitrifying bacteria change the ammonium ions into nitrites and nitrate s.
Some of the nitrates are used by plants. The process of converting ammonium ions to nitrites or nitrates is called nitrification. Still
other bacteria, called denitrifying bacteria, conve rt some of the nitrates in soil back into nitrogen ga s in a process called

6.28.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12126denitrification. The process is the opposite of nitrogen fixation. Den itrification returns nitrogen gas back to the atmosph ere, where
it can continue the nitrogen cycle.
Summary
The nitrogen cycle moves nitrogen back and forth betwee n the atmosphere and organisms.
Bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to n itrogen compounds that plants can absorb.
Other bacteria change nitrogen compounds back to nitroge n gas, which re-enters the atmosphere.
Review
1. Why can't plants use nitrogen gas directly?
2. What is nitrogen fixation?
3. Explain why bacteria are essential parts of the nitrogen cycle.
Th e Gre a tP ickle s
The Nitrogen Cycle
The Nitrogen Cycle
Watch on

6.28.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121264. What is ammonification?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Erika Hörner
Source: pixabay.com/en/colorful-beansmarket-108378/
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
6.28: Nitrogen Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.29.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121276.29: Biomes and Climate
What do temperature, wind, and rain, have in common?
They are all part of climate, the statistical summar y of temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind, rainfall, other
meteorological measurements in a given region over lo ng periods. In other words, is it dry or wet, hot or cold, or humid? And it is
these abiotic factors that help determine the nature of a biome.
Terrestrial Biomes
If you look at the two pictures in Figure below, you will see very few similarities. The picture o n the left shows a desert in Africa.
The picture on the right shows a rainforest in Austra lia. The desert doesn’t have any visible plants, whe reas the rainforest is densely
packed with trees. What explains these differences?
Sahara Desert in northern Africa (left). Rainforest in northeastern Aus tralia (right). Two very different biomes are pictured
here. A biome is a group of similar ecosystems with the same general abiotic factors and primary producers. Both are found
at roughly the same distance from the equator.
Terrestrial biomes include all the land areas on Earth where organisms live. The distinguishing features of terrestrial biomes are
determined mainly by climate. Terrestrial biomes inc lude tundras, temperate forests and grasslands, chaparral, temperate and
tropical deserts, and tropical forests and grasslands.
Terrestrial Biomes and Climate
Climate is the average weather in an area over a long perio d of time. Weather refers to the conditions of the atmosphere from day
to day. Climate is generally described in terms of temper ature and moisture.
Temperature falls from the equator to the poles. The refore, major temperature zones are based on latitude. They include tropical,
temperate, and arctic zones (see Figure below). However, other factors besides latitude may al so influence temperature. For
example, land near the ocean may have cooler summer s and warmer winters than land farther inland. This is b ecause water gains

6.29.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127and loses heat more slowly than does land, and the wa ter temperature influences the temperature on the c oast. Temperature also
falls from lower to higher altitudes. That’s why tropic al zone mountain tops may be capped with snow.
Temperature zones are based on latitude. What temperature zone do you live in?
In terms of moisture, climates can be classified as arid (dry), semi-arid, humid (wet), or semi-humid. The amount of moisture
depends on both precipitation and evaporation. Precipita tion increases moisture. Evaporation decreases moisture.
The global pattern of precipitation is influenced by mov ements of air masses. For example, there is a global belt of dry air
masses and low precipitation at about 30° N and 30° S latitude.
Precipitation is also influenced by temperature. Warm air can hold more moisture than cold air, so tropical ar eas receive more
rainfall than other parts of the world.
Nearness to the ocean and mountain ranges may also influence the amount of precipitation an area receives. This is ex plained in
Figure below.
Evaporation of moisture is greatest where it is hot and su nny. Therefore, cold climates with low precipitation may not be as dry
as warm climates with the same amount of precipitation.
Moist air from the ocean rises up over the mountain range.
As the air rises, it cools and its water vapor condenses. Precipitation falls on the windward side of the mountain range.
The air is dry when it reaches the leeward side of the mountai n range, so there is little precipitation there. This creat es a “rain
shadow.”
This diagram shows how precipitation is affected by the ocean and a mo untain range.

6.29.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127Climate and Plant Growth
Plants are the major producers in terrestrial biomes. They have five basic needs: air, warmth, sunlight, water, and nutrients. How
well these needs are met in a given location depends on the growing season and soil quality, both of which a re determined mainly
by climate.
The growing season is the period of time each year when it is warm and wet enou gh for plants to grow. The growing season
may last all year in a hot, wet climate but just a few mont hs in a cooler or drier climate.
Plants grow best in soil that contains plenty of nutrients and organic matter. Both are added to soil when plant litter and de ad
organisms decompose. Decomposition occurs too slowly in cold cl imates and too quickly in hot, wet climates for nutrients an d
organic matter to accumulate. Temperate climates usually have the best soil for plant growth.
Climate and Biodiversity
Because climate determines plant growth, it also influ ences the number and variety of other organisms in a terrestrial biome.
Biodiversity generally increases from the poles to the equator. It is also usually greater in more humid climates. Th is is apparent
from the desert and rainforest biomes pictured in Figure above.
Climate and Adaptations
Organisms evolve adaptations that help them survive i n the climate of the biome where they live. For examp le, in biomes with arid
climates, plants may have special tissues for storing wa ter (see Figure below). The desert animals pictured in Figure below also
have adaptations for a dry climate.
Cra sh Cou rse K ids
Weather vs. Climate: Crash Course K
Weather vs. Climate: Crash Course K
Watch on

6.29.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127
The aloe plant on the left stores water in its large, hollow leaves. The cactus plant on the right stores water in its stout,
barrel-shaped stems.
The Gila monster’s fat tail is an adaptation to its dry climate. It se rves as a storage depot for water. The kangaroo rat has
very efficient kidneys. They produce concentrated urine, thus reducing the amount of water lost from the body.
In biomes with cold climates, plants may adapt by bec oming dormant during the coldest part of the year. Dormancy is a state in
which a plant slows down cellular activities and may sh ed its leaves. Animals also adapt to cold temperatures. One way is with
insulation in the form of fur and fat. This is how the polar b ears in Figure below stay warm.
Thick fur and a layer of blubber keep polar bears warm in their Arctic ecosys tem. Why do you think their fur is white?
Why might it be an adaptation in an Arctic biome?
Summary
Terrestrial biomes are determined mainly by climate.
Climate influences plant growth, biodiversity, and adapt ations of land organisms.

6.29.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127Review
1. What is climate? How does it differ from weather?
2. What is a rain shadow?
3. What is a growing season? How does climate influence plan t growth?
4. Describe the relationship between climate and biodiv ersity.
5. Compare the data for Seattle and Denver in Table below. Seattle is farther north than Denver. Why is Seat tle warmer?

6.29.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127City, State Latitude (°N)Altitude (ft above sea
level)Location (relative to
ocean)Average Low
Temperature in January
(°F)
Seattle, Washington 48 429 Coastal 33
Denver, Colorado 41 5183 Interior 15
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Source:
alaska.fws.gov/aba/budget/index.htm
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Desert: Flickr:wonker; Rainforest:
User:Tim35/Wikipedia
Source: Desert:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wonker/4300
437105/; Rainforest:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rainforr
est_between_Kuranda_and_Cairns;
_North_East_Queensland.jpg
License: Desert: CC BY 2.0; Rainforest:
Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin, using globe graphic
courtesy of the Defense Institute of Security
Assistance Management
Source: CK-12 Foundation (globe graphic:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Globe_
Atlantic.svg)
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Globe graphic:
Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Aloe: Rae Allen; Cactus: Amante
Darmanin
Source: Aloe:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/raeallen/7049
539727/; Cactus:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/amantedar/56
99827213/
License: CC BY 2.0

6.29.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12127
[Figure 6]Credit: Gila monster: David Mark;
Kangaroo rat: U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service
Source: Gila monster:
pixabay.com/en/reticulate-gila-monsteranimal-86618/; Kangaroo rat:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kangaro
o-rat.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 7]Credit: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Source:
alaska.fws.gov/aba/budget/index.htm
License: Public Domain
6.29: Biomes and Climate is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.30.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14946.30: Terrestrial Biomes
Forest vs. desert. What explains these differences?
If you look at these two pictures, you will see very fe w similarities. The picture on the left shows a desert i n Africa. The picture on
the right shows a rainforest in Australia. The desert d oesn’t have any visible plants, whereas the rainforest is densely packed with
trees. Do they have different climates? Does one get mor e rain than the other?
Survey of Terrestrial Biomes
Terrestrial biomes are classified by the climate and their biodiversity, especially the types of primary producers. The world map
in Figure below shows where 13 major terrestrial biomes are found.
Worldwide Distribution of Terrestrial Biomes. This map shows the lo cations of Earth’s major terrestrial biomes.
The following figures summarize the basic features o f major terrestrial biomes. As you read about each biome, think about how its
biodiversity and types of plants and animals relate to its climate. For example, why do you think there are no amphibians or reptiles
in tundra biomes? (Hint: Amphibians and reptiles canno t maintain a constant body temperature. Instead, they have about the same
temperature as their surroundings.)

6.30.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1494

6.30.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1494
Science Friday: Superbloom: How Death Valley Springs to Life
A massive seed bank of desert wildflowers lies beneath Death Valley. This video by Science Friday shows that when heavy winter
rains soak deep into the soil, these hidden wonders spring to life, in an event called a “superbloom”.0:00
Sc iF ri
Superbloom: How Death Valley Sprin
Superbloom: How Death Valley Sprin
Watch on

6.30.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1494Summary
Terrestrial biomes include tundras, temperate forests and grasslands, chaparral, temperate and tropical deserts, a nd tropical
forests and grasslands.
Review
1. Identify two types of tundra and where they are found.
2. What terrestrial biome has the highest biodiversity? the lowest?
3. In which biome are you most likely to find grasses, zebras, and lions?

6.30.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14944. If you were to design a well-adapted desert animal, what adaptations would you give it to help it survive in its dese rt biome?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Desert: Flickr:wonker; Rainforest:
User:Tim35/Wikipedia
Source: Desert:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wonker/4300
437105/; Rainforest:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rainforr
est_between_Kuranda_and_Cairns;
_North_East_Queensland.jpg
License: Desert: CC BY 2.0; Rainforest:
Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: CK-12 Foundation,
Fawcett5/Wikimedia Commons, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpine_f
lora.png;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tundra_
coastal_vegetation_Alaska.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4]Credit: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Picea_m
ariana_taiga.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, Nicholas A.
Tonelli
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/nicholas_t/6958582
046/
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Brian Kell, CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oglala_
National_Grassland.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
[Figure 7]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, Miguel Vieira
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/miguelvieira/33843
03160/
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
[Figure 8] Credit: Ju Dadalto, CK-12 Foundation
Source:

6.30.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1494http://www.flickr.com/photos/blackbird/2584138571/
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
[Figure 9]Credit: lana.japan; Flickr, Ethan Roos
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/13007595@
N05/2697183159/
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
[Figure 10]Credit: Shankar S., CK-12 Foundation
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/shankaronlin
e/7513383356/
License: CC BY-NC 2.0
This page titled 6.30: Terrestrial Biomes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Prokaryotes and Viruses
7.1: Virus Structure
7.2: Virus Classification
7.3: Virus Origin
7.4: Virus Replication
7.5: Viral Disease
7.6: HIV
7.7: Virus Control
7.8: Viruses in Research
7.9: Prokaryotes
7.10: Bacteria Classification
7.11: Bacteria Structure
7.12: Bacteria Nutrition
7.13: Bacteria Habitat
7.14: Bacteria Reproduction
7.15: Bacteria and Humans
7.16: Viruses
7.17: Virus Characteristics
This page titled 7: Prokaryotes and Viruses is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121857.1: Virus Structure
Is this a cell or a virus?
It is actually a representation of the HIV virus, the v irus that causes AIDS. All the little “knobs” on the out side of the virus help to
give the virus structure. And it is this structure that must b e identified by a vaccine.
Structure of Viruses
Viruses vary in their structure. A virus particle con sists of DNA or RNA within a protective protein coat cal led a capsid. The shape
of the capsid may vary from one type of virus to an other. The capsid is made from the proteins that are encoded by viral genes
within their genome.
The shape of the capsid serves as one basis for classif ication of viruses. The capsid of the virus shown in Figure below is
icosahedral. Virally coded proteins will self-assemble to form a capsid. Some viruses have an envelope of p hospholipids and
proteins. The envelope is made from portions of the h ost’s cell membrane. It surrounds the capsid and hel ps protect the virus from
the host’s immune system. The envelope may also have receptor molecules that can bind with host cells. They make it easier for the
virus to infect the cells.
Diagram of a Cytomegalovirus. The capsid encloses the genetic mate rial of the virus. The envelope which surrounds the
capsid is typically made from portions of the host cell membranes (phospholi pids and proteins). Not all viruses have a viral
envelope.
Helical Viruses
Helical capsids are made up of a single type of protein subunit stac ked around a central axis to form a helical structure. The helix
may have a hollow center, which makes it look like a hollow tube. This arrangement results in rod-shaped o r filamentous virions.
These virions can be anything from short and very rigi d, to long and very flexible. The well-studied tobacc o mosaic virus (TMV) is
an example of a helical virus, as seen in the Figure below.

7.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12185
A helical virus, tobacco mosaic virus. Although their diameter m ay be very small, some helical viruses can be quite long, as
shown here. 1. Nucleic acid; 2. Viral protein units, 3. Capsid. TM V causes tobacco mosaic disease in tobacco, cucumber,
pepper, and tomato plants.
Icosahedral Viruses
Icosahedral capsid symmetry gives viruses a spherical appearance at low m agnification, but the protein subunits are actually
arranged in a regular geometrical pattern, similar t o a soccer ball; they are not truly spherical. An ico sahedral shape is the most
efficient way of creating a hardy structure from mul tiple copies of a single protein. This shape is used because it can be built from a
single basic unit protein which is used over and over again. This saves space in the viral genome.
Adenovirus, an icosahedral virus. An icosahedron is a three-dimensional shape made up of 20 equilateral triangles. Viral
structures are built of repeated identical protein subunits, making the icos ahedron the easiest shape to assemble using these
subunits.
Complex Viruses
Complex viruses possess a capsid which is neither purely helical, no r purely icosahedral, and which may have extra struct ures
such as protein tails or a complex outer wall. Viral p rotein subunits will self-assemble into a capsid, but the complex viruses DNA
also codes for proteins which help in building the vir al capsid. Many phage viruses are complex-shaped; th ey have an icosahedral
head bound to a helical tail. The tail may have a base plate with protein tail fibers. Some complex viruses do not have t ail fibers.

7.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12185
This “moon lander”-shaped complex virus infects
Escherichia coli
bacteria.
Enveloped Viruses
Some viruses are able to surround (envelop) themselves in a portion of the cell membrane of their host. Th e virus can use either the
outer membrane of the host cell, or an internal memb rane such as the nuclear membrane or endoplasmic re ticulum. In this way the
virus gains an outer lipid bilayer known as a viral envelope. This membrane is studded with proteins coded for by both the viral
genome and the host genome. However, the lipid membrane itself and any carbohydrates present come entirely from the host cell.
The influenza virus, HIV, and the varicella zoster virus (Figure below) are enveloped viruses.
An enveloped virus. Varicella zoster virus causes chicken pox and shingl es.
The viral envelope can give a virus some advantages over other capsid-only viruses. For example, they have better protection from
the host's immune system, enzymes and certain chemic als. The proteins in the envelope can include glycopr oteins, which act as
receptor molecules. These receptor molecules allow h ost cells to recognize and bind the virions, which may result in easier uptake
of the virion into the cell. Most enveloped viruses d epend on their envelopes to infect cells. However, becau se the envelope
contains lipids, it makes the virus more susceptible to inac tivation by environmental agents, such as detergents th at disrupt lipids.
Summary
Viruses have different shapes. They can be cylindrical, i cosahedral, complex, or enveloped.
Arm a n do H a su du n ga n
Microbiology - Viruses (Structure, T y
Microbiology - Viruses (Structure, T y
Watch on

7.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12185Review
1. Describe variation in capsid shape in viruses.
2. Compare the structures of a prokaryote and a virus. If yo u prefer, you may draw a diagram of each and label the di fferent parts
of each structure.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention/Dr. Erskine
Palmer/B.G. Partin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Varicella
_%28Chickenpox%29_Virus_PHIL_1878_l
ores.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: User:GrahamColm/Wikipedia
Source:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Enteric_Aden
oviruses.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Courtesy of Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention/Dr. Erskine
Palmer/B.G. Partin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Varicella
_%28Chickenpox%29_Virus_PHIL_1878_l
ores.jpg
License: Public Domain
7.1: Virus Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121867.2: Virus Classification
How are viruses classified?
In part by their shape. This picture represents a bac teriophage, a virus that infects bacteria. Notice the distinctive shape. This virus
has a complex shape.
Classification of Viruses
Like the classification systems for cellular organism s, virus classification is the subject of ongoing de bate. This is largely due to the
nature of viruses, which are not living organisms by th e classic definition, but neither are they necessari ly non-living. Therefore,
viruses do not fit neatly into the biological classifica tion system of cellular organisms, as plants and animals do.
Virus classification is based mainly on characteristi cs of the viral particles, including the capsid shape, the type of nucleic acid
(DNA or RNA, double stranded (ds) or single stranded (ss)) within the capsid, the process of replication, their host organisms, or
the type of disease they cause. The Table below lists characteristics such as capsid shape, presen ce of an envelope, and the diseases
the viruses can cause.
Viruses

7.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12186Virus
FamilyVirus EnvelopeCapsid
shapeNuclei
c AcidDiseas
e
Adeno
viruse
sAdenovirus NoIcosah
edraldsDN
Aupper
respira
tory
infecti
ons
Parvo
viruse
sParvovirus NoIcosah
edralssDN
Afifth
diseas
e,
Canine
parvov
irus
Herpe
svirus
esHerpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster virus, Epstein Bar r virus YesIcosah
edraldsDN
AHerpes
chicke
n pox,
shingl
es,
infecti
ous
monon
ucleosi
s
Hepad
naviru
sesHepatitis B virus YesIcosah
edraldsDN
AHepati
tis B
Reovi
rusesRotavirus NoIcosah
edraldsRN
Agastro
enteriti
s
Retro
viruse
sHIV, HTLV-I YesComp
lexssRN
AHIV/A
IDS,
leuke
mia
Ortho
myxo
viruse
sInfluenza viruses YesHelica
lssRN
AInflue
nza
(flu)
Rhabd
ovirus
esRabies virus YesHelica
lssRN
ARabies
Coron
avirus
esCorona virus Yes Comp
lexssRN
AComm
on
cold,
Severe
acute
respira
tory

7.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12186Virus
FamilyVirus EnvelopeCapsid
shapeNuclei
c AcidDiseas
e
syndro
me
(SARS
Cysto
viruse
sCystovirus YesIcosah
edraldsRN
AInfects
Pseud
omona
s
bacteri
a
Summary
Viruses can be classified on the basis of capsid shape, presence or absence of an envelope, and type of nucleic ac id.
Review
1. Describe how viruses are classified.
2. What is the difference between viruses in the Herpesvirus family and the Retrovirus family?
3. What are the four types of nucleic acid that may be pr esent in a virus?
4. Give an example of a disease caused by a member of the Orth omyxoviruses.
5. Give an example of a disease caused by a retrovirus.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
L e a rn oH u b - Cla ss 11, 12
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Watch on

7.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121867.2: Virus Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121877.3: Virus Origin
Can you "discover" something without actually seeing it?
Well, yes you can, and that's precisely how viruses wer e discovered. Viruses are much smaller than bacteria, so special microscopes
are needed to see them, but the existence of viruses was known prior to the development of these special microscopes.
Discovery and Origin of Viruses
Viruses are so small that they can be seen only with a n electron microscope. Before electron microscopes were invented, scientist s
knew viruses must exist. How did they know? They had demonstr ated that particles smaller than bacteria cause disease.
Discovery of Viruses
Researchers used special filters to remove bacteria from tissues that were infected. If bacteria were ca using the infection, the
filtered tissues should no longer be able to make othe r organisms sick. However, the filtered tissues remained inf ective. This meant
that something even smaller than bacteria was causing t he infection.
Scientists did not actually see viruses for the first time until the 1930s. That’s when the electron microscope was invented. In
1915, English bacteriologist Frederick Twort discover ed bacteriophage, the viruses that attack bacteria. He noticed tiny c lear spots
within bacterial colonies, and hypothesized that somet hing was killing the bacteria. The tobacco mosaic virus shown in Figure
below was the first one to be seen.

7.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12187
Tobacco Mosaic Virus. This tobacco mosaic virus was the first v irus to be discovered. It was first seen with an electron
microscope in 1935.
Origin of Viruses
Where did viruses come from? How did the first viruses a rise? The answers to these questions are not known for c ertain. Several
hypotheses have been proposed. The two main hypotheses are stated below. Both may be valid and explain the origin of different
viruses.
Small viruses started as runaway pieces of nucleic acid t hat originally came from living cells such as bacteria.
Large viruses were once parasitic cells inside bigger host cells. Over time, genes needed to survive and reproduce outside host
cells were lost.
Summary
Viruses were assumed to exist before they were first see n with an electron microscope in the 1930s.
Multiple hypotheses for viral origins have been proposed.
Review
1. Why did scientists think viruses must exist even before they ever saw them with an electron microscope?
2. State two hypotheses for the origin of viruses.
3. What allowed scientists to see a virus for the first time?

7.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12187Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: T. Moravec
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TMV.jp
g
License: Public Domain
7.3: Virus Origin is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Se e ke r
Are Viruses Alive?
Are Viruses Alive?
Watch on

7.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121887.4: Virus Replication
Notice the viruses sitting on the bacteria?
Why is the virus sitting here? Remember, viruses are not l iving. So how do they replicate?
Replication of Viruses
Populations of viruses do not grow through cell divis ion because they are not cells. Instead, they use the machinery and metabolism
of a host cell to produce new copies of themselves. Aft er infecting a host cell, a virion uses the cell’s r ibosomes, enzymes, ATP, and
other components to replicate. Viruses vary in how they do this. For example:
Some RNA viruses are translated directly into viral prote ins in ribosomes of the host cell. The host ribosomes treat t he viral
RNA as though it were the host’s own mRNA.
Some DNA viruses are first transcribed in the host cell into vir al mRNA. Then the viral mRNA is translated by host cell
ribosomes into viral proteins.
In either case, the newly made viral proteins assemble to form new virions. The virions may then direct the production of an
enzyme that breaks down the host cell wall. This allows th e virions to burst out of the cell. The host cell i s destroyed in the process.
The newly released virus particles are free to infect ot her cells of the host.
Replication of RNA Viruses
An RNA virus is a virus that has RNA as its genetic material. The ir nucleic acid is usually single-stranded RNA, but may be
double-stranded RNA. Important human pathogenic RNA vir uses include the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) virus,
Influenza virus, and Hepatitis C virus. Animal RNA viruse s can be placed into different groups depending on their type of
replication.
Some RNA viruses have their genome used directly as if it were mRNA. The viral RNA is translated directly into new viral
proteins after infection by the virus.
Some RNA viruses carry enzymes which allow their RNA genome t o act as a template for the host cell to a form viral mRNA.
Retroviruses use DNA intermediates to replicate. Reverse transcriptase, a viral enzyme that comes from the virus itself,
converts the viral RNA into a complementary strand of DNA, wh ich is copied to produce a double stranded molecule of vira l
DNA. This viral DNA is then transcribed and translated by the host machinery, directing the formation of new virions. Normal
transcription involves the synthesis of RNA from DNA; hence, r everse transcription is the reverse of this process. This is an
exception to the central dogma of molecular biology.
Replication of DNA Viruses
A DNA virus is a virus that has DNA as its genetic material and r eplicates using a DNA-dependent DNA polymerase. The nucleic
acid is usually double-stranded DNA but may also be sin gle-stranded DNA. The DNA of DNA viruses is transcribed into mR NA
by the host cell. The viral mRNA is then translated i nto viral proteins. These viral proteins then assembl e to form new viral
particles.

7.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12188Reverse-Transcribing Viruses
A reverse-transcribing virus is any virus which replicates using reverse transcrip tion, the formation of DNA from an RNA
template. Some reverse-transcribing viruses have genome s made of single-stranded RNA and use a DNA intermediat e to replicate.
Others in this group have genomes that have double-s tranded DNA and use an RNA intermediate during genome r eplication. The
retroviruses, as mentioned above, are included in th is group, of which HIV is a member. Some double-strande d DNA viruses
replicate using reverse transcriptase. The hepatitis B v irus is one of these viruses.
Bacteriophages
Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria. They bind to surface receptor molecules of the bact erial cell and then their genome
enters the cell. The protein coat does not enter the bacteria. Within a short amount of time, in some ca ses, just minutes, bacterial
polymerase starts translating viral mRNA into protei n. These proteins go on to become either new virions wit hin the cell, helper
proteins which help assembly of new virions, or proteins involved in cell lysis. Viral enzymes aid in the br eakdown of the cell
membrane. With some phages, just over twenty minutes a fter the phage infects the bacterium, over three hund red phages can be
assembled and released from the host.
Summary
After infecting a host cell, a virus uses the cell’s machi nery and metabolism to produce new copies of itself.
Review
1. In general terms, describe viral replication.
2. Describe how DNA viruses replicate.
3. What are reverse-transcribing viruses?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
NPR i s a n
Ame ri ca n …N P R
Flu Attack! How A Virus Invades Y our
Flu Attack! How A Virus Invades Y our
Watch on

7.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121887.4: Virus Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121897.5: Viral Disease
Viral or bacterial?
Doesn't look like fun. The flu is caused by an influenz a virus. And usually a slightly different virus every season.
Viruses and Human Disease
Viruses cause many human diseases. In addition to th e flu and HIV, viruses cause rabies, measles, diarrheal diseases, hepatitis,
polio, cold sores and other diseases (see Figure below). Viral diseases range from mild to fatal. One wa y viruses cause disease is
by causing host cells to burst open and die. Viruses may also cause disease without killing host cells. They may cause illness by
disrupting homeostasis in host cells.
Cold Sore. Cold sores are caused by a herpes virus.
Some viruses live in a dormant state inside the body. This is called latency. For example, the virus that causes chicken pox may
infect a young child and cause the short-term diseas e chicken pox. Then the virus may remain latent in n erve cells within the body
for decades. The virus may re-emerge later in life as the disease called shingles. In shingles, the virus ca uses painful skin rashes
with blisters (see Figure below).

7.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12189
Shingles. Shingles is a disease caused by the same virus that causes chicken pox.
Some viruses can cause cancer. For example, human papill omavirus (HPV) causes cancer of the cervix in females. Hepat itis B
virus causes cancer of the liver. A viral cancer is like ly to develop only after a person has been infected with a virus for many years.
The Flu
Influenza, or flu, is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses. Influenza spreads around the world in seasonal
epidemics. An epidemic is an outbreak of a disease within a population of p eople during a specific time. Every year in the Unite d
States, about 200,000 people are hospitalized and 36,0 00 people die from the flu. Flu pandemics can kill mi llions of people. A
pandemic is an epidemic that spreads through human population s across a large region (for example a continent), or even
worldwide. Three influenza pandemics occurred in the 2 0th century and killed tens of millions of people, with each of these
pandemics being caused by the appearance of a new stra in of the virus. Most influenza strains can be inactiva ted easily by
disinfectants and detergents.
Emerging Viral Diseases
Modern modes of transportation allow more people and p roducts to travel around the world at a faster pace. T hey also open the
airways to the transcontinental movement of infectious disease vectors. One example of this occurring is West Nile Virus, which
scientists believe was introduced to the United States by an infected air traveler. With the use of air tr avel, people are able to go to
foreign lands, contract a disease and not have any sym ptoms of illness until they get home, possibly exposi ng others to the disease
along the way.
Often, new diseases result from the spread of an existin g disease from animals to humans. A disease that can be spread from
animals to humans is called a zoonosis. When a disease breaks out, scientists called epidemiologists investigate the outbreak,
looking for its cause. Epidemiologists are like detec tives trying to solve a crime. The information epid emiologists learn is important
to understand the pathogen, and help prevent future ou tbreaks of disease.
A deadly strain of avian flu virus named H5N1 has posed the greatest risk for a new influenza pandemic since it first killed humans
in Asia in the 1990s. The virus is passed from infec ted birds to humans. Fortunately, the virus has not m utated to a form that
TED-Ed
How pandemics spread
How pandemics spread
Watch on

7.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12189spreads easily between people.
Several lethal viruses that cause viral hemorrhagic f ever have been discovered, two of which are shown in t he Figure below. Ebola
outbreaks have been limited mainly to remote areas of the world. However, they have gained extensive media attention because of
the high mortality rate—23 percent to 90 percent—de pending on the strain. The primary hosts of the viru ses are thought to be apes
in west central Africa, but the virus has also been isolat ed from bats in the same region.
The Ebola virus (left), and Marburg virus (right), are viruses tha t cause hemorrhagic fevers that can cause multiple organ
failure and death.
Ebola is a rare and deadly disease caused by infecti on with a strain of Ebola virus. The 2014 Ebola epidemi c affected multiple
countries in West Africa, including Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Ebola is spread through direct contact with blood and body
fluids of a person infected by and already showing sym ptoms of Ebola. Ebola is not spread through the air, water, food, or
mosquitoes.
People get exposed to new and rare zoonoses when they mov e into new areas and encounter wild animals. For example, severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a respiratory disease which is caused by the SARS cor onavirus. An outbreak in China in
2003 was linked to the handling and consumption of wil d civet cats sold as food in a market. In 2005, two stu dies identified a
number of SARS-like coronaviruses in Chinese bats. It is li kely that the virus spread from bats to civets, and then to humans.
A novel type of coronavirus was discovered in 2019, first in China and then spread to other locations gl obally, including the United
States. The origin is thought to likely be from an an imal that was then transmitted to humans. The novel v irus causing the recent
pandemic has been named Severe Acute Respiratory Syndr ome - 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The disease itself is referred to as coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). The impact of this disease has led to widespread lo ckdown and stay-at-home policies enacted by
governments globally to mitigate the spread of the vi rus.
Summary
Viruses cause many human diseases by killing host cells or disturbing their homeostasis.
Viruses are not affected by antibiotics. Several viral diseases can be treated with antiviral drugs or prevent ed with vaccines.
Several emerging viral diseases exist: West Nile Virus, Ebol a, SARS, and COVID-19.
TED-Ed
What is a coronavirus? - Elizabeth Co
What is a coronavirus? - Elizabeth Co
Watch on

7.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12189Explore More
Explore More I
Use the resource below to answer the questions that follow.
Which is better: Soap or hand sanitizer?: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7KKkElpyKQ
1. What is the outer surface of the coronavirus that ca uses COVID-19 made of?
2. What are amphiphiles? Which biological molecules do the y resemble?
3. Distinguish between how hand sanitizer versus soap and water disrupt the outer membrane of the coronavirus that caus es
COVID-19.
4. Is hand sanitizer or soap and water better to use to prevent the spread of COVID-19?
5. What are the benefits to using soap and water to prevent the spread of COVID-19?
Explore More II
Use the resource below to answer the questions that follow.
U.S. Mortality: Death Certificates Listing Pneumonia, Influ enza, and COVID-19:
Animated GIF: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/ima ges/us-mortality-graph-animated-may72020.gif
Static Image: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/ima ges/us-mortality-graph-may72020.jpg
1. The peak percent of deaths is observed as a result of wha t disease(s)?
2. What might you infer about the disease(s) that are causin g the percent of deaths at this peak?
3. The graph indicates a peak in the percent of death s ending the week of April 11, 2020. During this time in t he US (March 2020 May 2020), widespread stay-at-home policies were put into place with strict social distancing guidelines. According to the dat a
provided, how do you think these measures impacted the pe rcent of deaths during this time?
Review
1. How do viruses cause human disease?
2. What is an epidemic? Why can the flu be considered an e pidemic?
TED-Ed
Which is better: Soap or hand sanitiz
Which is better: Soap or hand sanitiz
Watch on

7.5.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121893. What is latency? Give an example of a virus that underg oes this process.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA);Image
copyright Monika Wisniewska, 2014;Ebola
virus: Courtesy of CDC/Cynthia
Goldsmith; Marburg virus: Courtesy of
CDC/Dr. Erskine Palmer, Russell Regnery,
Ph.D.
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_at
tack_diagram.png;
http://www.shutterstock.com; Ebola virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ebola_V
irus_TEM_PHIL_1832_lores.jpg; Marburg
virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marburg
_virus.jpg
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Metju12/Wikimedia
Commons;Ebola virus: Courtesy of
CDC/Cynthia Goldsmith; Marburg virus:
Courtesy of CDC/Dr. Erskine Palmer,
Russell Regnery, Ph.D.
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Herpes_
labialis.jpg; Ebola virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ebola_V
irus_TEM_PHIL_1832_lores.jpg; Marburg
virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marburg
_virus.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Preston Hunt
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shingles
_on_the_chest.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 4] Credit: Ebola virus: Courtesy of
CDC/Cynthia Goldsmith; Marburg virus:
Courtesy of CDC/Dr. Erskine Palmer,
Russell Regnery, Ph.D.
Source: Ebola virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ebola_V
irus_TEM_PHIL_1832_lores.jpg; Marburg
virus:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marburg

7.5.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12189_virus.jpg
License: Public Domain
7.5: Viral Disease is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121907.6: HIV
Why is the shape of the virus important?
The AIDS virus. One of the most devastating viruses known. Why? Notice the intricate anatomy of the virus, both inside and
outside. It is the constant changing of those outside mar kers that make producing a vaccine against this virus diff icult.
HIV
The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is the virus that causes Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Most
researchers believe that the HIV originated in sub-Sa haran Africa during the 20th century. HIV is transmitte d by sexual contact and
by contact with infected bodily fluids, such as blood, semen, breast milk, and vaginal secretions. It is a lso passed from mother to
fetus. HIV is now a pandemic, with an estimated (as of 2008) 38.6 million people now living with the disease worldwide. It is
estimated that AIDS has killed more than 25 million peopl e since it was first recognized in 1981.
HIV is the retrovirus that destroys the immune system. HIV primarily infects helper T cells (specifically CD4 T cells),
macrophages, and dendritic cells. HIV infection leads to low levels of CD4 T cells because the virus directly kills infected cells
and the infected T cells are also attacked by the imm une system. The infection of a CD4 cell is shown in the Figure below. When
CD4 T cell numbers decline below a certain critical l evel, cell-mediated immunity is lost, and the body b ecomes more prone to
opportunistic infections. HIV infections will be discussed f urther in the immune system concepts.
If left untreated, most HIV-infected individuals will d evelop AIDS. AIDS is a collection of symptoms and infecti ons resulting from
the damage to the immune system by HIV. Because the im mune systems of people with AIDS are so weak, bacteria and viruses that
do not normally cause disease in healthy people can easily cause disease in an AIDS patient. Opportunistic in fections associated
with AIDS include:
Pneumocystis pneumonia: a form of pneumonia caused by a fungus.
Tuberculosis (TB), caused by the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria.
Lung infections caused by Mycobacterium other than tuber culosis (MOTT).
Kaposi's sarcoma: a type of cancer that is caused by Kaposi's sarcoma-asso ciated herpesvirus (KSHV).+

7.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12190
Lifecycle of HIV. The image at bottom right is an SEM of HIV budding from cultured lymphocyte. The many round bumps
on the cell surface are sites of assembly and budding of virions.
An HIV Infection
An HIV infection of a CD4 cell can be summarized as follows:
1. First, the viral particle attaches to the CD4 receptor and other associated receptors on the cell membrane. The vi ral envelope
then fuses with the cell membrane, and the viral capsid moves into the cell.
2. Once the viral capsid enters the cell, reverse transcrip tase frees the single-stranded RNA from the viral prot eins and copies it
into a complementary strand of DNA. This process of reverse transcription is error-prone and it is during this step tha t
mutations may occur. Such mutations may cause drug resista nce.
3. The reverse transcriptase then makes a complementar y DNA strand to form a double-stranded viral DNA (vDNA).
4. The vDNA is then moved into the cell nucleus. The integr ation of the viral DNA into the host cell's genome is carried o ut by
another viral enzyme called integrase. This integrated viral DNA may then lie dormant, during the latent stage of the HIV
infection. Clinical latency for HIV can vary between two we eks and 20 years.
5. To actively produce viruses, certain cellular transcri ption factors need to be present. These transcription f actors are plentiful in
activated T cells. This means that those cells most likely to be killed by HIV are those currently fighting infection. T he virus
DNA is transcribed to mRNA which then leads to new virus prote in and genome production.
6. Viral particles are assembled inside the cell and then ex it the cell by budding. The virus gets its viral envelop e from the cell’s
plasma membrane. The cycle begins again when the new particl es infect another cell.
HIV infection is treated with a cocktail of several an tiretroviral drugs. The antiretroviral drugs prevent the virus from replicating
and destroying more T cells, thus preventing the patie nts from developing AIDS. Treatment with antiretroviral drugs can
dramatically increase the life expectancy of people with HI V.

7.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12190Summary
HIV is the virus that causes AIDS. HIV destroys the immune s ystem.
Opportunistic infections lead to AIDS.
Review
1. Describe the relationship between HIV and AIDS.
The graph below shows the relationship between the numb er of HIV particles and CD4 lymphocyte counts over th e course of an
untreated HIV infection. Use the graph to answer the followi ng questions:
2. How does the increase of the number of HIV particles rela te to the path of the disease?
3. Outline what happens to the number of viruses and numbe rs of lymphocytes between three and six weeks after initial i nfection.
TED-Ed
Why it’ s so hard to cure HIV/AIDS - Ja
Why it’ s so hard to cure HIV/AIDS - Ja
Watch on

7.6.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121904. Can the development of AIDS symptoms be delayed? Explain yo ur answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Diagram: Courtesy of the NIAID;
SEM image: Courtesy of CDC/C.
Goldsmith, P. Feorino, E. L. Palmer, W. R.
McManus
Source: Diagram:
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIV AIDS/
Understanding/Biology/pages/hivreplicatio
ncycle.aspx; SEM image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HIVbudding.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Diagram: Courtesy of the NIAID;
SEM image: Courtesy of CDC/C.
Goldsmith, P. Feorino, E. L. Palmer, W. R.
McManus
Source: Diagram:
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIV AIDS/
Understanding/Biology/pages/hivreplicatio
ncycle.aspx; SEM image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HIVbudding.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Diagram: Courtesy of the NIAID;
SEM image: Courtesy of CDC/C.
Goldsmith, P. Feorino, E. L. Palmer, W. R.
McManus
Source: Diagram:
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIV AIDS/
Understanding/Biology/pages/hivreplicatio
ncycle.aspx; SEM image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HIVbudding.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
7.6: HIV is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121917.7: Virus Control
What's the best part of going to the doctor?
Most people don't like having a shot at the doctor's office. But these are necessary. They protect you fr om some very dangerous
viruses.
Control of Viruses
People have been able to control the spread of viruse s even before they knew they existed. In 1717, Mary Mont agu, the wife of an
English ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, observed lo cal women inoculating their children against smallpox, a contagious viral
disease that was often deadly. Inoculation involves introducing a small amount of virus into a person’s body to allow their body to
build up immunity to the virus. This early smallpox inoculation involved putting smallpox crusts into the nostril of a healthy
person.
Vaccines
Because viruses use the machinery of a host cell to reproduce and stay within them, they are difficult t o get rid of without killing
the host cell. Vaccines were used to prevent viral in fections long before the discovery of viruses. A vaccine is a mixture of
antigenic material and other immune stimulants that will produce immunity to a certain pathogen or dise ase. The term "vaccine"
comes from Edward Jenner's use of cowpox (vacca means cow in Latin), to immunize people against smallpox.
The material in the vaccine can either be weakened f orms of a living pathogen or virus, dead pathogens (or inactivated viruses),
purified material such as viral proteins, or geneti cally engineered pieces of a pathogen. The material in the vaccine will cause the
body to mount an immune response, so the person will d evelop immunity to the disease. Smallpox was the first disease people
tried to prevent by purposely inoculating themselve s with other types of infections such as cowpox. Vaccination is an effective
way of preventing viral infections. Vaccinations can be given in schools, shown in the Figure below, health clinics, and even at
home. Their use has resulted in a dramatic decline i n morbidity (illness) and mortality (death) associate d with viral infections such
as polio, measles, mumps, and rubella. Genetically engi neered vaccines are produced through recombinant DNA technology. Most
new vaccines are produced with this technology.

7.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12191
A young student receives a vaccine.
A worldwide vaccination campaign by the World Health Or ganization led to the eradication of smallpox in 197 9. Smallpox is a
contagious disease unique to humans and is caused by two V ariola viruses. The eradication of smallpox was possible b ecause
humans are the only carriers of the virus. To this day, smallpox is the only human infectious disease to h ave been completely
eradicated from nature. Scientists are hoping to eradicate polio next.
Antiviral Drugs
While people have been able to prevent certain vira l diseases by vaccinations for many hundreds of years, the development of
antiviral drugs to treat viral diseases is a relati vely recent development. Antiviral drugs are medications used specifically for
treating the symptoms of viral infections. The first antiviral drug was interferon, a substance that is naturally produced by certain
immune cells when an infection is detected. Over the past twenty y ears the development of antiretroviral drugs (also k nown as
antiretroviral therapy, or ART) has increased rapidly. T his has been driven by the AIDS epidemic.
Like antibiotics, specific antivirals are used for sp ecific viruses. They are relatively harmless to the host, and therefore can be used
to treat infections. Most of the antiviral drugs now avai lable are designed to help deal with HIV and herpes vi ruses. Antivirals are
also available for the influenza viruses and the Hepatiti s B and C viruses, which can cause liver cancer.
Antiviral drugs are often imitation DNA building blocks which viruses incorporate into their genomes during replication. The life
cycle of the virus is then halted because the newly sy nthesized DNA is inactive. Similar to antibiotics, antivi rals are subject to drug
resistance as the pathogens evolve to survive exposur e to the treatment. HIV evades the immune system by c onstantly changing the
amino acid sequence of the proteins on the surface of the virion. Researchers are now working to extend the range of antivirals to
other families of pathogens.
Summary
Several viral diseases can be treated with antiviral dr ugs or prevented with vaccines.
Review
1. What is a vaccine?
2. Describe the relationship between vaccination and im munity.

7.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121913. What diseases can be controlled with vaccinations? List f ive.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: cK-12 Foundation
Source: cK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY
[Figure 2]Credit: PV2 Andrew W. McGalliard
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somali_
boy_receives_a_polio_vaccination.jpg
License: Public Domain
7.7: Virus Control is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121927.8: Viruses in Research
Can viruses be helpful, or just harmful?
Viruses are extensively used in research and medicine to both understand basic biology and to improve huma n health. Imagine
having a tool that is able to inject its DNA into a h ost cell. The possibilities of using such a tool are en dless. That tool would be a
virus.
Viruses in Research
Viruses are an extremely important tool in the stud y of molecular and cellular biology. Since viruses i nfect cells by moving their
genetic material into the host cell's nucleus, they are helpful in the investigation of the functions of cells. For example, the use of
viruses in research has helped our understanding of the basics of molecular genetics, such as DNA replicatio n, transcription, RNA
processing, translation, protein transport, and immunolo gy.
Viruses and Medicine
Geneticists often use viruses as vectors to introduce genes into cells that they are studying. A viral vector is a tool commonly used
by molecular biologists to place genetic material i nto cells. To be a useful viral vector, the virus is modified s o that it will not cause
disease, and it will infect only certain types of cells. Phages are often used as vectors to genetically modify bacteria.
In a similar fashion, viral therapy uses viruses to genetically modify diseased cells and tissues. Viral therapy shows promise as a
method of gene therapy and in the treatment of cancer. Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into a person’s cells and tissues to
treat a disease. In the case of a genetic disease, th e defective gene is replaced with a working gene. Altho ugh the technology is still
new, it has been used with some success.
Scientists have focused on gene therapy for diseases c aused by single-gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis, h emophilia, muscular
dystrophy and sickle cell anemia. In gene therapy, t he correct version of the gene is introduced to huma n cells by using a viral
vector such as the adenovirus shown in the Figure below.
Phages have been used for over 60 years as an alterna tive to antibiotics in the former Soviet Union and Ea stern Europe. They are
seen as a hope against multi-drug-resistant strains o f many bacteria because they can infect and kill these “superbugs”. Howe ver, in
the case of MRSA (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), a phage infecting the bacterium produces a toxin t hat makes the
bacterium more virulent and difficult to contain.
Viruses that infect cancer cells are being studied f or their use in cancer treatments. Oncolytic viruses are viruses that lyse and kill
cancer cells. Some researchers are hoping to treat some c ancers with these viruses.

7.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12192
Gene therapy using an Adenovirus vector. A new gene is inserted into an adeno virus vector, which is used to introduce the
modified DNA into a human cell. If the treatment is successful, the new ge ne will get into the nucleus and into the target cell
DNA to make a functional protein.
Summary
Viruses are useful tools in scientific research and medicine.
Viruses help us understand molecular biology. They are also used in gene therapy.
Review
1. Why are viruses especially useful tools for understan ding molecular biology?
2. What have scientists learned by studying the viruses and their invasion of host cells?
3. What is a viral vector? Are they harmful?
Se e ke r
Can The Herpes Virus Kill Cancer?
Can The Herpes Virus Kill Cancer?
Watch on

7.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12192Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of National Institutes of
Health
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gene_th
erapy.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of National Institutes of
Health
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gene_th
erapy.jpg
License: Public Domain
7.8: Viruses in Research is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
How we conquered the deadly smallp
How we conquered the deadly smallp
Watch on

7.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14577.9: Prokaryotes
What are the most numerous organisms on the planet?
Bacteria. And all it takes is one to quickly grow, under just th e right conditions, into millions and billions. Luck ily, we know how to
control bacteria when necessary. But bacteria do serve ma ny important purposes. In fact, we could not survive without them.
Evolution of Prokaryotes
No doubt you’ve had a sore throat before, and you’ve p robably eaten cheese or yogurt. If so, then you’ve en countered the
fascinating world of prokaryotes. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms that lack a nucleus. The y also lack other membranebound organelles. Prokaryotes are tiny and sometimes bo thersome, but they are the most numerous organisms on Ea rth. Without
them, the world would be a very different place. Prokary otes are the simplest organisms. The first cells and organisms to evolve
would be classified as prokaryotic.
Prokaryotes are currently placed in two domains. A domain is the highest taxon, just above the kingdom. The prokaryote domains
are Bacteria and Archaea (see Figure below). The third domain is Eukarya. It includes all eukaryotes. Unlike prokaryotes,
eukaryotes have a nucleus in their cells.
It’s not clear how the three domains are related. Archaea were once thought to be offshoots of Bacteria that wer e adapted to
extreme environments. For their part, Bacteria were con sidered to be ancestors of Eukarya. Scientists now know tha t Archaea share
several traits with Eukarya that Bacteria do not sha re (see Table below). How can this be explained? One hypothesis is that
Eukarya arose when an Archaean cell fused with a Bacte rial cell. The two cells became the nucleus and cytoplasm of a new
Eukaryan cell. How well does this hypothesis fit the evidenc e in Table below?
Characteristic Bacteria Archaea Eukarya
Flagella Unique to Bacteria Unique to Archaea Unique to Eukarya
Cell Membrane Unique to Bacteria Like Bacteria and Eu karya Unique to Eukarya
Protein Synthesis Unique to Bacteria Like Eukarya Like Ar chaea
Introns Absent in most Present Present
Peptidoglycan (in cell wall) Present Absent in most Absent

7.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1457Summary
Prokaryotes include Bacteria and Archaea. An individual prok aryote consists of a single cell without a nucleus.
Bacteria live in virtually all environments on Earth.
Archaea live everywhere on Earth, including extreme envi ronments.
Review
1. What are prokaryotes?
2. What are two major differences between Bacteria and Archaea?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Adenosine/Wikimedia
Commons;Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 7.9: Prokaryotes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

7.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14607.10: Bacteria Classification
With so many different bacteria, how are they all classified?
By shape? By size? By some other criteria? As you can imagine, classifying bacteria is probably not an easy task. Bacteria are
classified by their traits, some of which have to do with th eir shape, others with the cell wall, and even additional t raits.
The Prokaryotic Domains
Domain Bacteria
Bacteria are the most diverse and abundant group of organisms on Earth. They live in almost all environme nts. They are found in
the ocean, the soil, and the intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earth’s sur face. Any surface that has not
been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. It’s estimated to be 5 ×
10, or five million trillion. You have more bacteria in a nd on your body than you have body cells!
Bacteria called cyanobacteria are very important. They are bluish green in color (see Figure below) because they contain
chlorophyll (but not chloroplasts, of course). They make food through photosynthesis and release oxygen i nto the air. These
bacteria were probably responsible for adding oxygen to the air on early Earth. This changed the planet’s atmosphere. It also
changed the direction of evolution. Ancient cyanobacter ia also may have evolved into the chloroplasts of plant cells.
Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovere d, and many more are thought to exist. The known speci es can be classified
on the basis of various traits. One classification is b ased on differences in their cell walls and outer membr anes. It groups bacteria
into Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, as described in Figure below.30

7.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1460
Classification of Bacteria. Different types of bacteria stain a different color when stained with Gram stain. This makes them
easy to identify.
Domain Archaea
Scientists still know relatively little about Archaea. This is partly because they are hard to grow in the l ab. Many live inside the
bodies of animals, including humans. However, none are known for certain to c ause disease.
Archaea were first discovered in extreme environments. For examp le, some were found in hot springs. Others were found ar ound
deep sea vents. Such Archaea are called extremophiles, or “lovers of extremes.” Figure below describes three different types of
Archaean extremophiles. The places where some of them li ve are thought to be similar to the environment on ancient Earth. This
suggests that they may have evolved very early in Earth ’s history.
Extremophile Archaea. Many Archaea are specialized to live in extr eme environments. Just three types are described here.
Archaea are now known to live just about everywhere on Earth. They are particularly numerous in the ocean. Archaea in plankton
may be one of the most abundant types of organisms on the planet. Archaea are also thought to play importa nt roles in the carbon
and nitrogen cycles. For these reasons, Archaea are now recogni zed as a major aspect of life on Earth.

7.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1460Science Friday: Subvisual Subway: The Art of New York City's Bacterial World
An urban legend states that "using the handrails on the subway is like shaking hands with 100 people." In t his video by Science
Friday, Craig Ward sampled the bacteria on subway lines around New York City to create striking and unconven tional "portraits" of
NYC commuters.
Science Friday: Dawn of the Cyborg Bacteria
Does using bacteria to power microscopic robots sound l ike a horror film? In this video by Science Friday, Ph. D. students Elizabeth
Beattie and Denise Wong hope these nano bio-robots will provide a platform for future medical and micro-engin eering endeavors.
Cra sh Cou rse
Old & Odd: Archaea, Bacteria & P rotis
Old & Odd: Archaea, Bacteria & P rotis
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Subvisual Subway: The Art of New Y o
Subvisual Subway: The Art of New Y o
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Dawn of the Cyborg Bacteria
Dawn of the Cyborg Bacteria
Watch on

7.10.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1460Summary
Bacteria live in virtually all environments on Earth.
Archaea live everywhere on Earth, including extreme envi ronments.
Review
1. Distinguish between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte ria, and give an example of each.
2. Summarize the evolutionary significance of cyanobacte ria.
3. What are extremophiles? Name three types.

7.10.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14604. Describe the habitat of extreme halophiles.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of Jesse Allen/NASA
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harmful
_Bloom_in_Lake_Atitl%C3%A1n;
_Guatemala.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Gram cell wall:
User:JulianOnions/Wikimedia Commons;
Gram-positive: JA Jernigan et al./Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; Gramnegative: William A. Clark/Centers for
Disease and Control
Source: Gram cell wall:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GramCell-Wall.jpg; Gram-positive:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol7no6/je
rniganG2.htm; Gram-negative:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bacillus
_coagulans_01.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4] Credit: From left to right, top to bottom:
NASA; Tom Hilton; PMEL/National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
US Geological Survey; NASA;
Environmental Protection Agency
Source: From left to right; top to bottom:
http://science.nasa.gov/sciencenews/science-atnasa/2004/10sep_radmicrobe/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/tomhilton/46
89387475/;
http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents/nemo1999
/images/bugtem.gif;
http://wwwbrr.cr.usgs.gov/projects/GWC_c
hemtherm/;

7.10.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1460astrobiology.nasa.gov/articles/is-there-lifeon-mars-ask-a-magnet/;
http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/nps/acid_mne
.cfm
License: From left to right, top to bottom:
Public Domain; CC BY 2.0; Public
Domain; Public Domain; Public Domain;
Public Domain
This page titled 7.10: Bacteria Classification is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14617.11: Bacteria Structure
Does the shape matter?
It does if you're a bacterium. Prokaryotic cells are distinguished by their shape. And as you can imag ine, shape may have
something to do with mobility.
Prokaryote Structure
Most prokaryotic cells are much smaller than eukaryotic cells. Although they are tiny, prokaryotic cells can be distinguished by
their shapes. The most common shapes are helices, spheres, a nd rods (see Figure below).
Prokaryotic Cell Shapes. The three most common prokaryotic cell shapes are shown here.
Plasma Membrane and Cell Wall
Like other cells, prokaryotic cells have a plasma membrane (see Figure below). It controls what enters and leaves the cell. It is also
the site of many metabolic reactions. For example, cellul ar respiration and photosynthesis take place in the plas ma membrane.
Most prokaryotes also have a cell wall. It lies just outsi de the plasma membrane. It gives strength and rigidit y to the cell. Bacteria
and Archaea differ in the makeup of their cell wall. The cell wal l of Bacteria contains peptidoglycan, composed of sugars and
amino acids. The cell wall of most Archaea lacks peptidoglycan.

7.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1461
Prokaryotic Cell. The main parts of a prokaryotic cell are shown i n this diagram. The structure called a mesosome was once
thought to be an organelle. More evidence has convinced most scientis ts that it is not a true cell structure at all. Instead, it
seems to be an artifact of cell preparation. This is a good example o f how scientific knowledge is revised as more evidence
becomes available. Can you identify each of the labeled structures?
Cytoplasm and Cell Structures
Inside the plasma membrane of prokaryotic cells is t he cytoplasm. It contains several structures, includ ing ribosomes, a
cytoskeleton, and genetic material. Ribosomes are sit es where proteins are made. The cytoskeleton helps the cell keep its shape.
The genetic material is usually a single loop of DNA. There may also be small, circular pieces of DNA, called plasmids. (see
Figure below). The cytoplasm may contain microcompartments as well. These are tiny structures enclosed by proteins. They
contain enzymes and are involved in metabolic processes.
Prokaryotic DNA. The DNA of a prokaryotic cell is in the cytoplasm be cause the cell lacks a nucleus.
Extracellular Structures
Many prokaryotes have an extra layer, called a capsu le, outside the cell wall. The capsule protects the cell from chemicals and
from drying out. It also allows the cell to stick to surfaces and to other cells. Because of this, many prokaryotes can form biofilms,
like the one shown in Figure below. A biofilm is a colony of prokaryotes that is stuck to a surfac e such as a rock or a host’s tissues.
The sticky plaque that collects on your teeth between brus hings is a biofilm. It consists of millions of bacteria.
Most prokaryotes also have long, thin protein structur es called flagella (singular, flagellum). They extend from the plasma
membrane. Flagella help prokaryotes move. They spin around a fixed base, causing the cell to roll and tu mble. As shown in Figure
below, prokaryotes may have one or more flagella.

7.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1461
Bacterial Biofilm. The greatly magnified biofilm shown here was found o n a medical catheter (tubing) removed from a
patient’s body.
Variations in the Flagella of Bacteria. Flagella in prokaryote s may be located at one or both ends of the cell or all around it.
They help prokaryotes move toward food or away from toxins.
Endospores
Many organisms form spores for reproduction. Some prok aryotes form spores for survival. Called endospores, they form inside
prokaryotic cells when they are under stress. The stres s could be UV radiation, high temperatures, or harsh ch emicals. Endospores
enclose the DNA and help it survive under conditions that may kill the cell. Endospores are commonly foun d in soil and water.
They may survive for long periods of time.

7.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1461Summary
Most prokaryotic cells are much smaller than eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic cells have a cell wall outside their plasma m embrane.
Prokaryotic DNA consists of a single loop. Some prokaryotes a lso have small, circular pieces of DNA called plasmids.
Review
1. Identify the three most common shapes of prokaryotic cel ls.
2. Describe a typical prokaryotic cell.
Am oe ba Siste rs
(OLD VIDEO) P rokaryotes and Eukary
(OLD VIDEO) P rokaryotes and Eukary
Watch on

7.11.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14613. What are the roles of flagella and endospores in prokary otes?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Gram cell wall:
User:JulianOnions/Wikimedia Commons;
Gram-positive: JA Jernigan et al./Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; Gramnegative: William A. Clark/Centers for
Disease and Control;Gram cell wall:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...-CellWall.jpg; Gram-positive:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol7no6/je
rniganG2.htm; Gram-negative:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...agulans_
01.jpg
Source: Gram cell wall:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GramCell-Wall.jpg; Gram-positive:
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol7no6/jernigan
G2.htm; Gram-negative:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bacillus
_coagulans_01.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Helix: Janice Carr/Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; Sphere:
Janice Carr/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; Rod: V olker Brinkmann, Max
Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Berlin, Germany
Source: Helix:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leptospi
ra_interrogans_strain_RGA_01.png;
Sphere:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Staphylo
coccus_aureus_01.jpg; Rod:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Salmone
lla_typhimurium.png
License: (Helix and Sphere) Public
Domain; (Rod) CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Prokary
ote_cell_diagram_international.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0

7.11.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1461
[Figure 5]Credit: Courtesy of Janice Carr/Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Staphylo
coccus_on_catheter.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 6]Credit: User:Adenosine/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flagella.
svg
License: CC BY 3.0
This page titled 7.11: Bacteria Structure is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

7.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14627.12: Bacteria Nutrition
What do bacteria need to grow?
Like most everything else, they need food. Given the r ight conditions, bacteria can grow from just a few cells to millions or billions
overnight.
Prokaryote Metabolism
Like all living things, prokaryotes need energy and carbon. They meet these needs in a variety of ways. In fact, prokaryotes have
just about every possible type of metabolism. They may get energy from light (photo) or chemica l compounds (chemo). They may
get carbon from carbon dioxide (autotroph) or other living things (heterotroph). Most prokaryotes are chemoheterotrophs. They
depend on other organisms for both energy and carbo n. Many break down organic wastes and the remains of de ad organisms. They
play vital roles as decomposers and help recycle carb on and nitrogen. Photoautotrophs are important producers. They are
especially important in aquatic ecosystems.
Classification of Prokaryotes Based on Metabolism
Two major nutritional needs can be used to group proka ryotes. These are (1) carbon metabolism, their source of carbon for building
organic molecules within the cells, and (2) energy metabolism, their source of energy used f or growth.
In terms of carbon metabolism, prokaryotes are classified as either heterotrophic or autotrophic:
Heterotrophic organisms use organic compounds, usually f rom other organisms, as carbon sources.
Autotrophic organisms use carbon dioxide (CO) as their o nly source or their main source of carbon. Many autotroph ic bacteria
are photosynthetic, and get their carbon from the carbon di oxide in the atmosphere.
Energy metabolism in prokaryotes is classified as one of t he following:
Phototrophic organisms capture light energy from the s un and convert it into chemical energy inside their cells.
Chemotrophic organisms break down either organic or i norganic molecules to supply energy for the cell. Some ch emotrophic
organisms can also use their organic energy-supplying mole cules as a carbon supply, which would make them
chemoheterotrophs.
Photoheterotrophs are organisms that capture light energy to convert to c hemical energy in the cells, but they get carbon from
organic sources (other organisms). Examples are purple n on-sulfur bacteria, green non-sulfur bacteria and helio bacteria.
Chemoheterotrophs are organisms that get their energy source and carbon source from organic sources. Chemohetero trophs
must consume organic building blocks that they are unabl e to make themselves. Most get their energy from organic mol ecules
such as sugars. This nutritional mode is very common amo ng eukaryotes, including humans.
Photoautotrophs are cells that capture light energy, a nd use carbon dioxide as their carbon source. There are many
photoautotrophic prokaryotes, which include cyanobacter ia. Photoautotrophic prokaryotes use similar compounds t o those of2

7.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1462plants to trap light energy.
Chemoautotrophs are cells that break down inorganic molecules to supp ly energy for the cell, and use carbon dioxide as a
carbon source. Chemoautotrophs include prokaryotes tha t break down hydrogen sulfide (H S the “rotten egg” smelling gas),
and ammonia (NH). Nitrosomonas, a species of soil bacterium, oxidizes NH to nitrite (NO). This reaction releases energy
that the bacteria use. Many chemoautotrophs also live in extreme environments such as deep sea vents.
This flowchart helps to determine if a species is an autotroph or a he terotroph, a phototroph or a chemotroph. For example,
“Obtain carbon elsewhere?” asks if the source of carbon is another organis m. If the answer is “yes”, the organism is
heterotrophic. If the answer is “no,” the organisms is autotrophic.
Summary
Prokaryotes fulfill their carbon and energy needs in vari ous ways. They may be photoautotrophs, chemoautotrophs,
photoheterotrophs, or chemoheterotrophs.
Review
1. Describe metabolism of most prokaryotes.
2. Define phototrophic and chemotrophic organisms.
3. What are photoautotrophs?
4. What are photoheterotrophs?2
4 4+2-

7.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1462Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 7.12: Bacteria Nutrition is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
B IAL IGY
P rokaryotes - Nutrition and Metaboli
P rokaryotes - Nutrition and Metaboli
Watch on

7.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14647.13: Bacteria Habitat
Where do you find lots of bacteria?
Practically all surfaces. Bacteria can live and grow in practically any environment. It is this ability that has made bacteria the most
numerous species on the planet.
Prokaryote Habitats
Prokaryotes have a wide range of metabolisms, and this de termines where they live. They live in a particular h abitat because they
are able to “eat” whatever is around them. For exampl e, there are bacteria and archaea that break down hydrogen sulfide to produce
ATP. Hydrogen sulfide is the gas that gives rotten eg gs and sewage their distinctive smell. It is poisonous to animals, but some
prokaryotes depend on it for life.
Organisms that are obligate aerobes need oxygen to live. That is, they use oxygen as a t erminal electron acceptor while making
ATP (see the “Cellular Respiration” concept). Humans ar e obligate aerobes, and so are Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria. M.
tuberculosis causes tuberculosis (TB). Obligate aerobes are found o nly in places with molecular oxygen.
An anaerobic organism is any organism that does not need oxygen for growth and even dies in its presence. Obligate anaerobes
will die when exposed to atmospheric levels of oxygen. Clostridium perfringens bacteria, which are commonly found in soil
around the world, are obligate anaerobes. Infection o f a wound by C. perfringens bacteria causes the disease gas gangrene. Obligate
anaerobes use molecules other than oxygen as terminal electron acceptors.
Facultative anaerobic organisms, which are usually prokaryotic, make ATP by aerobic respiration, if oxygen is present, but can
also survive without oxygen. In the absence of oxygen they switch to the process of fermentation to make AT P. Fermentation is a
type of heterotrophic metabolism that uses organic carbon instead of oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor. Examples of
facultative anaerobic bacteria are the Staphylococci, Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium, and Listeria species. Many bacteria that
cause human diseases are facultative anaerobic organism s.
Temperature
Like most organisms, prokaryotes live and grow best within certain temperature ranges. Prokaryotes can be classified by their
temperature preferences, as shown in the Table below. Which type of prokaryote would you expect to find inside the human body?
Thermophiles live at relatively high temperatures, above 45°C (11 3°F). Thermophiles are found in geothermally heated regions of
the Earth, such as hot springs like the Morning Glory po ol in Yellowstone National Park (see Figure below), and deep sea
hydrothermal vents. Some thermophiles live in decayin g plant matter such as peat bogs and compost. Many th ermophiles are
archaea. Extreme thermophiles (or hyperthermophiles), live in temperatures hotter than 80°C (176°F).
Psychrophiles grow and reproduce in cold temperatures. The optima l growth temperature of some psychrophiles is 15°C or lower;
they cannot grow in temperatures above 20°C. The envi ronments that psychrophiles inhabit are found all ov er Earth. Psychrophiles
live in such places as permafrost soils, deep-ocean waters, Ar ctic and Antarctic glaciers and snowfields.

7.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1464Mesophiles grow best in moderate temperature, typically between 25°C and 40°C (77°F and 104°F). Mesophiles are often f ound
living in or on the bodies of humans or other animals. The optimal growth temperature of many pathogenic mesophiles is 37°C
(98°F), the normal human body temperature. Mesophilic o rganisms have important uses in food preparation, in cluding cheese,
yogurt, beer and wine.
Type of Prokaryote Preferred Temperature Where It Might Be Found
Thermophile above 45°C (113°F) in compost
Mesophile about 37°C (98°F) inside animals
Psychrophile below 20°C (68°F) in the deep ocean
The Morning Glory pool of Yellowstone National Park in the United State s is a geothermal pool whose waters are heated to
high temperatures by magma deep underground. Hyperthermophilic organisms, s uch as members of the archaeal genus
Sulfolobus
can live at temperatures between 60°C-80°C and a pH of 3.
Summary
Aerobic prokaryotes live in habitats with oxygen.
Anaerobic prokaryotes live in habitats without oxygen.
Prokaryotes may also be adapted to habitats that are hot, mod erate, or cold in temperature.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Bacteria | Biology | Bacteriology
Bacteria | Biology | Bacteriology
Watch on

7.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1464Review
1. Why are many prokaryotes adapted for living at the no rmal internal temperature of the human body.
2. Compare psychrophiles to thermophiles.
3. Compare obligate aerobes to facultative anaerobes.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the National Park
Service;From left to right, top to bottom:
NASA; Tom Hilton; PMEL/National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
US Geological Survey; NASA;
Environmental Protection Agency
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Morning
_Glory_Pool.jpg; From left to right; top to
bottom: http://science.nasa.gov/sciencenews/science-atnasa/2004/10sep_radmicrobe/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/tomhilton/46
89387475/;
http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents/nemo1999
/images/bugtem.gif;
http://wwwbrr.cr.usgs.gov/projects/GWC_c
hemtherm/;
astrobiology.nasa.gov/articles/is-there-lifeon-mars-ask-a-magnet/;
http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/nps/acid_mne
.cfm
License: Public Domain; (Left to right, top
to bottom) Public Domain; CC BY 2.0;
Public Domain; Public Domain; Public
Domain; Public Domain
This page titled 7.13: Bacteria Habitat is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

7.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14637.14: Bacteria Reproduction
How do bacteria reproduce?
Essentially, they grow and divide. Show here is an exa mple of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, bacteria.
Notice how one bacterium is dividing into two.
Reproduction in Prokaryotes
Unlike multicellular organisms, increases in the siz e of prokaryotes (cell growth) and their reproductio n by cell division are tightly
linked. Prokaryotes grow to a fixed size and then reproduc e through binary fission.
Binary Fission
Binary fission is a type of asexual reproduction. It occurs when a parent cell splits into two identical d aughter cells. This can result
in very rapid population growth. For example, under id eal conditions, bacterial populations can double ever y 20 minutes. Such
rapid population growth is an adaptation to an unstable environment. Can you explain why?
Schematic diagram of cellular growth (elongation) and binary fission o f bacilli. Blue and red lines indicate old and newlysynthesized bacterial cell wall, respectively. The DNA inside the ba cterium is copied and the daughter cells receive an exact
copy of the parent DNA. Fission involves a cytoskeletal protein FtsZ tha t forms a ring at the site of cell division.

7.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1463Genetic Transfer
In asexual reproduction, all the offspring are exactl y the same. This is the biggest drawback of this type of reproduction. Why?
Lack of genetic variation increases the risk of exti nction. Without variety, there may be no organisms that can survive a major
change in the environment.
Prokaryotes have a different way to increase genetic va riation. It’s called genetic transfer or bacterial conjugation. It can occur in
two ways. One way is when cells “grab” stray pieces of DNA from their environment. Th e other way is when cells directly
exchange DNA (usually plasmids) with other cells. For exa mple, as shown in Figure below, the donor cell makes a structure called
an F pilus, or sex pilus. The F pilus attaches one cell to anoth er cell. The membranes of the two cells merge and genetic material,
usually a plasmid, moves into the recipient cell. Genetic transfer ma kes bacteria very useful in biotechnology. It can be used to
create bacterial cells that carry new genes.
A flowchart showing bacterial conjugation. The donor cell makes a structur e called an F pilus, or sex pilus. The F pilus
attaches one cell to another cell. The membranes of the two cells m erge and genetic material, usually a plasmid, moves into
the recipient cell.
L e a rn in g Sim ply
P rokaryotic Cell Division
P rokaryotic Cell Division
Watch on

7.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1463Summary
Prokaryotic cells grow to a certain size. Then they div ide by binary fission. This is a type of asexual reproduc tion.
Binary fission produces genetically identical offspring.
Genetic transfer increases genetic variation in prokaryot es.
Review
1. Describe binary fission.
2. Why might genetic transfer be important for the survival of prokaryote species?
3. Under ideal conditions, in 2 hours how many bacteria ca n result from just a single bacterium? 5 hours?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 7.14: Bacteria Reproduction is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121827.15: Bacteria and Humans
Can you guess what organisms are pictured here?
Are they fat green worms on a red leaf? Here’s a clue: Th ere are more organisms like these than any other on Earth. Here’s another clue: Each organism
consists of a single cell without a nucleus.
The organisms are bacteria called Salmonella. If the word Salmonella rings a bell, that’s probably b ecause Salmonella causes human diseases such as food
poisoning. Many other types of bacteria also cause hu man diseases. But not all bacteria are harmful to peo ple. In fact, we could not survive without many of
the trillions of bacteria that live in or on the human body.
Bacteria and Humans
Bacteria and humans have many important relationships. Bacteria make our lives easier in a number of ways. In fact, we could not survive without them. On
the other hand, bacteria can also make us sick.
Benefits of Bacteria
Bacteria provide vital ecosystem services. They are important decomposers. They are also needed for the carbon and nitrogen cycles. There are billions of
bacteria inside the human intestines. They help dige st food, make vitamins, and play other important roles. Hu mans also use bacteria in many other ways,
including:
Creating products, such as ethanol and enzymes.
Making drugs, such as antibiotics and vaccines.
Making biogas, such as methane.
Cleaning up oil spills and toxic wastes.
Killing plant pests.
Transferring normal genes to human cells in gene therapy.
Fermenting foods (see Figure below).
Fermented Foods. Fermentation is a type of respiration that doesn’t use ox ygen. Fermentation by bacteria is used in brewing and baking. It is also
used to make the foods pictured here.
Bacteria and Disease
You have ten times as many bacteria as human cells in your body. Most of these bacteria are harmless. Howe ver, bacteria can also cause disease. Examples
of bacterial diseases include tetanus, syphilis, and foo d poisoning. Bacteria may spread directly from one p erson to another. For example, they can spread
through touching, coughing, or sneezing. They may also spread via food, water, or objects.
Another way bacteria and other pathogens can spread is b y vectors. A vector is an organism that spreads pathogens from host to h ost. Insects are the most
common vectors of human diseases. Figure below shows two examples.

7.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12182
Bacterial Disease Vectors. Ticks spread bacteria that cause Lyme dise ase. Deerflies spread bacteria that cause tularemia.
Humans have literally walked into some new bacterial d iseases. When people come into contact with wild popul ations, they may become part of natural
cycles of disease transmission. Consider Lyme disease. It’s caused by bacteria that normally infect small, wild mammals, such as mice. A tick bites a mouse
and picks up the bacteria. The tick may then bite a human wh o invades the natural habitat. Through the bite, the bact eria are transmitted to the human host.
Controlling Bacteria
Bacteria in food or water usually can be killed by heating it to a high temperature (generally, at least 74°C, or 165°F). Bacteria on many surfaces can be
killed with chlorine bleach or other disinfectants. Bac terial infections in people can be treated with antibiotic drugs. For example, if you ever had “strep”
throat, you were probably treated with an antibiotic.
Antibiotics have saved many lives. However, misuse and over-use of the drugs have led to antibiotic resistance in bacteria. Figure below shows how
antibiotic resistance evolves. Some strains of bacteria are no w resistant to most common antibiotics. These infections are very difficult to treat.
Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance in Bacteria. This diagram shows how ant ibiotic resistance evolves by natural selection.

7.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12182
J on a t h a n E is e n
M ee t yo ur m i c r o b e s
Science Friday: Your Very Special Bacterial Cloud
There is a cloud surrounding you, formed by billions of bacteria that slough off your body with every move ment you make. In this video by Science Friday,
researchers at the University of Oregon, revealed that they can d etect and catalog this unique personal microbial cloud.

7.15.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12182Science Friday: Subvisual Subway: The Art of New York City's Bacterial World
An urban legend states that "using the handrails on the subway is like shaking hands with 100 people." In this video by Science Friday, Craig Ward sampled
the bacteria on subway lines around New York City to create stri king and unconventional "portraits" of NYC commuters.
Summary
Bacteria and humans have many important relationships. Bac teria provide humans with a number of services. They also cau se human diseases.
Review
1. How can bacteria cause disease?
2. List three benefits of bacteria.
Sc iF ri
Y our Very Special Bacterial Cloud
Y our Very Special Bacterial Cloud
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Subvisual Subway: The Art of New Y ork City' s B
Subvisual Subway: The Art of New Y ork City' s B
Watch on

7.15.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121823. How can bacteria be killed?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Wykis/Wikimedia Commons, modified
by CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibiotic_resista
nce.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Left to right: Flickr:LWY;
Flickr:dustingrzesik; Christian Bauer;
User:Omernos/Wikimedia Commons
Source: Left to right:
www.flickr.com/photos/86688834@N00/214370972
0;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/80707662@N02/8326
034806/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Swiss_cheese_cu
bes.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Labneh01.jpg
License: Left to right: CC BY 2.0; CC BY 2.0; CC
BY 2.0; Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Tick: Courtesy of Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; Deerfly:
User:Pudding4Brains/Wikimedia Commons
Source: Tick:
http://www.fda.gov/forconsumers/consumerupdates/
ucm049298.htm; Deerfly:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Daas_op_been_
%28omgeving_Goor%29.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: User:Wykis/Wikimedia Commons, modified
by CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibiotic_resista
nce.svg
License: Public Domain
7.15: Bacteria and Humans is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121837.16: Viruses
What is a virus? Is it even a living organism?
This alien-looking thing is a virus. But is it proka ryotic or eukaryotic? Or neither? Or both? A virus is essentially genetic material
surrounded by protein. That's it. So, is a virus prokaryo tic or eukaryotic? Or neither? Or both?
Viruses: Prokaryotes or Eukaryotes?
Viruses, like the one depicted in Figure below, are tiny particles that may cause disease. Huma n diseases caused by viruses include
the common cold and flu. Do you think viruses are pr okaryotes or eukaryotes? The answer may surprise you. Vi ruses are not cells
at all, so they are neither prokaryotes nor eukaryotes.
Cartoon of a flu virus. The flu virus is a tiny particle that may cause illness in humans. What is a virus? Is it a cell? Is it
even alive?
Viruses contain DNA but not much else. They lack the o ther parts shared by all cells, including a plasma membrane, cytoplasm,
and ribosomes. Therefore, viruses are not cells, but are they alive? All living things not only have cell s; they are also capable of
reproduction. Viruses cannot reproduce by themselves. Instead, they infect living hosts, and use the host s’ cells to make copies of
their own DNA. Viruses also do not have their own metabol ism or maintain homeostasis. For these reasons, most sci entists do not
consider viruses to be living things.

7.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12183Further Reading
Virus Characteristics
Summary
Viruses are neither prokaryotic or eukaryotic.
Viruses are not made of cells. Viruses cannot replicate on their own.
Most scientists do not consider viruses to be living.
Review
1. What is a virus?
2. Explain why viruses are not considered to be living.
3. Is a virus made of cells?
4. Can a virus reproduce?
NPR i s a n
Ame ri ca n …N P R
Flu Attack! How A Virus Invades Y our
Flu Attack! How A Virus Invades Y our
Watch on

7.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121835. Does a virus metabolize?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Kannanimages,
2014;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_structure_en.svg
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com;Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Kannanimages,
2014;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_structure_en.svg
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com;Public Domain
7.16: Viruses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121847.17: Virus Characteristics
This virus looks alive, but is it?
Notice the big virus. He (or she) looks very angry. But actually viruses cannot be a "he" or a "she" - or bi g either. In fact, viruses
are the smallest things. Much smaller than most prokar yotes. We also cannot say that viruses are the smalle st living things or
organisms, as viruses do not meet the definition of living or of an organism.
Characteristics of Viruses
Which of the three domains of life do viruses belon g to? None. Why? Viruses are usually considered to be nonliving. Viruses do
not meet most of the criteria of life. They are not even mad e of cells.
A virus is a sub-microscopic particle that can infect livin g cells. Viruses are much smaller than prokaryotes, ranging in size from
about 20–300 nanometers (nm), though some can be larg er. Prokaryotes are typically 0.5–5.0 micrometers (µm) in length. For
example, if a virus was about the size of three soccer balls lying side-by-side, then a prokaryote would be about the size of soccer
field.
An individual virus is called a virion. It is a tiny particle much smaller than a prokaryoti c cell. Because viruses do not consist of
cells, they also lack cell membranes, cytoplasm, ribosomes, a nd other cell organelles. Without these structures, they are unable to
make proteins or even reproduce on their own. Instead, they must depend on a host cell to synthesize their proteins and to make
copies of themselves. Although viruses are not class ified as living things, they share two important tra its with living things. They
have genetic material, and they can evolve. This is why the classification of viruses has been controversi al. It calls into question
just what it means to be alive. What do you think? How would yo u classify viruses?
The study of viruses is known as virology and people who study viruses are known as virologists. Viruses infect and live inside the
cells of living organisms. When viruses infect the cel ls of their host, they may cause disease. For example, vi ruses cause AIDS
(Acquired immune deficiency syndrome), influenza (flu), chicken pox, and the common cold. Therapy is somet imes difficult for
viral diseases. Antibiotics have no effect on viruses a nd only a few antiviral drugs are available for some diseases. One of the best
ways to prevent viral diseases is with a vaccine, which produces immunity. But vaccines are available for only a few diseases.
Mimivirus, shown in the Figure below, is the largest known virus, with a diameter of 400 nm. Protein filaments measuring 100 nm
stick out from the surface of the virus, which increas es the diameter of the virus to about 600 nm. This is bigger than a small
bacterial cell. The virus appears hexagonal under an electron microscope; the viral shape is icosahedral (having 20 faces or sides).

7.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12184
The largest known virus, called mimivirus, is so large that scientists firs t mistook it for a bacterium. It was first discovered
in amoeba, in 1992, and was identified as a virus in 2003. Scientists belie ve that mimivirus may cause certain types of
pneumonia in humans. The core contains DNA, with the majority of the DNA in genes, and only 10% DNA of unknown
function ("junk" DNA).
Replication
Viruses can replicate only by infecting a host cell. They cannot reproduce on their own. Viruses are not c ells; they are a strand of
genetic material within a protective protein coat ca lled a capsid. They infect a wide variety of organisms, including both eukaryotes
and prokaryotes. Once inside the cell, they use the cell’s ATP, ribosomes, enzymes, and other cellular parts to repli cate.
Habitats
Viruses can be found almost anywhere there is life, including living within prokaryotes. A phage is a virus that infects prokaryotes.
Phages are estimated to be the most widely distributed and diverse entities in the biosphere, even more nu merous than prokaryotic
organisms. Phages can be found everywhere their hosts are f ound, such as in soil, in the intestine of animals, or seawater. Up to 10
virions have been found in a milliliter of seawater, a nd up to 70 percent of marine bacteria may be infected by phages. They are
also found in drinking water and in some foods, including fermented vegetables a nd meats, where they control the growth of
bacteria.
Summary
Viruses are tiny particles, smaller than prokaryotic ce lls.
Viruses are not cells and cannot replicate without help, but they have nucleic acids and can evolve.
Review
1. What is a virus?
2. What are the two main components of a virus?
3. How do viruses differ from living things? How are they similar to living things?
4. Briefly describe how viruses depend on host cells.
5. What two characteristics of life are evident in viruses?9

7.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/121846. What is a phage?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Xanthine/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mimivir
us.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Xanthine/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mimivir
us.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
7.17: Virus Characteristics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Protists and Fungi
8.1: Fungi Reproduction
8.2: Fungi Evolution
8.3: Fungi Classification
8.4: 8.13 Fungi Nutrition
8.5: Fungi Symbiosis
8.6: Use of Fungi
8.7: Fungi Diseases
8.8: Protists
8.9: Protist Evolution
8.10: Protist Characteristics
8.11: Protozoa
8.12: Algae
8.13: Mold
8.14: Protists and Disease
8.15: Fungi
8.16: Fungi Structure
This page titled 8: Protists and Fungi is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122038.1: Fungi Reproduction
How do fungi reproduce? Sexually or asexually?
How about both? That would suggest that fungi can prod uce both diploid and haploid cells, which they can. Shown above are fungi
mycelia and haploid spores. Spores allow fungi to reproduce through unfavorable conditions.
Reproduction of Fungi
The majority of fungi can reproduce both asexually and sexually. This allows them to adjust to condition s in the environment. They
can spread quickly through asexual reproduction when conditions are stable. They can increase their gene tic variation through
sexual reproduction when conditions are changing and va riation may help them survive.
Asexual Reproduction
Almost all fungi reproduce asexually by producing sp ores. A fungal spore is a haploid cell produced by mitosis from a haploid
parent cell. It is genetically identical to the paren t cell. Fungal spores can develop into new haploid ind ividuals without being
fertilized.
Spores may be dispersed by moving water, wind, or other organisms. Some fungi even have “cannon s” that “shoot” the spores far
from the parent organism. This helps to ensure that the offspring will not have to compete with the paren t for space or other
resources. You are probably familiar with puffballs, lik e the one in Figure below. They release a cloud of spores when knocked or
stepped on. Wherever the spores happen to land, the y do not germinate until conditions are favorable for growth. Then they
develop into new hyphae.

8.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12203
Puffballs release spores when disturbed.
Yeasts do not produce spores. Instead, they reproduc e asexually by budding. Budding is the pinching off of an offspring from the
parent cell. The offspring cell is genetically identic al to the parent. Budding in yeast is pictured in Figure below.
Yeast reproduce asexually by budding.
Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction also occurs in virtually all fun gi. This involves mating between two haploid hyphae. Dur ing mating, two
haploid parent cells fuse, forming a diploid spore called a zygospore. The zygospore is genetically different from the p arents. After
the zygospore germinates, it can undergo meiosis, form ing haploid cells that develop into new hyphae.
Summary
The majority of fungi can reproduce both asexually and s exually. This allows them to adjust to conditions in the e nvironment.
Yeast reproduce asexually by budding. Other fungi reprodu ce asexually by producing spores.
Sexual reproduction occurs when spores from two parents fus e and form a zygospore.
Su rprise Un de rTh e K ilt
Fungal Reproduction
Fungal Reproduction
Watch on

8.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12203Review
1. Explain the advantages of fungal spores.
2. Identify ways that fungal spores may be dispersed.
3. Compare and contrast a fungal spore and zygospore.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright siloto, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National
Institutes of Health
Source:
www.niaid.nih.gov/labsandresources/labs/a
boutlabs/lcid/clinicalmycologysection/Page
s/bennett.aspx
License: Public Domain
8.1: Fungi Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122048.2: Fungi Evolution
What were early fungi like?
Early fungi probably lived in water. And they were most likely single-celled organisms. Mayb e they lived on dead and decaying
material. Obviously, at least in overall size and stru cture, a mold is very different than a mushroom. Coul d early fungi have been
similar to a mold?
Evolution of Fungi
DNA evidence suggests that almost all fungi have a single common ancestor. The earliest fungi may have evolved about 600
million years ago or even earlier. They were probably aquatic organisms with a flagellum. Fungi first coloniz ed the land at least
460 million years ago, around the same time as plants. Fossils of terrestrial fungi date back almost 400 million years (see Figure
below). Starting about 250 million years ago, the fossil record shows fungi were abundant in many places. They may have been the
dominant life forms on Earth at that time.
Summary
Almost all fungi have a single common ancestor.
The earliest fungi may have evolved about 600 million years ago.
Fungi colonized land at least 460 million years ago.
By 250 million years ago, they may have been the domina nt life forms on Earth.

8.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12204Review
1. Summarize the evolution of fungi.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Jpwilson/Wikipedia
Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rh
ynie_chert.jpg
License: Public Domain
8.2: Fungi Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122058.3: Fungi Classification
What type of fungus is this?
Obviously a mold. But what type of mold? There are thousands of known species of molds. How are they classified?
Classification of Fungi
For a long time, scientists considered fungi to be memb ers of the plant kingdom because they have obvious s imilarities with plants.
Both fungi and plants are immobile, have cell walls, a nd grow in soil. Some fungi, such as lichens, even look like plants (see
Figure below).
Moss (Plant) and Lichen Growing on Tree Bark. Both fungi and moss are growing o n this tree. Can you tell them apart?
The Kingdom Fungi
Today, fungi are no longer classified as plants. We now know that they have unique physical, chemical, and genetic traits that set
them apart from plants and other eukaryotes. For exampl e, the cell walls of fungi are made of chitin, not cellulose. Also, fungi
absorb nutrients from other organisms, whereas plants m ake their own food. These are just a few of the reasons f ungi are now
placed in their own kingdom.
Fungal Phyla
Classification of fungi below the level of the kingdo m is controversial. There is no single, widely-accepte d system of fungal
classification. Most classifications include several p hyla (the next major taxon below the kingdom). Three of the most common
phyla are compared in Table below.

8.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12205Phylum Description Example
Zygomycotamainly terrestrial, live in soil and compost
and on foods such as breadblack bread mold
Basidiomycotahave many different shapes, considerable
variation exists even within speciesbutton mushrooms
Ascomycotafound in all terrestrial ecosystems worldwide, even in Antarctica, often involved in
symbiotic relationshipsbaker’s yeast
Summary
Fungi used to be classified as plants. Now, they are known to hav e unique traits that set them apart from plants. For exam ple,
fungal cell walls contain chitin, not cellulose, and fun gi absorb food rather than make their own.
Below the level of the kingdom, classification of fungi is controversial.
Review
1. State why fungi were once classified as plants.
2. Explain the significance of the chitin cell wall of f ungi.
L e a rn oH u b - Cla ss 11, 12
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Watch on

8.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122053. Mushrooms belong to what phylum of fungi?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Flickr:SNappa2006
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/snappa2006/4
343940216/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5]Credit: Zappy's
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
8.3: Fungi Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12205

8.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122068.4: 8.13 Fungi Nutrition
So what do fungi "eat"?
Just about anything. From dead plants to rotting fruit. Shown here are fungi sprouting from dead material in the woods. Fungi
perform an essential role in the decomposition of org anic matter and have fundamental roles in nutrient cycl ing and exchange.
Nutrition
Fungi get their nutrition by absorbing organic compou nds from the environment. Fungi are heterotrophic: they rely solely on
carbon obtained from other organisms for their meta bolism and nutrition. Fungi have evolved in a way that allows many of them to
use a large variety of organic substrates for growth, i ncluding simple compounds such as nitrate, ammonia, ace tate, or ethanol.
Their mode of nutrition defines the role of fungi in the ir environment.
Fungi obtain nutrients in three different ways:
1. They decompose dead organic matter. A saprotroph is an organism that obtains its nutrients from non-living organic matter,
usually dead and decaying plant or animal matter, by a bsorbing soluble organic compounds. Saprotrophic fungi p lay very
important roles as recyclers in ecosystem energy flow a nd biogeochemical cycles. Saprophytic fungi, such as shii take
(Lentinula edodes) and oyster mushrooms (Pleurotus ostreatus), decompose dead plant and animal tissue by releasing e nzymes
from hyphal tips. In this way they recycle organic materials b ack into the surrounding environment. Because of these ab ilities,
fungi are the primary decomposers in forests (see Figure below).
2. They feed on living hosts. As parasites, fungi live in or on other organisms and get their nut rients from their host. Parasitic
fungi use enzymes to break down living tissue, which may ca uses illness in the host. Disease-causing fungi are para sitic. Recall
that parasitism is a type of symbiotic relationship betwee n organisms of different species in which one, the parasite, b enefits
from a close association with the other, the host, which is har med.
3. They live mutualistically with other organisms. Mutualisti c fungi live harmlessly with other living organisms. Rec all that
mutualism is an interaction between individuals of two diff erent species, in which both individuals benefit.
Both parasitism and mutualism are classified as symbiot ic relationships, but they are discussed separately here because of the
different effect on the host.

8.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12206
Forest Decomposers. These forest mushrooms may look fragile, but they do a powerful job. They decompose dead wood
and other tough plant material.
Fungal hyphae are adapted to efficient absorption of nutrients from their environments, because hyphae ha ve high surface area-tovolume ratios. These adaptations are also complemente d by the release of hydrolytic enzymes that break down large organic
molecules such as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipi ds into smaller molecules. These molecules are then a bsorbed as nutrients into
the fungal cells. One enzyme that is secreted by fungi is cellulase, which breaks down the polysaccharide cellulose. Cellulose is a
major component of plant cell walls. In some cases, fungi have developed specialized structures for nutri ent uptake from living
hosts, which penetrate into the host cells for nutrient uptake by the fungus.
Fungal mycelia. Fungi absorb nutrients from the environment through mycel ia. The branching mycelia have a high
surface-area-to-volume ratio which allows for efficient absorpti on of nutrients. Some fungi digest nutrients by releasing
enzymes into the environment.
Mycorrhiza
A mycorrhiza (Greek for "fungus roots") is a symbiotic associatio n between a fungus and the roots of a plant. In a myco rrhizal
association, the fungus may colonize the roots of a h ost plant by either growing directly into the root cells, or by growing around
the root cells. This association provides the fungus with relatively constant and direct access to glucose, which the plant produces
by photosynthesis. The mycelia of the fungi increase th e surface area of the plant’s root system. The larg er surface area improves
water and mineral nutrient absorption from the soil.

8.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12206Summary
Fungi are heterotrophic. They get their nutrition by abso rbing organic compounds from the environment.
Fungi, along with bacteria that are found in soil, are the primary decomposers of o rganic matter in terrestrial ecosystems.
Review
1. Describe how fungi obtain nutrients.
2. Explain the role of saprotrophic fungi? Give an exampl e of this role.
3. What is a mycorrhiza? What are the advantages of a my corrhiza?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: A Bremner
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/scoobygirl/27
1283243/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Lex vB/Wikipedia
Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Z
wamvlok_20060705.jpg
License: Public Domain
8.4: 8.13 Fungi Nutrition is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
H a rva rd M u se u m of N a tu ra l H istory
Decomposing Fungi
Decomposing Fungi
Watch on

8.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122078.5: Fungi Symbiosis
Do all fungi feed only on dead organisms?
Not all. This fungus is a lichen, providing nutrients to the tree. The lichen gets sugars from the plant. Bot h benefit from this
relationship.
Symbiotic Relationships of Fungi
Not all fungi feed on dead organisms. Many are involved in symb iotic relationships, including parasitism and mutualism.
Fungi as Parasites
In a parasitic relationship, the parasite benefits whil e the host is harmed. Parasitic fungi live in or on other organisms and get their
nutrients from them. Fungi have special structures fo r penetrating a host. They also produce enzymes that break down the host’s
tissues.
Parasitic fungi often cause illness and may eventuall y kill their host. They are the major cause of disease in agricultural plants.
Fungi also parasitize animals, such as the insect pictured in Figure below. Fungi even parasitize humans. Did you ever have
athelete’s foot? If so, you were the host of a parasitic fun gus.
Parasitic Fungus and Insect Host. The white parasitic fungus named Cordyceps is shown here growing on its host—a dark
brown moth.
Mutualism in Fungi
Fungi have several mutualistic relationships with othe r organisms. In mutualism, both organisms benefit from the relationship. Two
common mutualistic relationships involving fungi are m ycorrhiza and lichen.

8.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12207A mycorrhiza is a mutualistic relationship between a fungus and a plant. T he fungus grows in or on the plant roots. The fungus
benefits from the easy access to food made by the plant. Th e plant benefits because the fungus puts out mycelia that h elp absorb
water and nutrients. Scientists think that a symbiotic relation ship such as this may have allowed plants to first colonize t he land.
A lichen is an organism that results from a mutualistic relatio nship between a fungus and a photosynthetic organism. The other
organism is usually a cyanobacterium or green alga. The fun gus grows around the bacterial or algal cells. The fungus benefits
from the constant supply of food produced by the photosy nthesizer. The photosynthesizer benefits from the water and nutrients
absorbed by the fungus. Figure below shows lichen growing on a rock.
Lichen Growing on Rock. Unlike plants, lichen can grow on bare rocks because they don’t have roots. That’s why lichens
are often pioneer species in primary ecological succession. How do li chen get water and nutrients without roots?
Some fungi have mutualistic relationships with insects. For exampl e:
Leafcutter ants grow fungi on beds of leaves in their nests. The fungi get a protected place to live. The ants feed the fung i to
their larvae.
Ambrosia beetles bore holes in tree bark and “plant” fungal s pores in the holes. The holes in the bark give the fungi an ideal
place to grow. The beetles harvest fungi from their “garde n.”
Ia n R. Sa n de rs
Mycorrhizal symbiosis
Mycorrhizal symbiosis
Watch on

8.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12207Summary
Many fungi are involved in symbiotic relationships.
Some fungi are parasites. They are specialized to penetra te a host and break down the host’s tissues. Parasitic fungi of ten cause
illness and may eventually kill their host.
Two common mutualistic relationships involving fungi are my corrhiza (fungi and plant roots) and lichen (fungi and either
cyanobacteria or green algae).
Some fungi also have mutualistic relationships with insects.
Review
1. How significant are fungi as plant parasites?
2. Describe an example of a mutualistic relationship betwe en fungi and insects.
3. Assume that you notice a fungus growing on a plant. Wha t possible relationships might exist between the fungus a nd the plant?
What type of evidence might help you identify which is th e correct relationship?
4. Compare and contrast mycorrhiza and lichen.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Dr. Morley Read,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Hardyplants/Wikipedia
Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Li
chen_reproduction1.jpg
License: Public Domain
SciSh ow K ids
Lichen: Two Living Things In One | Bi
Lichen: Two Living Things In One | Bi
Watch on

8.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122078.5: Fungi Symbiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122088.6: Use of Fungi
What's growing on this lemon?
Would you believe penicillin? Penicillin is a mold, wh ich of course is a fungus, one that has helped milli ons, if not billions, of
people.
Human Uses of Fungi
Whenever you eat pizza, you eat fungi, even if you d on’t like your pizza with mushrooms. That’s because pizza dough contains
yeast. Do you know other foods that are made with fungi?
Fungi for Food
Humans have collected and grown mushrooms for food for thousands of years. Figure below shows some of the many types of
mushrooms that people eat. Yeasts are used in bread baking and brewing alcoholic beverages. Other fungi a re used in fermenting a
wide variety of foods, including soy sauce, tempeh, and cheeses. Blue cheese has its distinctive appearance an d flavor because of
the fungus growing though it (see Figure below).
These are just a few of the many species of edible mushrooms consumed by humans.

8.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12208
Blue Cheese. The dark blue strands running through this cheese are a fungus. In fact, this cheese is moldy! The fungus is
Penicillium roqueforti
, a type of mold.
Fungi for Pest Control
Harmless fungi can be used to control pathogenic bacteria and insect pests on crops. Fungi compete with bacteria for nutrients and
space, and they parasitize insects that eat plants. Fungi red uce the need for pesticides and other toxic chemicals.
Other Uses of Fungi
Fungi are useful for many other reasons.
They are a major source of citric acid (vitamin C).
They produce antibiotics such as penicillin, which has saved countless lives.
They can be genetically engineered to produce insulin a nd other human hormones.
They are model research organisms.
SciSh ow
Why Moldy Food is More Dangerous
Why Moldy Food is More Dangerous
Watch on

8.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12208Summary
Humans use fungi for many purposes, including as food or in the preparation of food.
Humans also use fungi for pest control.
In addition, fungi can be used to produce citric acid, ant ibiotics, and human hormones.
Fungi are model research organisms as well.
Review
1. Describe two ways that humans use fungi.
2. How are fungi used to control pests?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Maja Dumat
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/blumenbiene/
5184802650/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Derek Wolfgram
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wolfgrams/43
76802043/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: U.S. Department of Agriculture
Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:M
ontforte_Blue_Cheese.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
8.6: Use of Fungi is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Ope n L e a rn from Th e Ope n Un ive rsity
Alexander Fleming and the Accident
Alexander Fleming and the Accident
Watch on

8.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122098.7: Fungi Diseases
Would you eat these mushrooms?
I would not recommend it. But certain red mushrooms, Ganoderma Lucidum, have been found to be good for you. Red Mushrooms
comprise a family of more than 200 mushroom species, which are good for our health. Of these, 6 species have a particularly high
therapeutic effect.
Fungi and Human Disease
Fungi cause human illness in three different ways: pois onings, parasitic infections, and allergic reactions. Science on the SPOT:
Fungus Fair explores some of these dangerous but also tasty and weirdly wonderful fungi.
Fungal Poisoning
Many fungi protect themselves from parasites and pre dators by producing toxic chemicals. If people eat toxic fungi, they may
experience digestive problems, hallucinations, organ fai lure, and even death. Most cases of mushroom poisonin g are due to
mistaken identity. That’s because many toxic mushrooms look very similar to safe, edible mushrooms. An example is shown in
Figure below.
Poisonous or Edible? The destroying angel mushroom on the left causes liv er and kidney failure. The puffball mushroom on
the right is tasty and harmless. Do you think you could tell these two speci es of mushrooms apart?
Fungal Parasites
Some fungi cause disease when they become human parasites. Two ex amples are fungi in the genera Candida and Trichophyton.
Candida are yeast that cause candidiasis, commonly called a “yeast infection.” The yeast can infe ct the mouth or the vagina. If
yeast enter the blood, they cause a potentially life threate ning illness. However, this is rare, except in people with a dep ressed
immune system.
Trichophyton are fungi that cause ringworm. This is a skin infection characterized by a ring-shaped rash. The rash may occur
on the arms, legs, head, neck, or trunk. The same fungi cau se athlete’s foot when they infect the skin between the toes.

8.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12209Athlete’s foot is the second most common skin disease in the U.S.
Figure below shows signs of these two infections.
Ringworm produces a ring-shaped rash, but it isn’t caused by a worm. It’s caused by t he same fungus that causes athlete’s
foot.
Fungal Allergies
Mold allergies are very common. They are caused by airborne mold sp ores. When the spores enter the respiratory tract, the
immune system responds to them as though they were h armful microbes. Symptoms may include sneezing, coughi ng, and
difficulty breathing. The symptoms are likely to be more severe in people with asthma or other respiratory diseases. Long-term
exposure to mold spores may also weaken the immune system.
Molds grow indoors as well as out. Indoors, they grow in s howers, basements, and other damp places. Homes damaged in floods
and hurricanes may have mold growing just about ever ywhere (see Figure below). Indoor mold may cause more health problems
than outdoor mold because of the closed, confined space. Most people also spend more time indoors than out.
The mold growing on the walls and ceiling of this storm-damaged home may be harmful to human health.
Summary
Fungi cause three different types of human illness: poiso nings, parasitic infections, and allergies.
Many poisonous mushrooms are eaten by mistake because they look like edible mushrooms.
Parasitic yeasts cause candidiasis, ringworm, and athlete’s f oot.
Mold allergies are very common.
Review
1. Explain why you should never eat mushrooms you find in th e woods unless you know for certain which type of mushrooms
they are.
2. Compare and contrast ringworm and athlete’s foot.

8.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122093. How does mold cause allergies?
4. State why indoor mold may cause more health problems than o utdoor mold.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Infrogmation/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DublinS
treetMoldCeiling.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Destroying Angel:
DeviantArt:Celes247; Edible Puffball:
Martin Pettitt
Source: Destroying Angel:
celes247.deviantart.com/art/DestroyingAngel-308442100; Edible Puffball:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mdpettitt/625
4083811/
License: Destroying Angel: CC BY 3.0;
Edible Puffball: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Ringworm: Dr. Lucille K.
Georg/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; Athlete's foot:
User:Falloonb/Wikipedia
Source: Ringworm:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ringwor
m_on_the_arm;
_or_tinea_corporis_due_to_Trichophyton_
mentagrophytes_PHIL_2938_lores.jpg;
Athlete's foot:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Athletes
.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: User:Infrogmation/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DublinS
treetMoldCeiling.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
8.7: Fungi Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14718.8: Protists
Prokaryote or eukaryote?
This organism consists of a single cell with several fl agella. Is it a prokaryote, such as a bacterium? Actually, it’s larger than a
prokaryotic cell, and it also has a nucleus. Therefore, this organism belongs to the domain Eukarya, the domain that includes
humans. This particular eukaryote is one of the smalle st, simplest organisms in the domain, called a protist. It’s scientific name is
Giardia lamblia. As a human parasite, it can make us sick.
Kingdom Protista
Protists are a group of all the eukaryotes that are n ot fungi, animals, or plants. As a result, it is a very diverse group o f organisms.
The eukaryotes that make up this kingdom, Kingdom Protista, do not have much in common besides a relatively si mple
organization. Protists can look very different from e ach other. Some are tiny and unicellular, like an amoeba, and some are large
and multicellular, like seaweed. However, multicellular protists do not have highly specialized tissues or organs. This simple
cellular-level organization distinguishes protists fr om other eukaryotes, such as fungi, animals, and plants. There are thought to be
between 60,000 and 200,000 protist species, and many have yet to be identified. Protists live in almost an y environment that
contains liquid water. Many protists, such as the algae, are photosynthetic and are vital primary producer s in ecosystems. Other
protists are responsible for a range of serious human diseas es, such as malaria and sleeping sickness.
The term protista was first used by Ernst Haeckel in 1 866. Protists were traditionally placed into one of sev eral groups based on
similarities to a plant, animal, or fungus: the anima l-like protozoa, the plant-like protophyta (mostly algae), and the fungus-like
slime molds and water molds. These traditional subdivisions, which were largely base d on non-scientific characteristics, have
been replaced by classifications based on phylogenetics (evolutionary relatedness among organisms). However, the older terms are
still used as informal names to describe the general chara cteristics of various protists.

8.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1471
Protists range from single-celled amoebas to multicellular seawee d. Protists may be similar to animals, plants, or fungi.
Summary
Kingdom Protista includes all eukaryotes that are not animals, plants, or fungi.
Kingdom Protista is very diverse. It consists of both sing le-celled and multicellular organisms.
Review
1. What are protists?
2. How are unicellular protists and multicellular protists simil ar?
Za n e Edu ca tion
Biology: The Five Kingdoms of Life: T
Biology: The Five Kingdoms of Life: T
Watch on

8.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14713. How are protists classified? What are the main categories of protists?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Lebendkulturen.de;Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 8.8: Protists is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

8.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14738.9: Protist Evolution
What's the difference between a bacterium and a simple protist?
Were simple protists the first eukaryotic organisms to evolve? Probably. A protist is a eukaryote, so eac h cell has a nucleus.
Otherwise, simple protists, like the Paramecium and amoeba, ca n be fairly similar to bacteria.
Evolution of Protists
Scientists think that protists are the oldest eukary otes. If so, they must have evolved from prokaryotic cells. How did this happen?
The endosymbiotic theory provides the most widely-accepted explanation. That’s because it is well supported by evidence.
The First Eukaryotic Cells
According to the endosymbiotic theory, the first eukar yotic cells evolved from a symbiotic relationship between two or more
prokaryotic cells. Smaller prokaryotic cells were eng ulfed by (or invaded) larger prokaryotic cells. The small cells (now called
endosymbionts) benefited from the relationship by getting a safe home and nutrients. The large cells (now called hosts) benefited
by getting some of the organic molecules or energy released by the endosymbionts. Eventually, the endosym bionts evolved into
organelles of the host cells. After that, neither could live without t he other.
As shown in Figure below, some of the endosymbionts were aerobic bacteria. They were specialized to break down chemicals and
release energy. They evolved into the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. Some of the small cells were cyanob acteria. They were
specialized for photosynthesis. They evolved into the chloroplasts of eukaryotic cells.
Endosymbiotic theory explains how eukaryotic cells arose.
Evidence for the Endosymbiotic Theory
Many pieces of evidence support the endosymbiotic theory. For example:

8.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1473Mitochondria and chloroplasts contain DNA that is different from the DNA found in the cell nucleus. Instead, it is similar to the
circular DNA of bacteria.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts are surrounded by their own plasma membranes, which are similar to bacterial membran es.
New mitochondria and chloroplasts are produced through a process similar to binary fission. Bacteria also reproduce through
binary fission.
The internal structure and biochemistry of chloroplast s is very similar to that of cyanobacteria.
Summary
Scientists think that protists are the oldest eukaryotes.
Protists most likely evolved from prokaryotic cells, as e xplained by the endosymbiotic theory. This theory is well-su pported by
evidence.
Review
1. How did the first eukaryotic cells evolve, according to en dosymbiotic theory?
2. Identify two pieces of evidence for endosymbiotic the ory. Explain how this evidence supports the theory.
3. How are additional mitochondria produced?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
This page titled 8.9: Protist Evolution is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
TED-Ed
How we think complex cells evolved
How we think complex cells evolved
Watch on

8.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14728.10: Protist Characteristics
Sexual or asexual reproduction for protists?
Notice how the Paramecium is dividing into two cells. This, obviously, is a form of asexual reproduction. But, remember that
protists are an extremely diverse kingdom, and some protis ts can also reproduce sexually.
Characteristics of Protists
Like all other eukaryotes, protists have a nucleus co ntaining their DNA. They also have other membrane-bound organelles, such as
mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum. Most protis ts are single-celled. Some are multicellular. Because the protist kingdom
is so diverse, their ways of getting food and reproducing var y widely.
Protist Habitats
Most protists are aquatic organisms. They need a moist e nvironment to survive. They are found mainly in damp soil, marshes,
puddles, lakes, and the ocean. Some protists are free-livi ng organisms. Others are involved in symbiotic relationships. They live in
or on other organisms, including humans.
Motility of Protists
Most protists have motility. This is the ability to move. Protists have three type s of appendages for movement. As shown in Figure
below, they may have flagella, cilia, or pseudopods (“false feet”). There may be one or more whip-like fla gella. Cilia are similar to
flagella, except they are shorter and there are more of them. They may completely cover the surface of t he protist cell. Pseudopods
are temporary, foot-like extensions of the cytoplasm.
Protists use cilia, pseudopods, or flagella to move.
Protist Reproduction
Protists have complex life cycles. Many have both asex ual and sexual reproduction. An example is a protist c alled Spirogyra, a type
of algae, shown Figure below. It usually exists as haploid cells that reproduce by binary fission. In a stressful env ironment, such as
one that is very dry, Spirogyra may produce tough spores that can withstand harsh c onditions. Spores are reproductive cells
produced by protists and various other organisms. I f two protist spores are close together, they can fus e to form a diploid zygote.
This is a type of sexual reproduction. The zygote then u ndergoes meiosis, producing haploid cells that repeat the cycle.

8.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1472
Spirogyra
is a genus of algae with a complex life cycle. Each organism consists of rectangular cells connected end-to-end in long
filaments.
Protist Nutrition
Protists get food in one of three ways. They may ingest, a bsorb, or make their own organic molecules.
Ingestive protists ingest, or engulf, bacteria and other small particles. They extend their cell wall and cell membrane around the
food item, forming a food vacuole. Then enzymes digest the food in the vacuole.
Absorptive protists absorb food molecules across their cell membranes. This occurs by diffusion. These protists are important
decomposers.
Photosynthetic protists use light energy to make food. They are major producers in aquatic ecosystems.
Summary
Protists have nuclear membranes around their DNA. They also h ave other membrane-bound organelles.
Many protists live in aquatic habitats, and most are moti le, or able to move.
Protists have complex life cycles that may include both se xual and asexual reproduction.
Protists get food through ingestion, absorption, or photosy nthesis.
Review
1. Identify three structures that protists use to move.
2. Describe three ways that protists get food.
L e a rn oH u b - Cla ss 11, 12
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Biology Biological Classi  cation part
Watch on

8.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14723. Describe asexual and sexual reproduction in protists.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Lebendkulturen.de
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Miranda Dudzik
Source:
http://cnx.org/content/m48073/latest/#figch23_02_02
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Spicywalnut/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spirogyr
a.JPG
License: Public Domain
This page titled 8.10: Protist Characteristics is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14748.11: Protozoa
What's like an animal, but not an animal?
An animal-like protist, or a protozoa. These protists have the ability to move, usually with some sort of c ilia or flagella, and must
obtain their energy from other sources. But obviously, t hey are much simpler than animals.
Animal-Like Protists: Protozoa
Animal-like protists are commonly called protozoa (singular, protozoan). Most protozoa consist of a sin gle cell. They are animallike because they are heterotrophs, and are capable of moving. Although protozoa are not animals, they are thought to be the
ancestors of animals.
Ecology of Protozoa
Protozoa generally feed by engulfing and digesting o ther organisms. As consumers, they have various roles in food chains and
webs. Some are predators. They prey upon other single -celled organisms, such as bacteria. In fact, protozoa predators keep many
bacterial populations under control. Other protozoa a re herbivores. They graze on algae. Still others are d ecomposers. They
consume dead organic matter. There are also parasitic protozoa that live in or on living hosts. For exampl e, the protozoan that
causes malaria lives inside a human host. Protozoa are also important food sources for many larger organis ms, including insects
and worms.
Classification of Protozoa
Protozoa can be classified on the basis of how they move. As shown in Table below, protozoa move in three different ways. Only
sporozoa cannot move. Note that this classification is based only on differences in movement. It does not rep resent phylogenetic
relationships.

8.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1474Type of Protozoa How It Moves Example (Genus)
Amoeboid pseudopodsAmoeba
Ciliate ciliaParamecium
Flagellate flagellaGiardia
Sporozoan does not move (as adult)Plasmodium

8.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1474Summary
Animal-like protists are called protozoa. Most consist a sing le cell.
Like animals, protozoa are heterotrophic and capable of moving.
Examples of protozoa include amoebas and paramecia.
Review
1. How are protozoa similar to animals?
2. What roles do protozoa play in food chains and webs?
3. What type of protozoa is a Paramecium?
7a ctive stu dio
P ROTOZOA CLASSIFICA TION
P ROTOZOA CLASSIFICA TION
Watch on

8.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14744. What type of protozoa is a Giardia?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC

8.11.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1474
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 8.11: Protozoa is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

8.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14758.12: Algae
Many people, if not most, believe seaweed to be a plant. Is it?
Seaweed is actually a plant-like protist, which are also known as algae. The green color is due to what pigmen t? Algae, like plants,
obtain their energy through photosynthesis.
Plant-Like Protists: Algae
Plant-like protists are called algae (singular, alga). They are a large and diverse grou p. Some algae, the diatoms, are single-celled.
Others, such as seaweed, are multicellular (see Figure below).
Diatoms are single-celled algae. Other forms of algae are mul ticellular.
Why are algae considered plant-like? The main reason is that they contain chloroplasts and produce food through photosynthesis.
However, they lack many other structures of true plant s. For example, algae do not have roots, stems, or leav es. Some algae also
differ from plants in being motile. They may move wit h pseudopods or flagella. Although not plants themsel ves, algae were
probably the ancestors of plants.
Ecology of Algae
Algae play significant roles as producers in aquatic ecosystems. Microscopic forms live suspended in the water column. They are
the main component of phytoplankton. As such, they contribute to the food base of most marine ecosystems.

8.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1475Multicellular seaweeds called kelp may grow as large as trees. They are the food base of ecosystems called kelp forests (see
Figure below). Kelp forests are found throughout the ocean in temperate and arctic climates. They are highly prod uctive
ecosystems.
Kelp Forest. This kelp forest supports a large community of many othe r types of organisms.
Classification of Algae
Types of algae include red and green algae, and euglenids, and dinoflagellates (see Table below for examples). Scientists think
that red and green algae evolved from endosymbiotic relationships with cyanobacteria. Their chloroplasts ha ve two membranes
because the cell membranes of the cyanobacteria beca me additional plasma membranes of the chloroplasts. Scientists think that
euglenids and dinoflagellates evolved later, from e ndosymbiotic relationships with green and red algae. T his is why their
chloroplasts have three membranes. Differences in th e types of chlorophyll in the four types of algae al so support the hypothesized
evolutionary relationships.
Type of Algae Origin of Chloroplast Type of Chloroplast
Red algae
cyanobacteriatwo membranes, chlorophyll like the
majority of cyanobacteria
Green algae
cyanobacteriatwo membranes, chlorophyll like a minority
of cyanobacteria
Euglenids
green algaethree membranes, chlorophyll like green
algae

8.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1475Type of Algae Origin of Chloroplast Type of Chloroplast
Dinoflagellates
red algae three membranes, chlorophyll like red algae
Reproduction of Algae
Algae have varied life cycles. Two examples are shown i n Figure below. Both cycles include phases of asexual reprodu ction
(haploid, n) and sexual reproduction (diploid, 2n). Why go to so much trouble to reproduce? Asexual rep roduction is fast, but it
doesn’t create new genetic variation. Sexual reproduc tion is more complicated and risky, but it creates new gene combinations.
Each strategy may work better under different conditi ons. Rapid population growth (asexual reproduction) is adaptive when
conditions are favorable. Genetic variation (sexual r eproduction) helps ensure that some organisms will sur vive if the environment
changes.
Life Cycles of Algae: Zygotic Meiosis (A), Gametic Meiosi s (B) and Sporic Meiosis (C). In life cycle A (left), diploid (2n)
zygotes result from fertilization and then undergo meiosis to pro duce haploid (n) gametes. The gametes undergo mitosis and
produce many additional copies of themselves. How are life cycles B and C different from life cycle A?
KQED: Algae Power
QUEST explores the potential of algae-–once considered nothing more than pond scum–-to become the fuel of the future.
Entrepreneurs from throughout California are working to create the next generation of biofuels from algae. But will you ever be
able to run your car off it?

8.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1475Summary
Plant-like protists are called algae. They include sin gle-celled diatoms and multicellular seaweed.
Like plants, algae contain chlorophyll and make food by p hotosynthesis.
Types of algae include red and green algae, euglenids, a nd dinoflagellates.
Review
1. Compare and contrast algae and plants.
2. State pros and cons of asexual and sexual reproduction in algae.

8.12.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14753. Explain why dinoflagellates and euglenids have chlorop lasts with three membranes instead of two.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Diatoms: Courtesy of Prof. Gordon
T. Taylor, NOAA; Seaweed: Wilfredo R
Rodriguez H
Source: Diatoms:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diatoms
_through_the_microscope.jpg; Seaweed:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alga_M
arina.JPG
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Claire Fackler, NOAA
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanc006
3_-_Flickr_-_NOAA_Photo_Library.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC

8.12.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1475
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 8.12: Algae is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

8.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14768.13: Mold
What grows just about anywhere there is decaying material?
Mold. This slime mold, shown growing on dead wood, is a fun gus-like protist. Though this mold does not have a mouth, essentially
it is still “eating” this decaying material.
Fungus-Like Protists: Molds
Fungus-like protists are molds. They are absorptive feeders on decaying organic mat ter. They resemble fungi, and they reproduce
with spores as fungi do. However, in other ways, they are quite dif ferent from fungi and more like other protists. For ex ample, they
have cell walls made of cellulose, whereas fungi have cell walls made of chitin. Like o ther protists, they have complicated life
cycles with both asexual and sexual reproduction. They are motile during some stages of their life cycle. Two major types of
fungus-like protists are slime molds and water molds.
Slime Molds
Slime molds are fungus-like protists commonly found on rotting logs and compost. They move very slowly in search of d ecaying
matter to eat. When food is scarce, individual cells swarm together to form a blob-like mass, like the “do g vomit” slime mold in the
Figure below. The mass glides along on its own secretions, engulfi ng decaying organic matter as it moves over it.
“Dog Vomit” Slime Mold. This slime mold looks like its name.
There are two types of slime molds when it comes to how they swarm: acellular and cellular.
When acellular slime molds swarm, they fuse together to f orm a single cell with many nuclei.
When cellular slime molds swarm, they remain as distinct cells.
Cellular slime molds are used as model organisms in m olecular biology and genetics. They may be the key to how multicellular
organisms evolved. Can you explain why?

8.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1476Water Molds
Water molds are commonly found in moist soil and surface water. Many are plant pathogens that destroy crops. They inf ect plants
such as grapes, lettuce, corn, and potatoes. Some water molds ar e parasites of fish and other aquatic organisms.
Science Friday: The Road Best Traveled
A Tale of Ants, Slime Mold and the New Jersey Turnpike For m ost people, getting stuck in a traffic jam on the Ne w Jersey
Turnpike is a grueling lesson in futility. However, in this video by Science Friday, Simon Garnier examines ou r collective behavior
and how relatively simple organisms organize themselves so dynamically.
Summary
Fungus-like protists are molds.
Molds are absorptive feeders, found on decaying organic m atter. They resemble fungi and reproduce with spores as fungi do.
Examples of fungus-like protists include slime molds and wat er molds.
Review
1. How are fungus-like protists similar to fungi? What is one way they are different?
De e p L ook
This P ulsating Slime Mold Comes in
This P ulsating Slime Mold Comes in
Watch on
Sc iF ri
The Road Best T raveled: A T ale of An
The Road Best T raveled: A T ale of An
Watch on

8.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14762. Why might cellular slime molds, but not acellular slime m olds, be the key to how multicellular organisms evolved?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Jason Hollinger
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/7147684@N
03/3439872376/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 8.13: Mold is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

8.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122008.14: Protists and Disease
Can such little creatures make you sick?
They sure can. Not all of them, but some of them. And without pr oper medical treatment, the person may never recover.
Protists and Human Disease
Most protist diseases in humans are caused by animal-lik e protists, or protozoa. Protozoa make us sick when they become human
parasites. Three examples of parasitic protozoa are described belo w.
Trypanosoma Protozoa
Members of the genus Trypanosoma are flagellate protozoa that cause sleeping sickness, which is common in Africa. They also
cause Chagas disease, which is common in South America. The parasites are spr ead by insect vectors. The vector for Chagas
disease is shown in Figure below. Trypanosoma parasites enter a person’s blood when the vector bit es. Then they spread to other
tissues and organs. The diseases may be fatal without medical treatment.
Vector for Chagas Disease. In Chagas disease, the Trypanosoma parasite is spread by an insect commonly called the
“kissing bug.” A bite from this bug could be the kiss of death.
The discovery of Chagas disease is unique in the hist ory of medicine. That’s because a single researcher —a Brazilian physician
named Carlos Chagas—single-handedly identified and e xplained the new infectious disease. In the early 190 0s, Chagas did careful
lab and field studies. He determined the pathogen, vec tor, host, symptoms, and mode of transmission of the d isease that is now
named for him.
Giardia Protozoa
Giardia are flagellate protozoa that cause giardiasis. The parasites enter the body through food or water that has been contaminated
by feces of infected people or animals. The protozoa attach to the lining of the host’s smal l intestine, where they prevent the host
from fully absorbing nutrients. They may also cause d iarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever. A picture of a Giardia protozoan opens
this concept.

8.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12200Plasmodium Protozoa
Plasmodium protozoa cause malaria. The parasites are spread by a mosquito vector. Para sites enter a host’s blood through the bite
of an infected mosquito. The parasites infect the ho st’s red blood cells, causing symptoms such as fever, joint pain, anemia, and
fatigue.
Malaria is common in tropical and subtropical climate s throughout the world (see Figure below). In fact, malaria is one of the most
common infectious diseases on the planet. Malaria is al so a very serious disease. It kills several million p eople each year, most of
them children. A vaccine to malaria is a possibility.
Worldwide Distribution of Malaria. This map shows where malaria is found. The area is determined by the mosquito
vector. The mosquito can live year-round only in the red-shaded areas.
Arm a n do H a su du n ga n
Giardiasis - Giardia Lamblia
Giardiasis - Giardia Lamblia
Watch on
TED-Ed
The loathsome, lethal mosquito - Ros
The loathsome, lethal mosquito - Ros
Watch on

8.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12200Summary
Most protist diseases in humans are caused by protozoa. Protozoa make humans sick when they become human parasites.
Trypanosoma protozoa cause Chagas disease and sleeping sickness.
Giardia protozoa cause giardiasis, and Plasmodium protozoa cause malaria.
Review
1. Describe how the protozoa that cause Chagas disease are s pread to human hosts.
2. State why malaria is commonly found only in tropical and subtropical regions of the world.
3. Terri lost her water bottle while hiking in Canada. It was a hot day, so she drank wat er from a stream to stay hydrated. A few
days later, Terri became ill with abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. Her doctor thinks she has a protozoan infection. Which
type of protozoa do you think is most likely responsible fo r Terri’s illness? How do you think Terri became infected?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin, William Oakley
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 4.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Source:
http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/insects.html
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Petaholmes/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Malaria
_map.PNG
License: Public Domain
8.14: Protists and Disease is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122018.15: Fungi
What exactly is a fungus?
They're not animals or plants, and definitely not protists. So they cannot photosynthesize or eat. And they are much more than
mushrooms.
Characteristics of Fungi
Do you see the organisms growing on the bread in the Figure below? They belong to the Kingdom Fungi. Molds growing on
foods are some of the most common fungi in our ever yday lives. These organisms may seem useless, gross, and c ostly. But fungi
play very important roles in almost every terrestrial ecosystem on Earth.
The mold growing on this bread is a common fungus.
Fungi (singular, fungus) are a kingdom in the domain E ukarya. The fungi kingdom may contain more than a mi llion species, but
fewer than 100,000 have been identified. As shown in the Figure below, fungi include mushrooms and yeasts in addition t o molds.
Several examples of fungi are pictured here.

8.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12201Most fungi are multicellular, but some exist as singl e cells. Single-celled fungi are known as yeasts. Fungi spend most of their life
cycle in the haploid state. They form diploid cells only during sexual reproduction. Like the cells of protists and plants, the cells of
fungi have cell walls. But fungi are unique in having cell walls made of chitin instead of cellulose. Chitin is a tough carbohydrate
that also makes up the exoskeleton (outer skeleton) of insects and related organisms.
Habitats of Fungi
Fungi are found all around the world, and grow in a wid e range of habitats, including deserts. Most grow in terrestrial
environments, but several species live only in aquati c habitats. Most fungi live in soil or dead matter, and in symbiotic relationships
with plants, animals, or other fungi. Fungi, along with bacteria that are found in soil, are the primary decomposer s of organic matter
in terrestrial ecosystems. The decomposition of dead org anisms returns nutrient to the soil, and the environme nt.
Science Friday: Fungal Freeways
Fungus use fluid networks, similar to roads and freeway s, to move nutrients and nuclei through their cells. In the video by Science
Friday, Dr. Marcus Roper explains how these networks functi on with remarkable efficiency and prevent microscopic tr affic jams.
Summary
Fungi are a kingdom in the domain Eukarya that includes mol ds, mushrooms, and yeasts.
Most fungi are multicellular. They are unique in havin g cell walls made of chitin.
Most fungi live on dead matter or soil. Some live in aquati c habitats. Many are involved in symbiotic relationships.
B B C Stu dios
Wow! Fungi plant growth - The P rivat
Wow! Fungi plant growth - The P rivat
Watch on
Sc iF ri
Fungal Freeways
Fungal Freeways
Watch on

8.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12201Review
1. What are fungi? Give two examples of fungi.
2. Explain the significance of the chitin cell wall of f ungi.
3. List two habitats where fungi live.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mushrooms: Jonathan Dinh;
Yellow Staghorn: milo bostock
(milesmilob); Jelly Ears: jenny downing;
Mold: User:Sapp/Wikimedia Commons;
Blue Turkeytail: Flickr:Aah-Yeah
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Ciar/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Moldy_
old_bread.JPG
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mushrooms: Jonathan Dinh;
Yellow Staghorn: milo bostock
(milesmilob); Jelly Ears: jenny downing;
Mold: User:Sapp/Wikimedia Commons;
Blue Turkeytail: Flickr:Aah-Yeah
Source: Mushrooms:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jonathandinh/
6718338681/; Yellow Staghorn:
www.flickr.com/photos/milesmilo/5918546
445/; Jelly Ears:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jennypics/3028266300/; Mold:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Schimm
elmandarijn.jpg; Blue Turkeytail:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/aahyeah/5510298344/
License: Mushrooms: CC BY 2.0; Yellow
Staghorn: CC BY 2.0; Jelly Eras: CC BY
2.0; Mold: Public Domain; Blue Turkeytail
CC BY 2.0
8.15: Fungi is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122028.16: Fungi Structure
Is the structure important?
Of course. Though mushrooms may be the most common typ e of fungus, fungi also include rusts, smuts, puffba lls, truffles, morels,
molds, and yeasts, as well as many less well-known organ isms. And, except for yeast cells, they all have similar structures, which
are usually hidden deep within their food source.
Structure of Fungi
Except for yeasts, which grow as single cells, most fungi grow as thread-like filaments, like tho se shown in Figure below. The
filaments are called hyphae (singular, hypha). Each hypha consists of one or m ore cells surrounded by a tubular cell wall. A mass
of hyphae make up the body of a fungus, which is called a mycelium (plural, mycelia).
The hyphae of most fungi are divided into cells by i nternal walls called septa (singular, septum). Septa usually have little pores that
are large enough to allow ribosomes, mitochondria and sometimes nuclei to flow among cells. Hyphae that are di vided into cells
are called septate hyphae. However, the hyphae of some fungi are not separated b y septa. Hyphae without septae are called
coenocytic hyphae. Coenocytic hyphae are big, multinucleated cells.
These branches are hyphae, or filaments, of a mold called
Penicillium
A mycelium may range in size from microscopic to ver y large. In fact, one of the largest living organis ms on Earth is the mycelium
of a single fungus. A small part of a similar fungus is pictured in Figure below. The giant fungus covers 8.9 square kilometers (3.4
square miles) in an Oregon forest. That’s about the s ize of a small city. The fungus didn’t grow that lar ge overnight. It’s estimated
to be 2,400 years old, and it’s still growing!

8.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12202
The fungus shown here has been dubbed the “humongous fungus” because it covers such a large area.
Fruiting Bodies
Some fungi become noticeable only when producing spore s (fruiting), either as mushrooms or molds. For example, y ou can see the
fruiting bodies of the Armillaria fungus in the Figure above, but the large “body” of the fungus, the myceli um, is hidden
underground. This fruiting body, known as the sporocarp, is a multicellular structure on which spore-produci ng structures form.
The fruiting body is part of the sexual phase of a fungal life cycle. The rest of the life cycle is ch aracterized by the growth of
mycelia.
Dimorphic Fungi
Some fungi take on different shapes, depending on th eir environmental conditions. These fungi are called dimorphic fungi,
because they have “two forms.” For example, the fungus Histoplasma capsulatum, which causes the disease histoplasmosis, is
thermally dimorphic; it has two forms that are depen dent on temperature. In temperatures of about 25°C, it grows as a brownish
mycelium, and looks like a mass of threads. At body temper ature (37°C in humans), it grows as single, round yeast cells.
Summary
Most fungi grow as thread-like filaments called hyphae.
A mass of hyphae make up the body of a fungus, called a myc elium.
Review
1. Describe the general structure of multicellular fun gi.
2. What is a fruiting body?
Cra sh Cou rse
Fungi: Death Becomes Them - Crash
Fungi: Death Becomes Them - Crash
Watch on

8.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122023. Relate the structures of hyphae, mycelia, and fruiting bodies to one another.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Andre Nantel,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: H. Krisp
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gemein
e_Hallimasch_Armillaria_ostoyae.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
8.16: Fungi Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Plants
9.1: Angiosperm
9.2: Plant Cell
9.3: Plant Tissue
9.4: Plant Growth
9.5: Roots
9.6: Stems
9.7: Leaves
9.8: Plant Reproduction and Life Cycle
9.9: Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants
9.10: Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants
9.11: Plant Characteristics
9.12: Life Cycle of Gymnosperms
9.13: Life Cycle of Angiosperms
9.14: Plant Adaptations
9.15: Plant Responses
9.16: Importance of Plants
9.17: Plant Life Cycle
9.18: Plant Evolution
9.19: Seed Plant Evolution
9.20: Plant Classification
9.21: Nonvascular Plants
9.22: Vascular Plants
9.23: Seed Plants
This page titled 9: Plants is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was edited
to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122249.1: Angiosperm
So what exactly is a flower?
This closeup view of a lily flower shows the fine detail of this structure. Why are flowers so colorful? What i s the purpose of all the
parts? They were one of the last adaptations of the plant kingdom, suggesting immense evolutionary significance.
Flowering Plants
Angiosperms, or flowering seed plants, form seeds in ovaries. As th e seeds develop, the ovaries may develop into fruits. Flowers
attract pollinators, and fruits encourage animals to disperse the seeds.
Parts of a Flower
A flower consists of male and female reproductive struc tures. The main parts of a flower are shown in Figure below. They include
the stamen, pistil, petals, and sepals.
The stamen is the male reproductive structure of a flower. It con sists of a stalk-like filament that ends in an anther. The anther
contains pollen sacs, in which meiosis occurs and pollen grains form. The filament raises the anther up high so i ts pollen will be
more likely to blow in the wind or be picked up by an anima l pollinator.
The pistil is the female reproductive structure of a flower. It cons ists of a stigma, style, and ovary. The stigma is raised and
sticky to help it catch pollen. The style supports the stigma and connects it to the ovary, which contains the e gg. Petals attract
pollinators to the flower. Petals are often brightly colored so pollinators will notice them.
Sepals protect the developing flower while it is still a bud. Sepal s are usually green, which camouflages the bud from possibl e
consumers.

9.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224
A flower includes both male and female reproductive structures.
Flowers and Pollinators
Many flowers have bright colors, strong scents, and swe et nectar to attract animal pollinators. They may at tract insects, birds,
mammals, and even reptiles. While visiting a flower, a p ollinator picks up pollen from the anthers. When the pollinator visits the
next flower, some of the pollen brushes off on the stigma. Th is allows cross-pollination, which increases genetic diver sity.
Other Characteristics of Flowering Plants
Although flowers and their components are the major i nnovations of angiosperms, they are not the only ones. Angiosperms also
have more efficient vascular tissues. Additionally, in many flowering plants the ovaries ripen into fruits. Fruits are often brightly
colored, so animals are likely to see and eat them and disperse their seeds (see Figure below).
M a h m u t De m ir
The beauty of pollination
The beauty of pollination
Watch on

9.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224
Brightly colored fruits attract animals that may disperse their seeds. It’s hard to miss the bright red apples on these trees.
Evolution of Flowering Plants
Flowering plants are thought to have evolved at least 200 million years ago from gymnosperms like Gnetae. T he earliest known
fossils of flowering plants are about 125 million year s old. The fossil flowers have male and female reprodu ctive organs but no
petals or sepals.
Scientists think that the earliest flowers attracted insects and other animals, which spread pollen from flower to flower. This greatl y
increased the efficiency of fertilization over wind- spread pollen, which might or might not actually land on another flower. To take
better advantage of this “animal labor,” plants evol ved traits such as brightly colored petals to attract pollinators. In exchange for
pollination, flowers gave the pollinators nectar.
Giving free nectar to any animal that happened to co me along was not an efficient use of resources. Much of the pollen might be
carried to flowers of different species and therefore wasted. As a result, many plants evolved ways to “hide ” their nectar from all
but very specific pollinators, which would be more li kely to visit only flowers of the same species. For their part, animal pollinators
co-evolved traits that allowed them to get to the hi dden nectar. Two examples of this type of co-evolutio n are shown in Figure
below.
The hummingbird has a long narrow bill to reach nectar at the bottom of t he tube-shaped flowers. The bat is active at
night, so bright white, night-blooming flowers attract it. In each case, t he flowering plant and its pollinator co-evolved to
become better suited for their roles in the symbiotic relationship.
Some of the most recent angiosperms to evolve are gr asses. Humans started domesticating grasses such as wheat about 10,000
years ago. Why grasses? They have many large, edible see ds that contain a lot of nutritious stored food. Th ey are also relatively
easy to harvest. Since then, humans have helped shaped t he evolution of grasses, as illustrated by the example in Figure below.
Grasses supply most of the food consumed by people worldwide. W hat other grass seeds do you eat?

9.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224
The plant on the left, called teosinte, is the ancestor of modern, domesti cated corn, shown on the right. An intermediate
stage is pictured in the middle. How were humans able to change the plant so dramatically?
Classification of Flowering Plants
There are more than a quarter million species of flowe ring plants, and they show tremendous diversity. Nonethe less, almost all
flowering plants fall into one of three major groups: monocots, eudicots, or magnolids. The three groups differ in several ways.
For example, monocot embryos form just one cotyledon, whereas eudicot and magnolid embryos form two cotyle dons. The
arrangement of their vascular tissues is also different. Examples of the three groups of flowering plants are giv en in Table below.
Group Sample Families Sample Families
MonocotsGrasses
Orchids
EudicotsDaisies
Peas
MagnolidsMagnolias
Avocados

9.1.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224Summary
Most modern seed plants are angiosperms that produce seeds i n the ovaries of flowers.
Ovaries may develop into fruits.
Flowers attract pollinators and fruits are eaten by animals. Both traits aid the dispersal of seeds.
Review
1. Describe the male and female reproductive structures o f flowers.
2. State how fruits help flowering plants reproduce.
3. Explain how flowering plants and their animal pollinat ors co-evolved.

9.1.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122244. Define monocot.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: David J;John Doebley;Bat:
Courtesy of the US Fish and Wildlife
Service; Hummingbird: Thomas
Bresson;Liz West
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/sebilden/3560
536000/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Teosinte
.png; Bat:
www.flickr.com/photos/usfwshq/71863370
25/; Hummingbird:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macrogl
ossum_stellatarum_A.jpg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/calliope/5407
0473/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Christopher Auyeung and Hana
Zavadska;Liz West
Source: CK-12 Foundation; CK12
Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/calliope/5407
0473/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Liz West
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/calliope/5407
0473/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Bat: Courtesy of the US Fish and
Wildlife Service; Hummingbird: Thomas
Bresson
Source: Bat:
www.flickr.com/photos/usfwshq/71863370
25/; Hummingbird:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macrogl
ossum_stellatarum_A.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: John Doebley
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Teosinte
.png; Bat:
www.flickr.com/photos/usfwshq/71863370
25/; Hummingbird:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macrogl
ossum_stellatarum_A.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5

9.1.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC

9.1.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12224
[Figure 11] License: CC BY-NC
9.1: Angiosperm is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122259.2: Plant Cell
Why do plant cells look like little rectangles?
A section of a pine embryo. Notice how all the cells seem to stack on each other, with no spaces in between. MIght thi s allow the cells to form structures that can grow upright?
Organs in Plants?
Your body includes organ systems, such as the digestive system, made of individual organs, such as the stomach, l iver, and pancreas, which work together to carry out a certa in
function (in this case, breaking down and absorbing food). Th ese organs, in turn, are made of different kinds of tissues, which are groups of cells which work together to perform a
specific job. For example, your stomach is made of muscle t issue to facilitate movement and glandular tissue to se crete enzymes for chemical breakdown of food molecules. The se
tissues, in turn, are made of cells specialized in shape, size, and compo nent organelles, such as mitochondria for energy and microtubul es for movement.
Plants, too, are made of organs, which in turn are made of t issues. Plant tissues, like ours, are constructed of speci alized cells, which in turn contain specific organelles. It is these
cells, tissues, and organs that carry out the dramatic lives of plan ts.
Plant Cells
Plant cells resemble other eukaryotic cells in many ways. For example, they are enclosed by a plasma membrane and h ave a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles. A
typical plant cell is represented by the diagram in Figure below.
Plant cells have all the same structures as animal cells, plus some additional struc tures. Can you identify the unique plant structures in the diagram?
Plant Cell Structures
Structures found in plant cells but not animal cells include a large central vacuole, cell wall, and plastids such as chloroplast s.
The large central vacuole is surrounded by its own membrane and contains water and dissolved substances. Its primary role is to maintain pressure aga inst the inside of the cell
wall, giving the cell shape and helping to support the plant.
The cell wall is located outside the cell membrane. It consists mainly of cellulose and may also contain lignin, which makes it more rigid. The cell wall shapes, supports, and
protects the cell. It prevents the cell from absorbing too much water and bursting. It also keeps large, damaging molecules out of the ce ll.
Plastids are membrane-bound organelles with their own DNA. Examples are chl oroplasts and chromoplasts. Chloroplasts contain the green pigment chlorophyll and carry out
photosynthesis. Chromoplasts make and store other pigments. They give flower petals t heir bright colors.

9.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12225Types of Plant Cells
There are three basic types of cells in most plants. The se cells make up ground tissue, which will be discussed in another concept. The three types of cells are described in Table
below. The different types of plant cells have different structure s and functions.
Type of Cell Structure Functions Example
Parenchymalcube-shaped
loosely packed
thin-walled
relatively unspecialized
contain chloroplastsphotosynthesis
cellular respiration
storagefood storage tissues of potatoes
Collenchymalelongated
irregularly thickened wallssupport
wind resistancestrings running through a stalk of celery
Sclerenchymal very thick cell walls containing ligninsupport
strengthtough fibers in jute (used to make rope)
m rspe re ira cla ss
Parts of a Plant Cell
Parts of a Plant Cell
Watch on

9.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12225Summary
Plants have eukaryotic cells with large central vacuoles, cell wall s containing cellulose, and plastids such as chloroplasts and chromo plasts.
Different types of plant cells include parenchymal, collenchymal, and sclerenchymal cells. The three types differ in structure and fu nction.
Review
1. Identify three structures found in plant cells but not animal cel ls. What is the function of each structure?
T e a ch e r's P e t
Unique Features of Plant Cells
Unique Features of Plant Cells
Watch on

9.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122252. Describe parenchymal plant cells and state their functions.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plant_cell_structure_svg.
svg
License: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Astrocytre.jpg
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons);Nerve cell: WA
Lee et al.; Blood cell: Courtesy of National Institute of
Health; Bacteria: TJ Kirn, MJ Lafferty, CMP Sandoe, and
RK Taylor; Algae: EF Smith and PA Lefebvre; Pollen: L
Howard and C Daghlian; Illustrations: Image copyright Alila
Medical Media, 2014
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plant_cell_structure_svg.
svg; Nerve cell:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:GFPneuron.png; Blood
cell: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Redbloodcells.jpg;
Bacteria:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/bacteriaSEM/source/1.html;
Algae: remf.dartmouth.edu/images/algaeSEM/source/1.html
; Pollen:
remf.dartmouth.edu/images/botanicalPollenSEM/source/10.h
tml; Illustrations: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Public Domain; Nerve Cell: CC BY 2.5; Blood
Cell: Public Domain; Bacteria: Public Domain; Algae: Publi c
Domain; Pollen: Public Domain; Illustrations: License from
Shutterstock
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC

9.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12225
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
9.2: Plant Cell is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122269.3: Plant Tissue
What is this abstract pattern?
Is it just a random artistic piece? Is it a depiction of a pattern of bubbles? Would you believe it is par t of a plant? It is actually the
center portion of a carrot taproot. And these are all cells. Cells that have come together to form a tissue, with a specific function.
What do you think is the main function of tissue in a plant 's root?
Plant Tissues
As for all animals, your body is made of four types of tissue: epithel ial, muscle, nerve, and connective tissues. Plants, too, are built
of tissues, but not surprisingly, their very differ ent lifestyles derive from different kinds of tissues. All three types of plant cells are
found in most plant tissues. Three major types of plant t issues are dermal, ground, and vascular tissues.
Dermal Tissue
Dermal tissue covers the outside of a plant in a single layer of cells called the epidermis. You can think of the epidermis as the
plant’s skin. It mediates most of the interactions be tween a plant and its environment. Epidermal cells sec rete a waxy substance
called cuticle, which coats, waterproofs, and protects the above-groun d parts of plants. Cuticle helps prevent water loss, abrasions,
infections, and damage from toxins.
This tissue includes several types of specialized cel ls. Pavement cells, large, irregularly shaped parenchym al cells which lack
chloroplasts, make up the majority of the epidermis. Within the epidermis, thousands of pairs of bean-sha ped schlerenchymal
guard cells swell and shrink by osmosis to open and close stomata, tiny pores which control the exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide gases and the release of water vapor. The lower surfaces of some leaves contain as ma ny as 100,000 stomata per square
centimeter.

9.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12226
The epidermis of
Arabidopsis
shows both pavement cells (A) and stomata made of sclerenchymal
guard cells
(B), which control water loss and gas exchange.
Ground Tissue
Ground tissue makes up much of the interior of a plant and carries out basic metabolic functions. Ground tissue in stems p rovides
support and may store food or water. Ground tissues in roots may also store food.
Vascular Tissue
Vascular tissue runs through the ground tissue inside a plant. Your body was able to grow from a single cell to perhaps 10 0 trillion
cells because, 21 days after fertilization, a tiny hea rt began to pump blood throughout your tiny self – and it hasn’t stopped since.
The blood it pumps carries water, oxygen and nutrient s to each one of your trillions of cells, and removes CO and other wastes. Of
course plants don’t have hearts, but they do have ve ssels that transport water, minerals, and nutrients thr ough the plant. These
vessels are the vascular tissue, and consist of xylem and phloem. Xylem and phloem are packaged together in bundles, as shown in
Figure below.
Bundles of xylem and phloem run through the ground tissue inside this stalk of cel ery. What function do these tissues serve?2

9.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12226Summary
The three types of plant cells are found in each of the m ajor types of plant tissues: dermal, ground, and vascular tissues.
Dermal tissue covers the outside of a plant in a single la yer of cells called the epidermis. It mediates most of the interactions
between a plant and its environment.
Ground tissue makes up most of the interior of a plant. It carries out basic metabolic functions and stores food and water.
Vascular tissue runs through the ground tissue inside a plant. It consists of bundles of xylem and phloem, which tr ansport fluids
throughout the plant.
Review
1. Compare dermal, ground, and vascular tissues of plants.
2. What is cuticle? What is its role?
3. What are guard cells and stomata?
4. An important concept in biology is that form follows fu nction. In other words, the structure of an organism, or pa rt of an
organism, depends on its function. Apply this concept to pl ants, and explain why plants have different types of cells and tissues.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Flickr:j bizzie
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/k9d/8237716
406/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: J Umbrasaite, A Schweighofer, et
al.
Source:
http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi
%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0015357
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:j bizzie
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/k9d/8237716
406/
License: CC BY 2.0
B oze m a n Scie n ce
P lant Structure
P lant Structure
Watch on

9.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122269.3: Plant Tissue is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122279.4: Plant Growth
So how do plants grow?
There must be an area of growth, similar to how the bon es in your fingers, arms, and legs grow longer. There is, and it is called the
apical meristem, which is shown here.
Growth of Plants
Most plants continue to grow throughout their lives. Lik e other multicellular organisms, plants grow through a combination of cell
growth and cell division. Cell growth increases cell si ze, while cell division (mitosis) increases the number of cells. As plant cells
grow, they also become specialized into different c ell types through cellular differentiation. Once cell s differentiate, they can no
longer divide. How do plants grow or replace damaged cells af ter that?
The key to continued growth and repair of plant cells is meristem. Meristem is a type of plant tissue consisting of u ndifferentiated
cells that can continue to divide and differentiate.
Apical meristems are found at the apex, or tip, of roots and buds, al lowing roots and stems to grow in length and leaves an d
flowers to differentiate. Roots and stems grow in leng th because the meristem adds tissue “behind” it, const antly propelling itself
further into the ground (for roots) or air (for ste ms). Often, the apical meristem of a single branch will become dominant,
suppressing the growth of meristems on other branches a nd leading to the development of a single trunk. In grasses, meristems at
the base of the leaf blades allow for regrowth after grazin g by herbivores – or mowing by lawnmowers.

9.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12227
Microphotograph of the root tip of a broad bean show rapidly dividing apical meristem tissue just behind the root cap.
Numerous cells in various stages of mitosis can be observed.
Apical meristems differentiate into the three basic t ypes of meristem tissue which correspond to the three types of tissue: protoderm
produces new epidermis, ground meristem produces ground tissue, and procambium produces new xylem and phloe m. These three
types of meristem are considered primary meristem because they allow growth in length or height, which i s known as primary
growth.
Secondary meristems allow growth in diameter (secondary growth) in woody p lants. Herbaceous plants do not have secondary
growth. The two types of secondary meristem are both n amed cambium, meaning “exchange” or “change”. Vascular cambium
produces secondary xylem (toward the center of the ste m or root) and phloem (toward the outside of the ste m or root), adding
growth to the diameter of the plant. This process prod uces wood, and builds the sturdy trunks of trees. Cork cambium lies between
the epidermis and the phloem, and replaces the epider mis of roots and stems with bark, one layer of which is cork.
Woody plants grow in two ways.
Primary growth
adds length or height, mediated by apical meristem tissue at the tips o f roots and shoots – which is difficult to show clearly
in cross-sectional diagrams.
Secondary growth
adds to the diameter of a stem or root; vascular cambium adds xyle m (inward) and phloem (outward), and cork cambium
replaces epidermis with bark.

9.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12227Summary
Most plants continue to grow as long as they live. They gr ow through a combination of cell growth and cell division (mitosis).
The key to plant growth is meristem, a type of plant tissu e consisting of undifferentiated cells that can continue to divide and
differentiate.
Meristem allows plant stems and roots to grow longer (primar y growth) and wider (secondary growth).
Review
1. Define meristem and apical meristem.
2. What are the two types of secondary meristem?
3. Describe cork cambium.
m in dla pse
Time lapse radish seeds sprouting, to
Time lapse radish seeds sprouting, to
Watch on

9.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122274. What is primary growth and secondary growth?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;Image
copyright Jubal Harshaw, 2014
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Jubal Harshaw,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
9.4: Plant Growth is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122289.5: Roots
Now those are some serious roots. But what exactly are roots?
There are taproots and fibrous roots, primary roots a nd secondary roots. And they always seem to know which wa y to grow. Roots
are very special plant organs. How and why?
Roots
Plants have specialized organs that help them survive and reproduce in a great diversity of habitats. Majo r organs of most plants
include roots, stems, and leaves.
Roots are important organs in all vascular plants. Most va scular plants have two types of roots: primary roots that grow
downward and secondary roots that branch out to the side. Together, all the roots o f a plant make up a root system.
Root Systems
There are two basic types of root systems in plants: taproot systems and fibrous root systems. Both are illustrated in Figure below.
Taproot systems feature a single, thick primary root, called the taproot, with smaller secondary roots growing out from the
sides. The taproot may penetrate as many as 60 meters (alm ost 200 feet) below the ground surface. It can plumb very deep
water sources and store a lot of food to help the plant survive dr ought and other environmental extremes. The taproot also
anchors the plant very securely in the ground.
Fibrous root systems have many small branching roots, called fibrous roots, but no large primary root. The huge number of
threadlike roots increases the surface area for absorption of water and minerals, but fibrous roots anchor the plant less se curely.
Dandelions have taproot systems; grasses have fibrous root systems.
Root Structures and Functions
As shown in Figure below, the tip of a root is called the root cap. It consists of specialized cells that help regulate primary growth
of the root at the tip. Above the root cap is primary merist em, where growth in length occurs.

9.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12228
A root is a complex organ consisting of several types of tiss ue. What is the function of each tissue type?
Above the meristem, the rest of the root is covered wi th a single layer of epidermal cells. These cells may have root hairs that
increase the surface area for the absorption of water and minerals from the soil. Beneath the epidermis i s ground tissue, which may
be filled with stored starch. Bundles of vascular tissu es form the center of the root. Waxy layers waterpro of the vascular tissues so
they don’t leak, making them more efficient at carr ying fluids. Secondary meristem is located within and a round the vascular
tissues. This is where growth in thickness occurs.
The structure of roots helps them perform their prim ary functions. What do roots do? They have three major jobs: absorbing water
and minerals, anchoring and supporting the plant, and storing f ood.
1. Absorbing water and minerals: Thin-walled epidermal cells and root hairs are well suited to absorb water and dissol ved
minerals from the soil. The roots of many plants also have a myc orrhizal relationship with fungi for greater absorption.
2. Anchoring and supporting the plant: Root systems help anch or plants to the ground, allowing plants to grow tall without
toppling over. A tough covering may replace the epiderm is in older roots, making them ropelike and even stronger. As shown in
Figure below, some roots have unusual specializations for an choring plants.
3. Storing food: In many plants, ground tissues in roots st ore food produced by the leaves during photosynthesis. The bloodroot
shown in Figure below stores food in its roots over the winter.
Mangrove roots are like stilts, allowing mangrove trees to ris e high above the water. The trunk and leaves are above water
even at high tide. A bloodroot plant uses food stored over the winter to gro w flowers in the early spring.

9.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12228Root Growth
Roots have primary and secondary meristems for growth in length and width. As roots grow longer, they always g row down into
the ground. Even if you turn a plant upside down, its roots will try to grow downward. How do roots “know” which wa y to grow?
How can they tell down from up? Specialized cells in ro ot caps are able to detect gravity. The cells direct meristem in the tips of
roots to grow downward toward the center of Earth. This is gener ally adaptive for land plants. Can you explain why?
As roots grow thicker, they can’t absorb water and minera ls as well. However, they may be even better at transporti ng fluids,
anchoring the plant, and storing food (see Figure below).
Secondary growth of sweet potato roots provides more space to stor e food. Roots store sugar from photosynthesis as starch.
What other starchy roots do people eat?
Science Friday: Plants in Space!
For humans to travel to the Moon and Mars, astronauts will need to understand how to grow plants in extreme climates in order to
help them stay alive. In this video by Science Friday, Dr. Anna-Lisa Paul and Dr. Robert J. Ferl send weeds to spac e to study their
behavior on a molecular level.
7a ctive stu dio
ROOT SYSTEM
ROOT SYSTEM
Watch on

9.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12228Summary
Roots absorb water and minerals and transport them to stem s. They also anchor and support a plant, and store food.
A root system consists of primary and secondary roots.
Each root is made of dermal, ground, and vascular tissues.
Roots grow in length and width from primary and secondary m eristem.
Review
1. What are root hairs? What is their role?
2. Identify three major functions of roots.
3. Contrast a taproot system with a fibrous root system.
Sc iF ri
P lants in Space!
P lants in Space!
Watch on

9.5.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122284. Explain how roots “know” which way to grow.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Joanne
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/cuyahogajco/
6251221084/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Taproot: Robbie Sproule; Fibrous:
Image copyright Nata-Lia, 2014
Source: Taproot:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/robbie1/5015
22313/; Fibrous:
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Taproot: CC BY; Fibrous: License
from Shutterstock
[Figure 3]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mangrove: Cesar Paes Barreto;
Bloodroot: William Curtis
Source: Mangrove:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Roots_b
y_cesarpb.jpg; Bloodroot:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bloodw
ort_-_Project_Gutenberg_eText_19123.jpg
License: Mangrove: The copyright holder
of this work allows anyone to use it for any
purpose including unrestricted
redistribution, commercial use, and
modification; Bloodroot: Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Joanne
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/cuyahogajco/
6251221084/
License: CC BY 2.0
9.5: Roots is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122299.6: Stems
How does water get up? How does sugar move down?
What structures hold the plant upright? Are tree trunk s also stems? Of course they are. Trees don't start ou t big and tall - they grow
from small plants to large trees. And it is these st ems that allow them to grow upright. So, obviously the stem is very important and
has numerous functions.
Stems
In vascular plants, stems are the organs that hold plants upright so they can get the sunlight and air they need. Stems also bear
leaves, flowers, cones, and secondary stems. These stru ctures grow at points called nodes (shown in Figure below). At each node,
there is a bud of meristem tissue that can divide and spe cialize to form a particular structure.
The stem of a vascular plant has nodes where leaves and other structures may g row.
Another vital function of stems is transporting water and minerals from roots to leaves and carrying food f rom leaves to the rest of
the plant. Without this connection between roots and leaves, plants could not survive high above ground in the air. In many plants,
stems also store food or water during cold or dry seasons.
Stem Diversity
Stems show variation because many stems are specialized. Figure below shows examples of stem specialization. With specia lized
stems, plants can exploit a diversity of niches in virtually a ll terrestrial ecosystems.

9.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12229
Stem specializations such as these let plants grow in many different habi tats.
Stem Tissues and Functions
Like roots, the stems of vascular plants are made of dermal, v ascular, and ground tissues.
A single-celled layer of epidermis protects and waterpro ofs the stem and controls gas exchange.
In trees, some of the epidermal tissue is replaced by bark. Bark is a combination of tissues that provides a tough, woody
external covering on the stems of trees. The inner par t of bark is alive and growing; the outer part is dead an d provides strength,
support, and protection.
Ground tissue forms the interior of the stem. The large central vacuoles of ground tissue cells fill with water to support the
plant. The cells may also store food.
Bundles of vascular tissue run through the ground tissue of a stem and transport fluids. Plants may vary in how these bun dles
are arranged.
Stem Growth
The stems of all vascular plants get longer through primary growth. This occurs in primary meristem at the tips and nodes of the
stems. Most stems also grow in thickness through secondar y growth. This occurs in secondary meristem, which is loca ted in and
around the vascular tissues. Secondary growth forms sec ondary vascular tissues and bark. In many trees, the yearly growth of new
vascular tissues results in an annual growth ring like the one in Figure below. When a tree is cut down, the rings in the trunk can be
counted to estimate the tree’s age.

9.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12229
The number of rings in this cross-section of tree trunk show how many years the t ree lived. What does each ring represent?
Summary
Stems hold plants upright, bear leaves and other structures, an d transport fluids between roots and leaves.
Like roots, stems contain dermal, ground, and vascular ti ssues.
Trees have woody stems covered with bark.
Review
1. Describe two types of specialized stems. What is each type of stem specialized for?
2. What is bark? What purposes does it serve?0:00

9.6.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122293. Apply lesson concepts to predict how the stem of a desert pl ant might be specialized for its environment.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Amanda Tromley
(www.outofthefireblog.com)
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/out_of_the_fi
re_blog/4516065674/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Baobab: Amila Tennakoon;
Redwood: Courtesy of National Park
Service; Vines: Flickr:epicbeer; Vine
tendril: Jon Sullivan; Rhizomes: Image
copyright dabjola, 2014; Thorns: Trilok
Rangan
Source: Baobab:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/lakpura/5997
342707/; Redwood:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coastal_
redwood.jpg; Vines:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/epicbeer/314
6388362/; Vine tendril:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vine.jpg
; Rhizomes: http://www.shutterstock.com;
Thorns:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/logrcubed/44
92462187/
License: Baobab: CC BY 2.0; Redwood:
Public Domain; Vines: CC BY 2.0; Vine
Tendril: Public Domain; Rhizomes: License
from Shutterstock; Thorns: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Amanda Tromley
(www.outofthefireblog.com)
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/out_of_the_fi
re_blog/4516065674/
License: CC BY 2.0
9.6: Stems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122309.7: Leaves
Could life exist without the leaf?
A leaf looks so simple. But it is actually a very c omplex structure. And it may be one of the most impor tant organs in all kingdoms.
Life as we know it could not exist without leaves. Why? One wo rd: photosynthesis.
Leaves
Plants have specialized organs that help them survive and reproduce in a great diversity of habitats. Majo r organs of most plants
include roots, stems, and leaves. Leaves are the keys not only to plant life but to all terrestrial life. The primary role of leaves is to
collect sunlight and make food by photosynthesis. Despite the fundamental importance of the work they do, there is great diversity
in the leaves of plants. However, given the diversity of habitats in which plants live, it’s not surprising that there is no single best
way to collect solar energy for photosynthesis.
Leaf Variation
Leaves may vary in size, shape, and their arrangement on stems. Nonflowering vascular plants have three basi c types of leaves:
microphylls (“tiny leaves”), fronds, and needles. Figure below describes each type.
Leaf variation in nonflowering plants reflects their evolutionar y origins. Can you explain how?
Flowering vascular plants also have diverse leaves. Howeve r, the leaves of all flowering plants have two basic p arts in common:
the blade and petiole. The blade of the leaf is the relatively wide, flat part of the leaf that gathers sunlight and undergoes
photosynthesis. The petiole is the part that attaches the leaf to a stem of the plant. This occurs at a node.

9.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12230Flowering plant leaves vary in how the leaves are arra nged on the stem and how the blade is divided. This i s illustrated in Figure
below. Generally, the form and arrangement of leaves m aximizes light exposure while conserving water, reducin g wind resistance,
or benefiting the plant in some other way in its particul ar habitat.
Leaves arranged in whorls encircle upright stems at interv als. They collect sunlight from all directions.
Leaves arranged in basal rosettes take advantage of war m temperatures near the ground.
Leaves arranged in alternate or opposing pairs collect li ght from above. They are typically found on plants with a sing le, upright
stem.
The blades of simple leaves are not divided. This pro vides the maximum surface area for collecting sunlight.
The blades of compound leaves are divided into many smaller leaflets. This r educes wind resistance and water loss.
Leaf variation in flowering plants may include variations in the arra ngement of leaves and the divisions of the blade.
Seasonal Changes in Leaves
Even if you don’t live in a place where leaves turn color in the fall, no doubt you’ve seen photos of thei r “fall colors” (see Figure
below). The leaves of many plants turn from green to other, glorious colors during autumn each year. The change is triggered by
shorter days and cooler temperatures. Leaves respond t o these environmental stimuli by producing less chlorophyll. This allows
other leaf pigments—such as oranges and yellows—to be seen.
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
Structure Of The Leaf | P lant | Biology
Structure Of The Leaf | P lant | Biology
Watch on

9.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12230
A deciduous tree goes through dramatic seasonal changes each year. Can you identify the seasons in the photo?
After leaves turn color in the fall, they may all fa ll off the plant for the winter. Plants that shed thei r leaves seasonally each year are
called deciduous plants. Shedding leaves is a strategy for reducing water loss during seasons of extreme dryness. On the downside,
the plant must grow new leaves in the spring, and that takes a lot of energy and matter. Some plants may “ban k” energy over the
winter by storing food. That way, they are ready to grow new le aves as soon as spring arrives.
Evergreen plants have a different strategy for adapting to se asonal dryness. They don’t waste energy and matter g rowing new
leaves each year. Instead, they keep their leaves and stay green year-round. However, to reduce water loss, they have needle-like
leaves with very thick cuticle. On the downside, needle- like leaves reduce the surface area for collecting su nlight. This is one
reason that needles may be especially rich in chlorop hyll, as you can see from the dark green pine needles in Figure below. This is
also an important adaptation for low levels of sunlight, allo wing evergreens to live far from the equator.
Compare the color of the evergreen needles and the deciduous leaf. Why is the darker color of the needles adaptive?
M in u te Ea rth
Why Are Leaves Green? P art 1
Why Are Leaves Green? P art 1
Watch on

9.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12230Summary
The primary function of leaves is to collect sunlight and make food by photosynthesis.
In a deciduous plant, leaves seasonally turn color and fal l off the plant. They are replaced with new leaves later in th e year.
An evergreen plant keeps its green leaves year-round. It may have needle-like leaves to reduce water loss.
Review
1. Name the two main parts of an angiosperm leaf. What is t he function of each part?
2. Identify strategies used by deciduous and evergreen plants t o adapt to seasonal dryness.

9.7.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122303. Relate leaf variation to environmental variation.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Evergreen: Courtesy of Robert H.
Mohlenbrock, USDA NRCS; Deciduous:
Hans Braxmeier
Source: Evergreen:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Abies_b
alsamea_branch.jpg; Deciduous:
pixabay.com/en/journal-green-leaf-veinsfiligree-141494/
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Microphylls: Gernot A. Molitor;
Fronds (left): Corrie Barklimore, (right):
User:Karora/Wikimedia Commons;
Needles: Richard Freeman
Source: Microphylls:
www.flickr.com/photos/tonreg/8342272166
/; Fronds (left):
www.flickr.com/photos/55368994@N06/52
55136894/; Fronds (right):
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tree_fer
n_frond_at_Akatarawa.jpg; Needles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/freebird710/2
779570509/
License: Microphylls: CC BY 2.0; Fronds
(right): CC BY 2.0; Fronds (left): Public
Domain; Needles: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Alternate, Opposite, Whorled,
Pinnately Compound, Palmately Compund,
Doubly Compound: Agnieszka Kwiecień
(User:Nova/Wikimedia Commons); Basal
Rosette, Simple: Rupali Raju/CK-12
Foundation
Source: Alternate; Opposite; Whorled:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ulistnie
nie.svg; Pinnately Compound; Palmately
Compund; Doubly Compound:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Li%C5
%9Bcie_z%C5%82o%C5%BCone.svg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: User:Cherubino/Wikimedia
Commons;Flickr:j bizzie
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Four_Po
plars_in_four_seasons.JPG;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/k9d/8237716
406/
License: Public Domain; CC BY 2.0

9.7.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12230
[Figure 5]Credit: Evergreen: Courtesy of Robert H.
Mohlenbrock, USDA NRCS; Deciduous:
Hans Braxmeier;Flickr:j bizzie
Source: Evergreen:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Abies_b
alsamea_branch.jpg; Deciduous:
pixabay.com/en/journal-green-leaf-veinsfiligree-141494/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/k9d/8237716
406/
License: Public Domain; CC BY 2.0
9.7: Leaves is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122319.8: Plant Reproduction and Life Cycle
Fertilization or pollination. How does this occur in the plant?
Pollination. A significant step in the life cycle of flowering plants. But fertilization must occur in the life cycles of all plants, not
just those with flowers. Does it always use the birds or the bees?
General Plant Life Cycle
The life cycle of all plants is complex because it is characterized by alternation of generations. Plants al ternate between diploid
sporophyte and haploid gametophyte generations, and b etween sexual and asexual reproduction. The ability to reproduce both
sexually and asexually gives plants the flexibility to adapt to changing environments. Their complex li fe cycle allows for great
variation. A general plant life cycle is represented by the diagram in Figure below. From the figure, you can see that the diploid
sporophyte has a structure called a sporangium (plural, sporangia) that undergoes meiosis to form haploid spores. A spore
develops into a haploid gametophyte. The gametophyte has male or female reproductive o rgans that undergo mitosis to form
haploid gametes (sperm or eggs). Fertilization of gametes produces a diploid zygote. The zygote grows and develops into a mature
sporophyte, and the cycle repeats.
This diagram represents the life cycle that generally charac terizes plants.
One of the two generations of a plant’s life cycle is typically dominant to the other generation. Whethe r it’s the sporophyte or
gametophyte generation, individuals in the dominant generation live longer and grow larger. They are the green, photosynthetic
structures that you would recognize as a fern, tree, or other plant (see Figure below). Individuals in the nondominant generation, in
contrast, may be very small and rarely seen. They may live in or on the dominant plant.

9.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12231The dominant generation in nonvascular plants is the gametophyte; in vascular plants, it’s the sporophyte. Why is a dominant
sporophyte generation an advantage on land?
All of these photos show plants of the dominant generation in their life cy cle.
Summary
All plants have a life cycle with alternation of generati ons.
Plants alternate between diploid sporophyte and haploid gam etophyte generations, and between sexual reproduction with
gametes and asexual reproduction with spores.
Review
1. Outline the general life cycle of plants.
2. What are sporangia? What do they do?
3. Describe the gametophyte.
SciSh ow K ids
How Does A Seed Become A P lant? |
How Does A Seed Become A P lant? |
Watch on

9.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122314. Describe the sporophyte.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Moss: S. Rae; Fern: John Tann;
Pine: Ken Bosma; Apple: Juha Ryhänen
Source: Moss:
www.flickr.com/photos/35142635@N05/54
74415455/; Fern:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/31031835@
N08/3125057762/; Pine:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kretyen/2761
375368/; Apple: pixabay.com/en/the-appletree-apple-257958/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Moss: S. Rae; Fern: John Tann;
Pine: Ken Bosma; Apple: Juha Ryhänen
Source: Moss:
www.flickr.com/photos/35142635@N05/54
74415455/; Fern:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/31031835@
N08/3125057762/; Pine:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kretyen/2761
375368/; Apple: pixabay.com/en/the-appletree-apple-257958/
License: Moss, Fern, Pine: CC BY 2.0;
Apple: Public Domain
9.8: Plant Reproduction and Life Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122329.9: Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants
Haploid or diploid. Which would you say is dominant?
That may depend on the plant. Start with moss. The typi cal nonvascular plant. But such a simple plant has a very interesting life
cycle. Whereas most kinds of plants have two sets of ch romosomes in their vegetative cells, mosses have only a single set of
chromosomes. So, how does meiosis occur?
Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants
Nonvascular plants include mosses, liverworts, and hor nworts. They are the only plants with a life cycle in wh ich the gametophyte
generation is dominant. Figure below shows the life cycle of moss. The familiar, green, photosynthetic moss plants are
gametophytes. The sporophyte generation is very small and dependent on the gametoph yte plant.
Like other bryophytes, moss plants spend most of their life cycle as g ametophytes. Find the sporophyte in the diagram. Do
you see how it is growing on the gametophyte plant?
The gametophytes of nonvascular plants have distinct m ale or female reproductive organs (see Figure below). Male reproductive
organs, called antheridia (singular, antheridium), produce motile sperm with two flagella. Female reproductive organs, called
archegonia (singular, archegonium), produce eggs.

9.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12232
The reproductive organs of bryophytes like this liverwort are male antheridia and female archegonia.
In order for fertilization to occur, sperm must swim in a drop of water from an antheridium to an egg in an archegonium. If
fertilization takes place, it results in a zygote that develops into a tiny sporophyte on the parent gametophyte plant. The sporophyte
produces haploid spores, and these develop into the next generation of gametophy te plants. Then the cycle repeats.
Summary
In nonvascular plants, the gametophyte generation is d ominant. The tiny sporophyte grows on the gametophyte pl ant.
Review
1. Describe antheridia and archegonia and their functions.
Cra sh Cou rse
The Reproductive Lives of Nonvascu
The Reproductive Lives of Nonvascu
Watch on

9.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122322. Create your own cycle diagram to represent the moss li fe cycle.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Liverwort: User:Lamiot/Wikimedia
Commons; Archegonia and Antheridia:
Hermann Schachner
Source: Liverwort:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorphaLamiot.448.jpg;
Archegonia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28b; _145318481413%29_3492.JPG; Antheridia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28c; _133318471447%29_4200.JPG
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Liverwort: User:Lamiot/Wikimedia
Commons; Archegonia and Antheridia:
Hermann Schachner
Source: Liverwort:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorphaLamiot.448.jpg;
Archegonia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28b; _145318481413%29_3492.JPG; Antheridia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28c; _133318471447%29_4200.JPG
License: Liverwort: CC BY 3.0;
Archegonia and Antheridia: Public Domain
9.9: Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122339.10: Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants
What's a fiddlehead?
This fern leaf structure is known as a fiddlehead. Can you understand why? Does it look tasty? Nearly all ferns have fiddleheads,
and many recipes exist on how to prepare fiddleheads. But this part of the plant, the leaf or the frond, a lso plays a very important
role in the fern's life cycle.
Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants
Unlike nonvascular plants, all vascular plants—includi ng seedless vascular plants—have a dominant sporophyte generation.
Seedless vascular plants include clubmosses and ferns. Figure below shows a typical fern life cycle.
In the life cycle of a fern, the sporophyte generation is dominant.
A mature sporophyte fern has the familiar leafy fronds. The undersides of the leaves are dotted with clust ers of sporangia.
Sporangia produce spores that develop into tiny, heart- shaped gametophytes. Gametophytes have antheridia and archegonia.
Antheridia produce sperm with many cilia; archegonia produce eggs. Fertilizat ion occurs when sperm swim to an egg inside an
archegonium. The resulting zygote develops into an embryo that becom es a new sporophyte plant. Then the cycle repeats.

9.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12233Summary
In vascular plants, the sporophyte generation is domin ant.
In seedless vascular plants such as ferns, the sporophyte releases spores from the undersides of leaves.
The spores develop into tiny, separate gametophytes, fr om which the next generation of sporophyte plants grows.
Review
1. What role do leaves play in the reproduction of ferns?
2. Describe antheridia and archegonia and their functions.
3. Create your own cycle diagram to represent the life cyc le of a fern.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
9.10: Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Cra ig Sa va ge
Seedless Vascular P lants (ferns)
Seedless Vascular P lants (ferns)
Watch on

9.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14939.11: Plant Characteristics
What are plants?
Autumn. A time when leaves turn amazing colors. Of course, leaves are part of plants. But what are plants? Wha t separates a plant
from a fungus or protist? Or animal?
Plants
Imagine that human life cycles resembled those of th e earliest plants. If you think about this analogy, y ou may begin to realize that
many plants, which appear so inert to our roving eyes an d active minds, actually lead secret lives of surprisin g variety.
You know that humans develop, or gradually change, fro m infants to quite different, sexually mature adults. You also know that
meiosis in your own ovaries or testes produces haploi d eggs or sperm, which must join in fertilization to become a new in dividual.
Each of us, of course, began as that single cell mad e when a sperm united with an egg. Now, through mitosis and the miracle of
development, we are made of trillions of cells organized into tissues, organs, and organ systems, which make us complex, amazing,
active, individual beings. None of us would doubt that we have changed significantly since we began as single c ells. Each of us has
a unique identity that we keep throughout our entire lives, until death marks our end. We may give birth to other individuals by
producing eggs or sperm, but only if they join with othe r sperm or eggs to produce new, separate lives.
If, however, we lived like some plants, your father woul d not have produced the sperm cell destined to provide half of your genes,
although there would be such a sperm cell. Your moth er would not have produced the egg cell destined to produce the other half. In
fact, your parents, and you, would not be distinguish able as male or female. Instead, both parents (or may be just one parent) would
have released thousands of haploid spore cells, each of which would grow, by mitosis, into a new ind ividual being, entirely
different in form and habitat from its parents - and you. Small spores would become males, and large spore s females, but as if
sperm and egg had decided to postpone their “marria ge” and grow up on their own, these beings would live very different, “nonhuman” lives.
Who are these beings? You are certainly not one of t hem, because you begin only when egg meets sperm. Their differences from
you would be far greater than the differences between tadpole and frog, or caterpillar and butterfly, bec ause every individual
butterfly or frog could (theoretically) identify ex actly which individual caterpillar or tadpole it used to be. Not so with these haploid
creatures.
At some time during their relatively long lives, the ma le and female beings would produce sperm cells and egg cells by mitosis.
Fertilization would not involve mating, of course. Dep ending on which kind of plant we chose as our model, sp erm might swim on
their own (with two or more flagella) from male to fem ale being, or they might be blown by the wind, or carr ied by an animal.
After sperm and egg join, you would begin your life as a single cell, and grow into an “adult,” eventually pr oducing your own
haploid spores. But you would never be able to identi fy your parents – if indeed you had two – nor would yo u know your children,
because entire haploid lives would separate you. Why do p lants lead such complex, multiple lives?
Most of the plants you are probably familiar with prod uce flowers. However, plants existed for hundreds of mi llions of years before
they evolved flowers. In fact, the earliest plants wer e different from most modern plants in several import ant ways. They not only

9.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1493lacked flowers, but also lacked leaves, roots, and stems. You might not even recognize them as plants. So why are the earli est plants
placed in the plant kingdom? What traits define a plant?
What are Plants?
Plants are multicellular eukaryotic organisms with cell walls made of cellulose. Plant cells also have chloroplasts. In addition,
plants have specialized reproductive organs. These are structures that produce reproductive cells. Mal e reproductive organs produce
sperm, and female reproductive organs produce eggs. Male and female reproductive organs may be on the same or diffe rent plants.
How Do Plants Obtain Food?
Almost all plants make food by photosynthesis. Only about 1 percent of the estimated 300,000 specie s of plants have lost the
ability to photosynthesize. These other species are consumers, many of them predators. How do plants prey o n other organisms?
The Venus fly trap in Figure below shows one way this occurs.
Venus fly trap plants use their flowers to trap insects. The flowers secr ete enzymes that digest the insects, and then they
absorb the resulting nutrient molecules.
What Do Plants Need?
Plants need temperatures above freezing while they are actively growing and photosynthesizing. They also ne ed sunlight, carbon
dioxide, and water for photosynthesis. Like most other organisms, plants n eed oxygen for cellular respiration and minerals to build
proteins and other organic molecules. Most plants s upport themselves above the ground with stiff stems in order to get light, carbon
dioxide, and oxygen. Most plants also grow roots down into the soil to absorb water and minerals. And, of course, we need the
energy stored in plants through photosynthesis to survive. Life as we know it would not be possible without plants.
Summary
Plants are multicellular eukaryotes. They have organelle s called chloroplasts and cell walls made of cellulose.
Plants also have specialized reproductive organs.
Almost all plants make food by photosynthesis.
Life as we know it would not be possible without plants.
Review
1. What traits do all plants share?
2. How do almost all plants obtain food?

9.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14933. What do plants need? Why do they need these items?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Miguel Vieira
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/miguelvieira/61645
82612/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 9.11: Plant Characteristics is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122349.12: Life Cycle of Gymnosperms
Do pine trees produce flowers?
Of course not. But look closely at these pine cones. No tice the shape. Can you see the "petals?" They do seem o ddly similar to
flowers. These pine cones have a prominent role in the g ymnosperm life cycle. So what is the function of a pine cone?
Life Cycle of Gymnosperms
Gymnosperms are vascular plants that produce seeds in cones. Examples include conifers such as pine and spruce trees. The
gymnosperm life cycle has a dominant sporophyte generation. Both gametophytes and the next generation’s new sporophytes
develop on the sporophyte parent plant. Figure below is a diagram of a gymnosperm life cycle.
The gymnosperm life cycle follows the general plant life cycle, but wi th some new adaptations. Can you identify them?
Cones form on a mature sporophyte plant. Inside male cones, male spores develop into male gametophytes. Each male
gametophyte consists of several cells enclosed within a grain of pollen. Inside female cones, female spores develop into fem ale
gametophytes. Each female gametophyte produces an egg i nside an ovule.
Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from a m ale to female cone. If sperm then travel from the pollen to an egg so
fertilization can occur, a diploid zygote results. The zygote develops into an embryo within a seed, whi ch forms from the ovule
inside the female cone. If the seed germinates, it may gr ow into a mature sporophyte tree, which repeats the cycle.

9.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12234Summary
In gymnosperms, the gametophyte generation takes place in a cone, which forms on the mature sporophyte plant.
Each male gametophyte is just a few cells inside a grain of pollen. Each female gametophyte produc es an egg inside an ovule.
Pollination must occur for fertilization to take place. Zygotes develop into embryos inside seeds, from which the next
sporophyte generation grows.
Review
1. Describe how gymnosperms use cones to reproduce.
2. Create your own cycle diagram to represent the life cyc le of a gymnosperm.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
9.12: Life Cycle of Gymnosperms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Cra ig Sa va ge
Gymnosperm (P ine) Life Cycle
Gymnosperm (P ine) Life Cycle
Watch on

9.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122359.13: Life Cycle of Angiosperms
What's the most successful type of plant?
Flowering plants. Why? As you know, flowers come in many different styles and colors, and many are visually p leasing. This aids
in pollination. Also notice the anatomy of this Hibiscus flower. Each part has evolved to play a role in the li fe cycle.
Life Cycle of Angiosperms
Angiosperms, or flowering plants, are the most abundant and diver se plants on Earth. Angiosperms evolved several reprod uctive
adaptations that have contributed to their success. Like all vascular plants, their life cycle is domina ted by the sporophyte
generation. A typical angiosperm life cycle is shown in Figure below.
Life cycle of an angiosperm
The flower in Figure above is obviously an innovation in the angiosperm life cycle. Flowers form on the dominant sporophyte
plant. They consist of highly specialized male and fe male reproductive organs. Flowers produce spores that develop into
gametophytes. Male gametophytes consist of just a few cells within a pollen grain and produce sperm. Female gametophytes
produce eggs inside the ovaries of flowers. Flowers also at tract animal pollinators.

9.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12235If pollination and fertilization occur, a diploid zy gote forms within an ovule in the ovary. The zygote de velops into an embryo
inside a seed, which forms from the ovule and also con tains food to nourish the embryo. The ovary surroundi ng the seed may
develop into a fruit. Fruits attract animals that may disperse the seeds they contain. If a seed ge rminates, it may grow into a mature
sporophyte plant and repeat the cycle.
Summary
In flowering plants, the gametophyte generation takes plac e in a flower, which forms on the mature sporophyte plant.
Each male gametophyte is just a few cells inside a grain of pollen. Each female gametophyte produc es an egg inside an ovule.
Pollination must occur for fertilization to take place. Zygotes develop into embryos inside seeds, from which the next
sporophyte generation grows.
Review
1. State the functions of flowers and fruits in angiosperm rep roduction.
2. Create your own cycle diagram to represent the life cyc le of a daisy.
Am oe ba Siste rs
(OLD VIDEO) P lant Reproduction in A
(OLD VIDEO) P lant Reproduction in A
Watch on

9.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12235Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
9.13: Life Cycle of Angiosperms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122369.14: Plant Adaptations
Look closely at the petals of this flower. Do they look different?
This flower is from an aloe plant. Aloes are succulent plants, which have adaptations that allow them to store water in their
enlarged fleshy leaves, stems, or roots. This allows them to su rvive in arid environments.
Plant Adaptations
Plants live just about everywhere on Earth. To live in so many different habitats, they have evolved adapt ations that allow them to
survive and reproduce under a diversity of conditions.
All plants are adapted to live on land. Or are they? All living plants today have terrestrial ancestors, but some plants now live in the
water. They have had to evolve new adaptations for their wate ry habitat.
Adaptations to Water
Aquatic plants are plants that live in water. Living i n water has certain advantages for plants. One advanta ge is, well, the water.
There’s plenty of it and it’s all around. Therefore, most aquatic plants do not need adaptations for absor bing, transporting, and
conserving water. They can save energy and matter by not growing extensive root systems, vascular tissues, or thick cuticles on
leaves. Support is also less of a problem because of the buoyancy of water. As a result, adaptations such as strong woody stems and
deep anchoring roots are not necessary for most aquati c plants.
Living in water does present challenges to plants, howev er. For one thing, pollination by wind or animals isn’t feasible under water,
so aquatic plants may have adaptations that help the m keep their flowers above water. For instance, water lil ies have bowl-shaped
flowers and broad, flat leaves that float. This allows the lilies to collect the maximum amount of sunlig ht, which does not penetrate
very deeply below the water's surface. Plants that live i n moving water, such as streams and rivers, may have di fferent adaptations.
For example, cattails have narrow, strap-like leaves that r educe their resistance to the moving water (see Figure below).

9.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12236
Water lilies and cattails have different adaptations for life in the water. Compare the leaves of the two kinds of plants. How
do the leaves help the plants adapt to their watery habitats?
Adaptations to Extreme Dryness
Plants that live in extremely dry environments have t he opposite problem: how to get and keep water. Plants that are adapted to
very dry environments are called xerophytes. Their adaptations may help them increase water int ake, decrease water loss, or store
water when it is available.
The saguaro cactus pictured in Figure below has adapted in all three ways. When it was still a very small plant, just a few inches
high, its shallow roots already reached out as much a s 2 meters (7 feet) from the base of the stem. By now, its root system is much
more widespread. It allows the cactus to gather as much moisture as possible from rare rainfalls. The sagua ro doesn’t have any
leaves to lose water by transpiration. It also has a l arge, barrel-shaped stem that can store a lot of wat er. Thorns protect the stem
from thirsty animals that might try to get at the water inside.
The saguaro cactus has many adaptations for extreme dryness. How does it stor e water?
Adaptations to Air
Plants called epiphytes grow on other plants. They obtain moisture from the air and make food by photosynthesis. Most epiphytes
are ferns or orchids that live in tropical or temper ate rainforests (see Figure below). Host trees provide support, allowing epiphyte
plants to obtain air and sunlight high above the for est floor. Being elevated above the ground lets epip hytes get out of the shadows
on the forest floor so they can get enough sunlight for photosynthesis. Being elevated may also reduce the risk of being eaten by
herbivores and increase the chance of pollination by wind.

9.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12236
These Elkhorn and Staghorn ferns are growing on a rainforest tree as epiphyte s.
Epiphytes don’t grow in soil, so they may not have r oots. However, they still need water for photosynthesis. Rai nforests are humid,
so the plants may be able to absorb the water they n eed from the air. However, many epiphytes have evolved m odified leaves or
other structures for collecting rainwater, fog, or dew. The leaves of the bromeliad shown in Figure below are rolled into funnel
shapes to collect rainwater. The base of the leaves fo rms a tank that can hold more than 8 liters (2 gall ons) of water. Some insects
and amphibians may spend their whole life cycle in th e pool of water in the tank, adding minerals to the wat er with their wastes.
The tissues at the base of the leaf are absorbent, so they ca n take in both water and minerals from the tank.
The leaves of this bromeliad are specialized to collect, store, a nd absorb rainwater.
Summary
Plants live just about everywhere on Earth, so they have evol ved adaptations that allow them to survive and reproduce under a
diversity of conditions.
Various plants have evolved adaptations to live in the water, in very dry environments, or in the air as epiphytes.
Review
1. List special challenges that aquatic plants face.
2. What are xerophytes? Give an example.
3. Identify three general ways that plants can adapt to extr eme dryness.
4. Describe how epiphytes can absorb moisture without growi ng roots in soil.
5. Why are epiphytes found mainly in rainforest ecosyst ems?
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
Adaptations Of P lants & Extremophil
Adaptations Of P lants & Extremophil
Watch on

9.14.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122366. Apply the concept of symbiosis to epiphytes and their host plants. Do you think they have a symbiotic relationship? If so, which
type of symbiotic relationship do you think they have? Ex plain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Robert Balog
Source: pixabay.com/en/flower-plantbromeliad-colors-85905/
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Lilies: Emmett Tullos; Cattails:
Derek Jensen
Source: Lilies:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/emmett_ns_t
ullos/167379449/; Cattails:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ty
pha-cattails-in-indiana.jpg
License: Lillies CC BY 2.0; Cattails Public
Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Jörn Napp
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:OldSaguaros-inside-the-Saguaro-NationalPark-Arizona.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Tatiana Gerus
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/tgerus/52338
52909/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Robert Balog
Source: pixabay.com/en/flower-plantbromeliad-colors-85905/
License: Public Domain
9.14: Plant Adaptations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122379.15: Plant Responses
So what happens to a vineyard in the middle of winter?
The vines cannot die each year. Instead, the plants go i nto a state of dormancy, almost as if they are taking a lon g nap.
Plant Responses
Like all organisms, plants detect and respond to sti muli in their environment. Unlike animals, plants can’t run, fly, or swim toward
food or away from danger. They are usually rooted to t he soil. Instead, a plant’s primary means of response is to change how it is
growing. Plants also don’t have a nervous system to con trol their responses. Instead, their responses are gener ally controlled by
hormones, which are chemical messenger molecules.
Plant Tropisms
Plant roots always grow downward because specialized cells in root caps detect and respond to gravity. This i s an example of a
tropism. A tropism is a turning toward or away from a stimulus in the env ironment. Growing toward gravity is called geotropism.
Plants also exhibit phototropism, or growing toward a light source. This response is con trolled by a plant growth hormone called
auxin. As shown in Figure below, auxin stimulates cells on the dark side of a plant to grow longer. This caus es the plant to bend
toward the light.
Phototropism is controlled by the growth hormone auxin.

9.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12237Daily and Seasonal Responses
Plants also detect and respond to the daily cycle of l ight and darkness. For example, some plants open their leaves during the day to
collect sunlight and then close their leaves at nig ht to prevent water loss. Environmental stimuli that indicate changing seasons
trigger other responses. Many plants respond to the day s growing shorter in the fall by going dormant. They suspend growth and
development in order to survive the extreme cold an d dryness of winter. Dormancy ensures that seeds will germinate and plants
will grow only when conditions are favorable.
Responses to Disease
Plants don’t have immune systems, but they do respond to disease. Typically, their first line of defense is the death of cells
surrounding infected tissue. This prevents the infecti on from spreading. Many plants also produce hormones and toxins to fight
pathogens. For example, willow trees produce salicylic acid to kill bacteria. The same compound is used in many acne products for
the same reason. Exciting new research suggests that plants may even produce chemicals that warn other p lants of threats to their
health, allowing the plants to prepare for their own d efense. As these and other responses show, plants may be r ooted in place, but
they are far from helpless.
Science Friday: Plants in Space!
For humans to travel to the Moon and Mars, astronauts will need to understand how to grow plants in extreme climates in order to
help them stay alive. In this video by Science Friday, Dr. Anna-Lisa Paul and Dr. Robert J. Ferl send weeds to spac e to study their
behavior on a molecular level.
Summary
Like all organisms, plants detect and respond to stimuli i n their environment. Their main response is to change how t hey grow.
Plant responses are controlled by hormones. Some plant resp onses are tropisms.
Plants also respond to daily and seasonal cycles and to dise ase.
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
P lant Growth: Auxins and Gibberellin
P lant Growth: Auxins and Gibberellin
Watch on
Sc iF ri
P lants in Space!
P lants in Space!
Watch on

9.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12237Review
1. What is the primary way that plants respond to environm ental stimuli? What controls their responses?
2. Define tropism. Name one example in plants.
3. State ways that plants respond to disease.
4. Why is it adaptive for plants to detect and respond to da ily and seasonal changes?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Rupali Raju;Human cells: Image
copyright Sebastian Kaulitzki, 2014; Onion
cells: Umberto Salvagnin
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Human cells:
http://www.shutterstock.com; Onion cells:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kaibara/3839
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; (Human cells)
License from Shutterstock; (Onion cells)
CC BY 2.0
9.15: Plant Responses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122129.16: Importance of Plants
What is so special about this particular plant?
Look at this plant. You could say it has some inter esting fruit. Some might say the fruit does not even look that tasty. However, this
is a cacao tree, and its seeds are the source of cho colate. So, there are some people who would argue that t his is one of the most
important plants in the whole plant kingdom.
The Importance of Plants
The importance of plants to humans and just about al l other life on Earth is staggering. Life as we know it would not be possible
without plants. Why are plants so important?
Plants supply food to nearly all terrestrial organisms, including humans. We eat either plants or oth er organisms that eat plants.
Plants maintain the atmosphere. They produce oxygen and ab sorb carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. Oxygen is essential
for cellular respiration for all aerobic organisms. It a lso maintains the ozone layer that helps protect Earth’s li fe from damaging
UV radiation. Removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere reduces the greenhouse effect and global warming.
Plants recycle matter in biogeochemical cycles. For examp le, through transpiration, plants move enormous amounts of water
from the soil to the atmosphere. Plants such as peas host bacteria that fix nitrogen. This makes nitrogen available to all pl ants,
which pass it on to consumers.
Plants provide many products for human use, such as firewood, timber, fibers, medicines, dyes, pesticides, oils, and rub ber.
Plants create habitats for many organisms. A single tree ma y provide food and shelter to many species of insects, wo rms, small
mammals, birds, and reptiles (see Figure below).

9.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12212
Red-eyed tree frogs like this one live in banana trees.
We obviously can’t live without plants, but sometime s they cause us problems. Many plants are weeds. Weeds are plants that grow
where people don’t want them, such as gardens and lawns. They take up space and use resources, hindering the growth of more
desirable plants. People often introduce plants to ne w habitats where they lack natural predators and para sites. The introduced
plants may spread rapidly and drive out native plan ts. Many plants produce pollen, which can cause allergies. Plants may also
produce toxins that harm human health (see Figure below).
Poison ivy causes allergic skin rashes. It’s easy to recognize the plant by its arrangement of leaves in groups of three. That’s
the origin of the old saying, “leaves of three, leave it be.”
Why Study Plants?
Members of the plant kingdom play many crucial and som etimes surprising roles in the drama of life on Earth. You are probably
familiar with some reasons plants are important. Why sho uld you understand how plants live? Because plants p lay many roles,
including but certainly not limited to:
1. Supplying Food and Energy
2. Maintaining Earth’s Atmosphere
3. Cycling Water and Nurturing Soils
4. Contributing to Nitrogen and Other Biogeochemical Cycles
5. Interdependence with Animals
6. Interdependence with Fungi
7. Interdependence Among Plants
8. Resources for Humans
9. Aesthetics for Humans
10. Scientific Use by Humans
11. Causing Problems
More than 100,000 natural compounds come from plants, and most of these have yet to be explored. Some of t he most powerful
and useful compounds come from plants. Who knew they c ould help us unlock some of the biology's mysteries - all using an
approach of mapping biological pathways.

9.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12212Summary
Life as we know it would not be possible without plants.
Review
1. List three reasons that plants are important to life o n Earth.
2. When is a plant considered a weed?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Geoff Galice
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dejeuxx/6360
290151/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:Dendroica cerulea
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dendroica/88
97442189/
License: CC BY 2.0
M ITK 12V ide os
Solving Biology' s Mysteries with P lan
Solving Biology' s Mysteries with P lan
Watch on

9.16.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122129.16: Importance of Plants is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14989.17: Plant Life Cycle
How do plants reproduce?
Is it really due to the birds and the bees? Not alway s. Even though it is spotted, this plant is known as t he kangaroo fern, not the
cheetah fern. And all those spots are spores. So what' s a spore? Each spore can grow into a new individual wi thout the need for
fertilization.
Life Cycle of Plants
All plants have a characteristic life cycle that includes alternation of generations. Plants alternate between haploid and diploid
generations. Alternation of generations allows for both asexual and sexual reproduction. Beginning with the di ploid sporophyte,
spores form from meiosis. Asexual reproduction with spores produ ces haploid individuals called gametophytes, which produce
haploid gametes by mitosis. Sexual reproduction with gametes and fertilization produces the diploid sporo phyte. A typical plant’s
life cycle is diagrammed in Figure below.
L
ife Cycle of Plants. Th
is diagram shows the general life cycle of a plant.
Early plants reproduced mainly with spores and spent m ost of their life cycle as haploid gametophytes. Spores require little energy
and matter to produce, and they grow into new individ uals without the need for fertilization. In contrast, most modern plants
reproduce with gametes using pollen and seeds, and the y spend most of their life cycle as diploid sporophy tes. Many modern plants

9.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1498can also reproduce asexually using roots, stems, or leav es. This is called vegetative reproduction. One way this can occur is
shown in Figure below.
Strawberry plants have horizontal stems called stolons that run over the gr ound surface. If they take root, they form new
plants.
Summary
All plants have a characteristic life cycle that include s alternation of generations.
Asexual reproduction with spores produces a haploid gametophyte generation.
Sexual reproduction with gametes and fertilization produc es a diploid sporophyte generation.
Review
1. Define alternation of generations.
2. What type of reproduction occurs in an alternation of generations life cycle?
F a stP la n ts
Wisconsin Fast P lants Life Cycle Tim
Wisconsin Fast P lants Life Cycle Tim
Watch on

9.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14983. Draw a diagram of a typical plant life cycle that illus trates the concept of alternation of generations.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Liz West
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/calliope/5407
0473/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:DrU/Wikipedia
Source:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:FragariaHybrid.
jpg
License: Public Domain
This page titled 9.17: Plant Life Cycle is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14999.18: Plant Evolution
Which moved onto land first, plants or animals?
This fossilized fern may be millions of years old. Over 200 million years ago, the first evidence of ferns r elated to several modern
families appeared. The "great fern radiation" occur red in the late-Cretaceous, which ended 65 million ye ars ago, when many
modern families of ferns first appeared. And if animals were the first on land, would many have starved?
Evolution of Plants
As shown in Figure below, plants are thought to have evolved from an a quatic green alga protist. Later, they evolved impor tant
adaptations for land, including vascular tissues, seeds, and flowers. Each of these major adaptations made plan ts better suited for
life on dry land and much more successful.
From a simple, green alga ancestor that lived in the water, plants eve ntually evolved several major adaptations for life on
land.
The Earliest Plants
The earliest plants were probably similar to the stonewort, an aquatic algae pictured in Figure below. Unlike most modern plants,
stoneworts have stalks rather than stiff stems, and th ey have hair-like structures called rhizoids instead of roots. On the other hand,
stoneworts have distinct male and female reproductive structures, which is a plant characteristic. For fertil ization to occur, sperm
need at least a thin film of moisture to swim to eggs. In a ll these ways, the first plants may have resembled stonewo rts.

9.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1499
Modern stoneworts may be similar to the earliest plants. Shown is a fie ld of modern stoneworts (right), and an example
from the Charophyta, a division of green algae that includes the closest r elatives of the earliest plants (left).
Life on Land
By the time the earliest plants evolved, animals were already the dominant organisms in the ocean. Plant s were also constrained to
the upper layer of water that received enough sunlight for photosynthesis. The refore, plants never became dominant marine
organisms. But when plants moved onto land, everything was wide open. Why was the land devoid of other life? Wit hout plants
growing on land, there was nothing for other organisms to feed on. Land could not be colonized by other org anisms until land
plants became established.
Plants may have colonized the land as early as 700 mi llion years ago. The oldest fossils of land plants dat e back about 470 million
years. The first land plants probably resembled modern pl ants called liverworts, like the one shown in Figure below.
The first land plants may have been similar to liverworts like this one.
Colonization of the land was a huge step in plant evol ution. Until then, virtually all life had evolved in the ocean. Dry land was a
very different kind of place. The biggest problem wa s the dryness. Simply absorbing enough water to stay alive was a huge
challenge. It kept early plants small and low to the ground. Water was also needed for sexual reproduction, so sperm could swim to
eggs. In addition, temperatures on land were extreme and always changing. Sunlight was also strong and danger ous. It put land
organisms at high risk of mutations.
Vascular Plants Evolve
Plants evolved a number of adaptations that helped th em cope with these problems on dry land. One of the e arliest and most
important was the evolution of vascular tissues. Vascular tissues form a plant’s “plumbing system.” They carry water and minerals
from soil to leaves for photosynthesis. They also ca rry food (sugar dissolved in water) from photosynthe tic cells to other cells in the
plant for growth or storage. The evolution of vascul ar tissues revolutionized the plant kingdom. The tis sues allowed plants to grow
large and endure periods of drought in harsh land env ironments. Early vascular plants probably resembled the fern shown in Figure
below.

9.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1499
Early vascular plants may have looked like this modern fern.
In addition to vascular tissues, these early plants evolved other adaptations to life on land, including lignin, leaves, roots, and a
change in their life cycle.
Lignin is a tough carbohydrate molecule that is hydrophobic (“wa ter fearing”). It adds support to vascular tissues in stems. It
also waterproofs the tissues so they don’t leak, which makes them mor e efficient at transporting fluids. Because most other
organisms cannot break down lignin, it helps protect plants f rom herbivores and parasites.
Leaves are rich in chloroplasts that function as solar col lectors and food factories. The first leaves were very s mall, but leaves
became larger over time.
Roots are vascular organs that can penetrate soil and even ro ck. They absorb water and minerals from soil and carry them to
leaves. They also anchor a plant in the soil. Roots evolved from rhizoids, which nonvascular plants had used for ab sorption.
Land plants evolved a dominant diploid sporophyte gene ration. This was adaptive because diploid individuals are less likely to
suffer harmful effects of mutations. They have two copie s of each gene, so if a mutation occurs in one gene, they hav e a backup
copy. This is extremely important on land, where there’s a lo t of solar radiation.
With all these advantages, it’s easy to see why vascula r plants spread quickly and widely on land. Many nonva scular plants went
extinct as vascular plants became more numerous. Vascular plants are now the dominant land plants on Earth.
F ie ld M u se u m
Science at FMNH - Early Land P lants
Science at FMNH - Early Land P lants
Watch on

9.18.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1499Summary
The earliest plants are thought to have evolved in the oce an from a green alga ancestor.
Plants were among the earliest organisms to leave the wate r and colonize land.
The evolution of vascular tissues allowed plants to grow la rger and thrive on land.
Review
1. What were the first plants to evolve?
2. What are vascular tissues of a plant? What is their func tion?
3. Explain why life on land was difficult for early plants.
F ie ld M u se u m
Science at FMNH - Threats for Early
Science at FMNH - Threats for Early
Watch on

9.18.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14994. Why did plants need to become established on land before a nimals could colonize the land?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Forest &#38; Kim Starr
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Starr_06
1108-9657_Psilotum_nudum.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Left: User:Pallastrelli/Wikimedia
Commons; Right: User:Panek/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: Left:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chara_l
upa.JPG; Right:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stonewo
rt_meadow.jpg
License: Left: Public Domain; Right: CC
BY 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit:
User:HermannSchachner/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plagioch
ila_asplenioides_IMG_4787.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Forest &#38; Kim Starr
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Starr_06
1108-9657_Psilotum_nudum.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
This page titled 9.18: Plant Evolution is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

9.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14979.19: Seed Plant Evolution
Why are they called sunflowers?
When the plant is in the bud stage, the flower tends to track the movement of the sun across the horizon, hence the name sunflower.
Flowering plants were the last group of plants to evolv e. The flower contains both the male and female repr oductive structures, and
these plants have become tremendously successful. But these plants could not have evolved without the pri or evolution of the seed.
So what exactly is a seed?
Seed Plants Emerge
For reproduction, early vascular plants still needed moisture. Sperm had to swim from male to female reproductive organs for
fertilization. Spores also needed some water to grow and often to disperse as well. Of course, dryne ss and other harsh conditions
made it very difficult for tiny new offspring plants to survive. With the evolution of seeds in vascular plants, all that changed. Seed
plants evolved a number of adaptations that made it possible to reproduce without water. As a result, seed plants were wildly
successful. They exploded into virtually all of Earth’s ha bitats.
Why are seeds so adaptive on land? A seed contains an embryo and a food supply enclosed within a tough coat ing. An embryo is a
zygote that has already started to develop and grow. Early growth and development of a plant embryo in a seed is called
germination. The seed protects and nourishes the embryo and giv es it a huge head start in the “race” of life. Many seeds can wait
to germinate until conditions are favorable for growth. Th is increases the offspring’s chance of surviving even more.
Other reproductive adaptations that evolved in seed pla nts include ovules, pollen, pollen tubes, and pollinati on by animals.
An ovule is a female reproductive structure in seed plants that c ontains a tiny female gametophyte. The gametophyte produc es
an egg cell. After the egg is fertilized by sperm, the ovule develops into a seed.
A grain of pollen is a tiny male gametophyte enclosed in a tough capsule (s ee Figure below). It carries sperm to an ovule while
preventing it from drying out. Pollen grains can’t swim, but they are very light, so the wind can carry them. Therefore, they can
travel through air instead of water.
Wind-blown pollen might land anywhere and be wasted. Anothe r adaptation solved this problem. Plants evolved traits that
attract specific animal pollinators. Like the bee in Figure below, a pollinator picks up pollen on its body and carrie s it directly
to another plant of the same species. This greatly increa ses the chance that fertilization will occur.
Pollen also evolved the ability to grow a tube, called a pollen tube, through which sperm could be transferred directly from the
pollen grain to the egg. This allowed sperm to reach an egg wit hout swimming through a film of water. It finally freed up pl ants
from depending on moisture to reproduce.

9.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1497
Individual grains of pollen may have prickly surfaces that help them stick t o pollinators such as bees. What other animals
pollinate plants?
Seed Plants Diverge
The first seed plants formed seeds in cones. Cones are made up of overlapping scales, which are modifi ed leaves (see Figure
below). Male cones contain pollen, and female cones co ntain eggs. Seeds also develop in female cones. Modern seed plants that
produce seeds in cones are called gymnosperms.
Gymnosperms produce seeds in cones (left). Each scale has a seed att ached (right).
Later, seed plants called angiosperms evolved. They produce flowers, which consist of both male and female reproductive
structures. The female reproductive structure in a flower includes an organ called an ovary. Eggs form in ovules inside ovaries,
which also enclose and protect developing seeds afte r fertilization occurs. In many species of flowering pl ants, ovaries develop into
fruits, which attract animals that disperse the seeds.
Summary
The evolution of seeds and pollen allowed plants to repr oduce on land without moisture.
Flowering plants evolved flowers with ovaries that formed fruits. They have been the most successful plants of all.
Review
1. What is a seed?
2. Describe cones.
3. Compare and contrast gymnosperms and angiosperms, and gi ve an example of each.

9.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14974. Which major plant adaptation—vascular tissues or seeds— do you think was more important in the evolution of plants? Choose
one of the two adaptations, and write a logical argument to su pport your choice.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Pollen: Dartmouth Electron
Microscope Facility, Dartmouth College;
Bee: Darron Birgenheier
Source: Pollen:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Misc_po
llen.jpg; Bee:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/darronb/6177
831662/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:tree-species
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/22327649@
N03/2169060844/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/22327649@
N03/2169063742/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 9.19: Seed Plant Evolution is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14969.20: Plant Classification
How do you know which group one particular plant belongs to?
So many different types of plants. Does the plant have r oots? Or flowers? Or just seeds? Or roots and stems but not se eds? These are all characteristics used to classify plan ts. How many different
types of plants do you see in this Japanese garden?
Classification of Plants
The scientific classification of modern land plants is un der constant revision. Informally, land plants can be cla ssified into the groups listed in Table below. Major divisions and types of modern land
plants are organized in this table. Why do the first five types of pl ants require a moist habitat?
The most basic division is between nonvascular plants and vascular plants. Vascular plants are further divided into those that reprod uce without seeds and those that reproduce with seeds. Seed
plants, in turn, are divided into those that produce seeds in cones and those that produce seeds in the ovaries of flowers. Seed plants are called gymnosperms. Seed plants called angiosperms produce
seeds in the ovaries of flowers.

9.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496Major Division Types of Plants No. of Living Species Description
Nonvascular Plants
Liverworts 7,000
Hornworts 150
Mosses 10,000 They lack leaves and roots. They have no stems, so they grow low to the ground. They reproduce wi
Vascular Plants
Clubmosses 1,200They have roots and tiny leaves. They have no stems, so they grow low to t he ground. They reprodu
habitat.
Ferns 11,000They have large leaves in fronds. They have stiff stems, so they are tall gr owing; some are trees. The
moist habitat.
Ginkgoes 1

9.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496Major Division Types of Plants No. of Living Species Description
Cycads 160
Conifers 700
Gnetae 70Most are trees with wood trunks. They have adaptations to dryness such as n eedle-like leaves. They
produce seeds in cones.
Flowering Plants 258,650They have tremendous diversity in size, shape, and other characteristic s. They reproduce with seeds
ovaries of flowers. Ovaries may develop into fruits, which enhance seed dispe rsal.

9.20.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14960:00
Summary
The most basic division of living plants is between nonvascular and vascular plants.
Vascular plants are further divided into seedless and seed plants.
Seed plants called gymnosperms produce seeds in cones.
Seed plants called angiosperms produce seeds in the ovaries of flower s.

9.20.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496Review
1. Compare the different types of plants in the Table above. Which type of plants would you say is most successful? Support yo ur answer with data from the table.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC

9.20.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC

9.20.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC

9.20.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1496
[Figure 11] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 9.20: Plant Classification is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

9.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/15009.21: Nonvascular Plants
Do all plants have roots?
The massive moss covering these branches seems to be dominating its habitat. And maybe it is. Mosses, bein g nonvascular plants,
don't need roots to grow, so they can easily cover m oist areas. Mosses commonly grow close together in clump s or mats in damp or
shady locations. You may even have mats of moss growing in your backyard.
Nonvascular Plants
Nonvascular plants are bryophytes. Despite the dominance of vascular plants today, mor e than 17,000 species of bryophytes still
survive. They include liverworts, hornworts, and mosses.
Characteristics of Nonvascular Plants
Most bryophytes are small. They not only lack vascular tissues; they also lack true leaves, seeds, and flowers. In stead of roots, they
have hair-like rhizoids to anchor them to the ground and to absorb water and minerals (see Figure below). Bryophytes occupy
niches in moist habitats, but, as they lack vascular tissue, they are not very efficient at absorbing water.
The rhizoids of a bryophyte may be so fine that they are just one cell thi ck.
Bryophytes also depend on moisture to reproduce. Sperm produced by a male gametophyte must swim through a l ayer of rainwater
or dew to reach an egg produced by a female gametoph yte. The tiny, diploid sporophyte generation then und ergoes meiosis to
produce haploid spores. The spores may also need moisture to di sperse.
Evolution of Nonvascular Plants
Nonvascular plants were the first plants to evolve. C ompared to other plants, their small size and lack o f specialized structures,
such as vascular tissue, stems, leaves, or flowers, expla ins why these plants evolved first. The first nonvascula r plants to evolve
were the liverworts. The hornworts evolved somewhat late r, and mosses apparently evolved last. Of all the bryo phytes, mosses are
most similar to vascular plants. Presumably, they share the most recent common ancestor with vascular plants.

9.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1500Diversity of Nonvascular Plants
The three types of modern nonvascular plants are pictur ed in Figure below.
Liverworts are tiny nonvascular plants that have leaf -like, lobed, or ribbon-like photosynthetic tissues rath er than leaves. Their
rhizoids are very fine, they lack stems, and they are ge nerally less than 10 centimeters (4 inches) tall. They o ften grow in
colonies that carpet the ground.
Hornworts are minute nonvascular plants, similar in size to liverworts. They also have very fine rhizoids and la ck stems. Their
sporophytes are long and pointed, like tiny horns. They rise several centimeters above the gametophytes of the plant.
Mosses are larger nonvascular plants that have coarser, multi cellular rhizoids that are more like roots. They also have tiny,
photosynthetic structures similar to leaves that encirc le a central stem-like structure. Mosses grow in dense clumps, which help
them retain moisture.
Liverworts, hornworts, and mosses are modern bryophytes. Liverworts ar e named for the liver-shaped leaves of some
species. Hornworts are named for their horn-like sporophytes.
Summary
Nonvascular plants are called bryophytes.
Nonvascular plants include liverworts, hornworts, and mos ses. They lack roots, stems, and leaves.
Nonvascular plants are low-growing, reproduce with spores, and need a moist habitat.
Review
1. Describe nonvascular plants.
2. What is a rhizoid?
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Nonvascular P lants | Biology
Nonvascular P lants | Biology
Watch on

9.21.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/15003. Why were nonvascular plants the first plants to evolve?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Liverwort:
User:Lamiot/Wikimedia Commons;
Archegonia and Antheridia: Hermann
Schachner
Source: Liverwort:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorphaLamiot.448.jpg;
Archegonia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28b; _145318481413%29_3492.JPG; Antheridia:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marchan
tia_polymorpha_%28c; _133318471447%29_4200.JPG
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: RC Kirkbride, JJ Harada, RL
Fischer
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0067971.g004)
Source:
http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi
%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0067971#po
ne-0067971-g004
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: Liverwort: Rictor Norton &#38;
David Allen; Hornwort: Alex Lomas; Moss:
Bernt Rostad
Source: Liverwort:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/rictor-anddavid/2826181160/; Hornwort:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/alexlomas/29
44517456/; Moss:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/brostad/1514
256412/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 9.21: Nonvascular Plants is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122229.22: Vascular Plants
How does water move from the roots to the top of these trees?
Redwood trees found in Yosemite National Park in Califo rnia. Big? Of course. How do these trees grow so tall? It has a lot to do
with a very efficient system to move water, sugars and other nutrients. But the first plants to have such a "vascular system" were
not tall trees, but much smaller plants.
Vascular Plants
Vascular plants are known as tracheophytes, which literally means “tube plants.” The earliest va scular plants quickly came to
dominate terrestrial ecosystems. Why were they so successful? It was mainly becau se of their tube-like vascular tissues.
Vascular Tissues
The vascular tissues for which these plants are name d are specialized to transport fluid. They consist of long, narrow cells arranged
end-to-end, forming tubes. There are two different ty pes of vascular tissues, called xylem and phloem. Bo th are shown in Figure
below.
Xylem is vascular tissue that transports water and dissolved minerals from roots to stems and leave s. This type of tissue consists
of dead cells that lack end walls between adjacent cells. The side walls a re thick and reinforced with lignin, which makes them
stiff and water proof.
Phloem is vascular tissue that transports food (sugar dissolve d in water) from photosynthetic cells to other parts of the plant for
growth or storage. This type of tissue consists of living cel ls that are separated by end walls with tiny perforation s, or holes.
Xylem and phloem are the two types of vascular tissues in vascular plant s.

9.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12222Evolution of Vascular Plants
The first vascular plants evolved about 420 million y ears ago. They probably evolved from moss-like bryop hyte ancestors, but they
had a life cycle dominated by the diploid sporophyte generation. As they continued to evolve, early vascul ar plants became more
plant-like in other ways as well.
Vascular plants evolved true roots made of vascular tissues. Compared with rhizoids, roots can absorb more water and minerals
from the soil. They also anchor plants securely in the groun d, so plants can grow larger without toppling over.
Vascular plants evolved stems made of vascular tissues and lignin. Because of lignin, stems are stiff, so plants can grow hi gh
above the ground where they can get more light and air. Be cause of their vascular tissues, stems keep even tall plant s supplied
with water so they don’t dry out in the air.
Vascular plants evolved leaves to collect sunlight. At first, leaves were tiny and ne edle-like, which helped reduce water loss.
Later, leaves were much larger and broader, so plants could collect more light.
With their vascular tissues and other adaptations, earl y vascular plants had the edge over nonvascular plan ts. The could grow tall
and take advantage of sunlight high up in the air. Bryophytes were the photosynthetic pioneers onto lan d, but early vascular plants
were the photosynthetic pioneers into air.
Diversity of Seedless Vascular Plants
Surviving descendants of early vascular plants include clubmosses and ferns. There are 1,200 species of clubmoss and more than
20,000 species of fern. Both types of vascular plant s are seedless and reproduce with spores. Two examples ar e pictured in Figures
below and below.
Clubmosses look like mosses and grow low to the ground. Unlik e mosses, they have roots, stems, and leaves, although th e
leaves are very small.
Ferns look more like “typical” plants. They have large lea ves and may grow very tall. Some even develop into trees.
Clubmosses like these are often confused with mosses.

9.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12222
There’s no confusing ferns with mosses. Why do these ferns look more plant- like?
Summary
Vascular plants are known as tracheophytes.
Vascular tissues include xylem and phloem. They allow plan ts to grow tall in the air without drying out.
Vascular plants also have roots, stems, and leaves.
Review
1. Compare xylem to phloem.
2. How did vascular tissues and lignin allow vascular plants to be “photosynthetic pioneers into air”?
3. Why are roots more advantageous to a plant than rhizoids?

9.22.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122224. What benefits do stems provide to a plant?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation;Flickr:j bizzie
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/k9d/8237716
406/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Club: Jason Hollinger; Bog: Gary
Peeples/USFWS; Fir: Homer Edward Price
Source: Club:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/7147684@N
03/1289194411/; Bog:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwssouthea
st/4660978704/; Fir:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/28340342@
N08/2979277365/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4] Credit: Flowering: Rhian; Maidenhair:
Anika Malone; Mosquito: Samantha;
Climbing: Forest &#38; Kim Starr; Tree:
Tim Green; Filmy: Forest &#38; Kim Starr
Source: Flowering:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/rhian/258049
2884/; Maidenhair:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/anikascreatio
ns/531598552/; Mosquito:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/s-am/7169501757/; Climbing:
www.biolib.cz/en/image/id51473/; Tree:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/atoach/28000
26937/; Climbing:

9.22.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12222www.biolib.cz/en/image/id51473/; Filmy:
www.flickr.com/photos/starrenvironmental/9063214435/
License: Flowering: CC BY; Maidenhair:
CC BY 2.0; Mosquito: CC BY 2.0;
Climbing CC BY 3.0; Tree CC BY 2.0;
Filmy CC BY 2.0
9.22: Vascular Plants is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122239.23: Seed Plants
Define spermatophyte.
Describe the parts of the seed, including the embryo, se ed coat, and endosperm.
Outline the classification and evolution of seed plants.
How old can a plant be?
This is obviously a seed plant. It is a Gingko tree, whi ch is an unique species in that there are no close li ving relatives. Gingkoes
can live for a very long time. Some specimens of thi s species are thought to be over 2,500 years old. Th e Ginkgo is also known as a
living fossil, with fossils related to modern Ginkgo from the Permian period, dating back 270 million years.
Seed Plants
Seed plants are called spermatophytes. The evolution of seeds by vascular plants was a very big deal. In fact, it was arguably as
important as the evolution of vascular tissues. Seeds solved the problem of releasing offspring into a d ry world. Once seeds
evolved, vascular seed plants and their descendants diversified to fill terrestrial niches everywhere. Tod ay, vascular seed plants
dominate Earth.
Parts of a Seed
As shown in Figure below, a seed consists of at least three basic parts: the embryo, seed coat, and stored food.
The embryo develops from a fertilized egg. While still inside the see d, the embryo forms its first leaf (cotyledon) and start s to
develop a stem (hypocotyl) and root (radicle).
The tough seed coat protects the embryo and keeps it from drying out un til conditions are favorable for germination.
The stored food in a seed is called endosperm. It nourishes the embryo until it can start making food on its own.
@@license="Public Domain"

9.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12223
A typical plant seed, like this avocado seed, contains an embryo, seed coa t, and endosperm. How does each part contribute
to the successful
development
of the new plant?
Many seeds have additional structures that help them disperse. Some examples are shown in Figure below. Structures may help
them travel in the wind or stick to animals. Dispersal of seeds away from parent plants helps reduce compe tition with the parents
and increases the chance of offspring surviving.
@@license="Dandelion: Public Domain; Maple: CC BY 2.0; Burd ock: Public Domain"
Dandelion seeds have tiny “parachutes.” Maple seeds have “wings” that act like little gliders. Burdock seeds are covered
with tiny hooks that cling to animal fur.
Classification of Seed Plants
The two major types of seed plants are the gymnosperms (seeds in cones) and angiosperms (seeds in ovaries of flowers). Figure
below shows how the seeds of gymnosperms and angiosperms differ. Do you see the main difference between the two seeds? The
angiosperm seed is surrounded by an ovary.
@@license="Public Domain"

9.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12223
In gymnosperms, a seed develops on the scale of a cone. Only an
angiosperm
seed develops inside an ovary.
There are only about 1,000 living species of gymnosp erms, whereas there are hundreds of thousands of livi ng species of
angiosperms. Living gymnosperms are typically classifi ed in the divisions described in the Table below. Most modern
gymnosperms are trees with woody trunks. The majority are c onifers such as pine trees.

9.23.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12223Division Description
GinkgoesThere is only one living species
(Ginkgo biloba); some living
trees are more than 2000 years
old; they originated in Asia but
now are cultivated all over the
world; they have been used for
medicines for thousands of
years.
ConifersThere are more than 700 living
species; most are trees such as
pines with needle-like leaves;
they are often the dominant
plants in their habitats; they are
valuable to humans for paper
and timber.
CycadsThere are about 300 living
species; they are typically trees
with stout trunks and fern-like
leaves; they live only in tropical
and subtropical climates; they
have large, brightly-colored
seed cones to attract animal
pollinators.
GnetaeThere are fewer than 100 living
species; most are woody vines
with evergreen leaves; they live
mainly in tropical climates; they
are the least well known
gymnosperms but the most
similar to angiosperms.

9.23.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12223Evolution of Seed Plants
The earliest seed plants probably evolved close to 300 million years ago. They were similar to modern gi nkgoes and reproduced
with pollen and seeds in cones. Early seed plants quick ly came to dominate forests during the Mesozoic Era, or Age of the
Dinosaurs, about 250 to 65 million years ago.
As seed plants continued to evolve, Earth’s overall cli mate became drier, so early seed plants evolved adapt ations to help them live
with low levels of water. Some also evolved adaptations to cold. They had woody trunks and needle-like, everg reen leaves covered
with a thick coating of waxy cuticle to reduce water l oss. Some of the trees were huge, like today’s giant sequo ia, a modern conifer
(see Figure below).
The person standing at the foot of this giant sequoia shows just how enormo us the tree is. Some early seed plants also grew
very large.
Eventually, some gymnosperms started to evolve angio sperm-like traits. For example, cycad ancestors were the first plants to use
insects as pollinators. They also used birds and mo nkeys to disperse their brightly colored seeds. Of modern gymnosperms, Gnetae
probably share the most recent common ancestor with angiosperms. Among other similarities, Gnetae produce nectar, a sweet,
sugary liquid that attracts insect pollinators. Most moder n flowering plants also produce nectar.
Summary
Most vascular plants are seed plants, or spermatophytes. They reproduce with seeds and pollen.
Some modern seed plants are gymnosperms that produce see ds in cones.
Review
1. Identify the parts of a seed and the role of each part.
2. Name and describe the divisions of gymnosperms.

9.23.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12223Resources
9.23: Seed Plants is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
J on a t h a n D r or i
W h y w e 're s t o r in g b i l l i o ns o f s e e d s

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Animals
10.1: Animals
10.2: Animal Classification
10.3: Animal Behavior Evolution
10.4: Innate Behavior
10.5: Learned Behavior
10.6: Social Behavior
10.7: Cyclic Behavior
10.8: Reproductive Behavior
This page titled 10: Animals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

10.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139010.1: Animals
Is an insect an animal?
Of course it is. Is a snail an insect? No, snails are mollu sks. Notice the large "foot" that allows movement, an d the antennas are
obvious. Actually, a snail's eyes are on the two long p rojections on its head, and the projections are calle d eyestalks. These are
characteristics of this animal.
Characteristics of Animals
Animals are a kingdom of multicellular eukaryotes. They can not make their own food. Instead, they get nutrients b y eating other
living things. Therefore, animals are heterotrophs.
Animal Cells
Like the cells of all eukaryotes, animal cells have a nucleus and o ther membrane-bound organelles (see Figure below). Unlike the
cells of plants and fungi, animal cells lack a cell wall. This gives animal cells flexibility. It lets them take on different shapes so
they can become specialized to do particular jobs. Th e human nerve cell shown in Figure below is a good example. Its shape suits
its function of transmitting nerve impulses over lon g distances. A nerve cell would be unable to take th is shape if it were
surrounded by a rigid cell wall.
Animal Cell. The shape of an animal cell is not constrained by a rigid cel l wall. A bacterial cell is shown above for
comparison.

10.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1390
Human Nerve Cell. A human nerve cell is specialized to transmit nerve impulses. How do you think the cell’s shape helps it
perform this function?
Animal Structure and Function
Animals not only have specialized cells. Most animals al so have tissues and organs. In many animals, organs form organ systems,
such as a nervous system. Higher levels of organizat ion allow animals to perform many complex functions. What can animals do
that most other living things cannot? Most animals sh are these characteristics: sensory organs, movement, and internal digestion.
All of them are illustrated in Figure below.
Animals can detect environmental stimuli, such as light, s ound, and touch. Stimuli are detected by sensory nerve cell s. The
information is transmitted and processed by the nervous system. The nervous system, in turn, may direct the body to respond.
All animals can move, at least during some stage of their life cycle. Muscles and nerves work together to allow moveme nt.
Being able to move lets animals actively search for food and mates. It also helps them escape from predators.
Virtually all animals have internal digestion of food. An imals consume other organisms and may use special tissues an d organs
to digest them. (Many other organisms absorb nutrients directl y from the environment.)
Most animals share these characteristics: sensory organs, movem ent, and internal digestion.

10.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1390Animal Life Cycle and Reproduction
Many animals have a relatively simple life cycle. A general animal life cycle is shown in Figure below. Most animals spend the
majority of their life as diploid organisms. Just about all animals reproduce sexually. Diploid adults underg o meiosis to produce
sperm or eggs. Fertilization occurs when a sperm and an egg fu se. The zygote that forms develops into an embryo. T he embryo
eventually develops into an adult.
Animal Life Cycle. An animal life cycle that includes only sexual reproduc tion is shown here. Some animals also reproduce
asexually. How does the animal life cycle compare with the life cyc le of a plant?
Summary
Animals are multicellular eukaryotes that lack cell wa lls.
All animals are heterotrophs.
Animals have sensory organs, the ability to move, and inte rnal digestion. They also have sexual reproduction.
Review
1. Identify traits that characterize all animals.
2. State one way that animal cells differ from the cells of p lants and fungi. What is the significance of this differen ce?
3. Describe animal digestion.
H illa ry W ilson
General Animal Characteristics
General Animal Characteristics
Watch on

10.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13904. Describe a general animal life cycle.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Top to bottom: Bryce McQuillan;
Dr. James P. McVey, NOAA Sea Grant
Program; Scott Oves
Source: Top to bottom:
www.flickr.com/photos/spidermanbryce200
6/1802722621/;
www.photolib.noaa.gov/htmls/reef0206.ht
m;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silicon640c/5
968047195/
License: Top to bottom CC BY 2.0; Public
Domain; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source: Top:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Average
_prokaryote_cell-_en.svg; Bottom:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
cell_structure_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Top to bottom: Bryce McQuillan;
Dr. James P. McVey, NOAA Sea Grant
Program; Scott Oves
Source: Top to bottom:
www.flickr.com/photos/spidermanbryce200
6/1802722621/;
www.photolib.noaa.gov/htmls/reef0206.ht
m;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silicon640c/5
968047195/
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Top: CC BY
2.0; Middle: Public Domain; Bottom: CC
BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Top to bottom: Bryce McQuillan;
Dr. James P. McVey, NOAA Sea Grant
Program; Scott Oves
Source: Top to bottom:
www.flickr.com/photos/spidermanbryce200
6/1802722621/;
www.photolib.noaa.gov/htmls/reef0206.ht
m;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silicon640c/5
968047195/
License: Top to bottom CC BY 2.0; Public
Domain; CC BY 2.0

10.1.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1390
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 10.1: Animals is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139210.2: Animal Classification
Plant or animal?
Animal. What type? Now that is a good question. This azure vase sponge is an animal, but how is it classified? It is estimated that
there are easily over a million species of animals on Earth. How are all these species divided into their vari ous classifications?
Classification of Animals
All animals share basic traits. But animals also show a lot of div ersity. They range from simple sponges to complex humans.
Major Animal Phyla
Members of the animal kingdom are divided into more t han 30 phyla. Table below lists the nine phyla with the greatest number of
species. Each of the animal phyla listed in the table h as at least 10,000 species.

10.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1392Phylum Animals It Includes
Porifera sponges
Cnidaria jellyfish, corals
Platyhelminthes flatworms, tapeworms, flukes
Nematoda roundworms
Mollusca snails, clams, squids
Annelida earthworms, leeches, marine worms

10.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1392Phylum Animals It Includes
Arthropoda insects, spiders, crustaceans, centipedes
Echinodermatasea stars, sea urchins, sand dollars, sea
cucumbers
Chordatatunicates, lancelets, fish, amphibians,
reptiles, birds, mammals
Invertebrate vs. Vertebrate
The first eight phyla listed in Table above include only invertebrate animals. Invertebrates are animals that lack a vertebral
column, or backbone. The last phylum in the table, the Chordata, also inc ludes many invertebrate species. Tunicates and lanc elets
are both invertebrates. Altogether, invertebrates ma ke up at least 95 percent of all animal species. The r emaining animals are
vertebrates. Vertebrates are animals that have a backbone. All vertebrates belo ng to the phylum Chordata. They include fish,
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Edu ca tion a l V ide os
Classi  cations of Animals
Classi  cations of Animals
Watch on

10.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1392Summary
Vertebrates have a backbone, but invertebrates do not.
Except for the chordates, all animal phyla consist only of invertebrates.
Chordates include both vertebrates and invertebrates.
Review
1. State how the phylum Chordata differs from other animal ph yla.

10.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13922. Compare and contrast invertebrates and vertebrates.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC

10.2.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1392
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC

10.2.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1392
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 10.2: Animal Classification is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139410.3: Animal Behavior Evolution
What is this elephant doing?
Obviously he is spraying the zebras with water. Why? Is this elephant playing or is there another reason he is spraying the zebras?
The elephant is actually trying to keep the zebras away fr om the waterhole. This is considered an animal behavior.
Animal Behavior
Did you ever see a dog sit on command? Have you ever watched a cat trying to catch a mouse? These are just two examples of the
many behaviors of animals. Animal behavior includes all the ways that animals interact with each other and the environment.
Examples of common animal behaviors are pictured in Figure below.
Examples of Animal Behavior. Can you think of other examples of animal be havior besides the three shown here?
The branch of biology that studies animal behavior i s called ethology. Ethologists usually study how animals behave in their
natural environment, rather than in a lab. They gener ally try to answer four basic questions about the behavi ors they observe:
1. What causes the behavior? What is the stimulus, or trigger, for the behavior? What structures and functio ns of the animal are
involved in the behavior?
2. How does the behavior develop? Is it present early in l ife? Or does it appear only as the animal matures? Are certain
experiences needed for the behavior to develop?
3. Why did the behavior evolve? How does the behavior affect the fitness of the animal performing it? How does it affec t the
survival of the species?
4. How did the behavior evolve? How does it compare with similar be haviors in related species? In what ancestor did the behavio r
first appear?
Evolution of Animal Behavior
To the extent that behaviors are controlled by genes, they may evolve through natural selection. If beha viors increase fitness, they
are likely to become more common over time. If they decr ease fitness, they are likely to become less common.
Nature vs. Nurture
Some behaviors seem to be controlled solely by genes. Others appear to be due to experiences in a given envi ronment. Whether
behaviors are controlled mainly by genes or by the environment is often a matter of debate. This is called the nature-nurture
debate. Nature refers to the genes an animal inherits. Nurture r efers to the environment that the animal experiences.
In reality, most animal behaviors are not controlled b y nature or nurture alone. Instead, they are influenc ed by both nature and
nurture. In dogs, for example, the tendency to behav e toward other dogs in a certain way is probably contro lled by genes. However,

10.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1394the normal behaviors can’t develop in an environment that lacks other dogs. A puppy raised in isolation f rom other dogs may never
develop the normal behaviors. It may always fear other dog s or act aggressively toward them.
How Behaviors Evolve
It’s easy to see how many common types of behavior ev olve. That’s because they obviously increase the fitn ess of the animal
performing them. For example, when wolves hunt together in a pack, they are more likely to catch prey (see Figure below).
Therefore, hunting with others increases a wolf’s fitnes s. The wolf is more likely to survive and pass its genes to the next
generation by behaving this way.
Wolves hunt together in packs. This is adaptive because it increases the ir chances of killing prey and obtaining food.
The evolution of certain other types of behavior is not as easy to explain. An example is a squirrel chat tering loudly to warn other
squirrels that a predator is near. This is likely to help the other squirrels avoid the predator. Therefore, it could increase their fitness.
But what about the squirrel raises the alarm? This s quirrel is more likely to be noticed by the predato r. Therefore, the behavior may
actually lower this squirrel’s fitness. How could such a be havior evolve through natural selection?
One possible answer is that helping others often means helping close relatives. Close relatives share many o f the same genes that
they inherited from their common ancestor. As a result, helping a close relative may actually increase th e chances that copies of
one’s own genes will be passed to the next generation. In this way, a behavior that puts oneself at risk cou ld actually increase
through natural selection. This form of natural selection is called kin selection.

10.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1394Science Friday: When Eels Attack!
Electric eels have been known to jump out of the water and shock animals like horses. What would cause this extraordinary
behavior? In this video by Science Friday, Kenneth Cata nia of Vanderbilt University discusses this behavior and the experiments
that demonstrate this.
Science Friday: Run, Octopus, Run!
Octopus move around using a variety of motions. One uni que motion they can perform is to “run” backwards on two arms. In this
video by Science Friday, Chrissy Huffard at Stanford explains the possible use of this behavior
Ka re n B a ss
U ns e e n fo o t a g e, unt a m e d n a t ur e
Sc iF ri
When Eels Attack!
When Eels Attack!
Watch on

10.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1394Summary
Most animal behaviors are controlled by both genes and ex periences in a given environment.
To the extent that behaviors are controlled by genes, they may evolve.
Behaviors that improve fitness increase through natur al selection.
Review
1. Define animal behavior.
2. What is the nature-nurture debate?
3. What is kin selection?
Sc iF ri
Run, Octopus, Run!
Run, Octopus, Run!
Watch on

10.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13944. How do behaviors become common?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of Doug Smith/National
Park Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Canis_lu
pus_pack_surrounding_Bison.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: From left to right:
User:Northernborderskennel/Wikipedia;
Courtesy of Scott Bauer/Agricultural
Research Service; Image copyright Nate
Allred, 2014
Source: From left to right:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Keepsto
neFetchcropped.JPG;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sow_wit
h_piglet.jpg; http://www.shutterstock.com
License: From left to right: Public Domain;
Public Domain; Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of Doug Smith/National
Park Service
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Canis_lu
pus_pack_surrounding_Bison.jpg
License: Public Domain
This page titled 10.3: Animal Behavior Evolution is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139810.4: Innate Behavior
Is this Blue-footed Booby actually dancing?
The courtship of the Blue-footed Booby consists of t he male flaunting his blue feet and dancing to impr ess the female. During the
dance, the male will spread his wings and stamp his feet on t he ground. Are these birds born with this skill, or do they le arn it?
Innate Behavior
Behaviors that are closely controlled by genes with l ittle or no environmental influence are called innate behaviors. These are
behaviors that occur naturally in all members of a species whenever they are exposed to a certain stimulus. Innate behaviors do not
have to be learned or practiced. They are also called instinctive behaviors. An instinct is the ability of an animal to perform a
behavior the first time it is exposed to the proper stimulus. For example, a dog will drool the first time —and every time—it is
exposed to food.
Significance of Innate Behavior
Innate behaviors are rigid and predictable. All membe rs of the species perform the behaviors in the same wa y. Innate behaviors
usually involve basic life functions, such as findin g food or caring for offspring. Several examples are shown in Figure below. If an
animal were to perform such important behaviors incorre ctly, it would be less likely to survive or reproduce.
Examples of Innate Behavior. These innate behaviors are necessary for survival or reproduction. Can you explain why each
behavior is important?

10.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1398Intelligence and Innate Behavior
Innate behaviors occur in all animals. However, they are less common in species with higher le vels of intelligence. Humans are the
most intelligent species, and they have very few innate behaviors. The only innate behaviors in humans are reflexes. A reflex is a
response that always occurs when a certain stimulus is present. For example, a human infant will grasp an obj ect, such as a finger,
that is placed in its palm. The infant has no contro l over this reaction because it is innate. Other than reflexes such as this, human
behaviors are learned–or at least influenced by experi ence—rather than being innate.
Innate Behavior in Human Beings
All animals have innate behaviors, even human beings. Can you thin k of human behaviors that do not have to be learned? Chances
are, you will have a hard time thinking of any. The o nly truly innate behaviors in humans are called reflex behaviors. They occur
mainly in babies. Like innate behaviors in other animals, reflex behaviors in human babies may help them survive.
An example of a reflex behavior in babies is the sucki ng reflex. Newborns instinctively suck on a nipple tha t is placed in their
mouth. It is easy to see how this behavior evolved. It increases the chances of a baby feeding and surviving. Another example of a
reflex behavior in babies is the grasp reflex (Figure below). Babies instinctively grasp an object placed i n the palm of their hand.
Their grip may be surprisingly strong. How do you think t his behavior might increase a baby’s chances of survivin g?
One of the few innate behaviors in human beings is the grasp reflex. It occur s only in babies.
Summary
Innate behaviors are instinctive. They are controlled by g enes and always occur in the same way.
Innate behaviors do not have to be learned or practiced.
Innate behaviors generally involve basic life functions, so it’s important that they be performed correctly.
Review
1. What are innate behaviors? Give an example.
2. What would happen to an individual who poorly perform s innate behaviors?
N a tion a l Ge ogra ph ic
Self-Recognition in Apes | National G
Self-Recognition in Apes | National G
Watch on

10.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13983. What is an instinct?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Spider: Dan Foy
(Flickr:orangeacid); Bird: Miguel Andrade;
Caterpillar: James Niland; Dolphin: Pen
Waggener
Source: Spider:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/orangeacid/2
36234522/; Bird:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nest_bir
d.jpg; Caterpillar:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/bareego/6574
102553/; Dolphin:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/epw/2350867
33/
License: Spider: CC BY 2.0; Bird: Public
Domain; Caterpillar: CC BY 2.0; Dolpin:
CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Vera Kratochvil
Source:
http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/viewimage.php?image=16862&#38;
picture=sleeping-baby
License: Public Domain
This page titled 10.4: Innate Behavior is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139910.5: Learned Behavior
Fighting or playing?
You might think that these young tigers are fightin g, but they’re really just playing. Like most other yo ung mammals, tigers like to
play. Why do mammals play? Is playing just for fun, o r does it serve some other purpose as well? Playing is actually an important
way of learning. By playing, these tigers are learnin g moves that will help them become successful predato rs as adults. Playing is
just one of many ways that mammals and other animals learn how to behave.
Learned Behavior
Learning is a change in behavior that occurs as a result of e xperience. Compared with innate behaviors, learned beha viors are
more flexible. They can be modified to suit changing conditions. This may make them more adaptive than i nnate behaviors. For
example, drivers may have to modify how they drive (a learned behavior) when roads are wet or icy. Otherwise, they may lose
control of their vehicle.
Animals may learn behaviors in a variety of ways. Some ways are quite simple. Others are more complex. Several types of learning
are described in Figure below.
Types of Learning. Five different ways that animals may learn behaviors a re shown here. What have you learned in each of
these ways?
Insight Learning
Insight learning, which is based on past experience and reasoning, is a hallmark of the human animal. Humans have used insig ht
learning to solve problems ranging from starting a fire to traveling to the moon. It usually involves c oming up with new ways to

10.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1399solve problems. Insight learning generally happens quickly. An animal has a sudden flash of insight. Insig ht learning requires
relatively great intelligence. Human beings use insig ht learning more than any other species. They have u sed their intelligence to
solve problems ranging from inventing the wheel to fl ying rockets into space.
Think about problems you have solved. Maybe you figur ed out how to solve a new type of math problem or how to get to the next
level of a video game. If you relied on your past experi ences and reasoning to do it, then you were using insight learning.
One type of insight learning is making tools to solve problems. Scientists used to think that humans were t he only animals
intelligent enough to make tools. In fact, tool-making wa s believed to set humans apart from all other animals.
In 1960, primate expert Jane Goodall discovered that c himpanzees also make tools. She saw a chimpanzee strip leaves from a twig.
Then he poked the twig into a hole in a termite moun d. After termites climbed onto the twig, he pulled the twig out of the hole and
ate the insects clinging to it. The chimpanzee had m ade a tool to “fish” for termites. He had used insight t o solve a problem. Since
then, chimpanzees have been seen making several diff erent types of tools. For example, they sharpen sticks a nd use them as spears
for hunting. They use stones as hammers to crack open nu ts.
Scientists have also observed other species of animals m aking tools to solve problems. A crow was seen bending a piece of wire
into a hook. Then the crow used the hook to pull food out of a tube.
An example of a gorilla using a walking stick is shown below (Figure below). Behaviors such as these show that other speci es of
animals can use their experience and reasoning to solve prob lems. They can learn through insight.
This gorilla is using a branch as a tool. She is leaning on it to kee p her balance while she reaches down into swampy water
to catch a fish.

10.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1399Summary
Learning is a change in behavior that occurs as a result of experience.
Learned behaviors are adaptive because they are flexibl e. They can change if the environment changes.
Behaviors can be learned in several different ways, incl uding through play.
Review
1. What is learning?
2. Name three types of learning in animals.
Ge e rt Stie n isse n
Insight learning: P igeon Solves the C
Insight learning: P igeon Solves the C
Watch on

10.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13993. Compare and contrast instinct and learning.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Scarecrow/crows: Image copyright
Svetolk, 2013; Rat: Image copyright Cathy
Keifer, 2014; Monkey: Flickr:Wajimacallit;
Kitten: Image copyright Tony Campbell,
2014; Chimp: Image copyright Norma
Cornes, 2014
Source: Monkey image
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wajimacallit/
2215859213/; rest of the images from
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: (Monkey) CC BY 2.0; (All others
in set) License from Shutterstock
[Figure 3]Credit: Thomas Breuer, Mireille
Ndoundou-Hockemba, Vicki
Fishlock/PLOS Biology
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gorrila_
tool_use-Efi.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
This page titled 10.5: Learned Behavior is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/140210.6: Social Behavior
Playing or fighting?
This display of aggression may be over a mate or land. But they definitely are not playing. This fight will c ontinue until one is
badly injured and flees, or the fight may continue to th e death.
Social Behaviors
Different types of behavior evolved in animals because the behaviors helped them survive or reprod uce. In many species, animals
live together in a close-knit group with other membe rs of their species. Such a group is referred to as a society. Animals that live in
a society are known as social animals. They live and work together for the good of the gr oup. This is called cooperation.
Generally, each member of the group has a specific rol e that it plays in the society. Cooperation allows the group to do many things
that a lone animal could never do. Look at the ants in Figure below. By working together, they are able to carry a large insect back
to the nest to feed other members of their society.
Cooperation in a Social Insect. These ants are cooperating in a task tha t a single ant would be too small to do alone.
Communication
For individuals to cooperate, they need to communicate. Animals can communicate with sounds, chemicals, or vi sual cues. For
example, to communicate with sounds, birds sing and f rogs croak. Both may be communicating that they are g ood mates. Ants
communicate with chemicals called pheromones. For example, they use the chemicals to mark trails to food sources so other ants
can find them. Male dogs use pheromones in urine to m ark their territory. They are “telling” other dogs to stay out of their yard.
You can see several examples of visual communication in Figure below.

10.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1402
Visual Communication in Animals. Many animals use visual cues to comm unicate.
Aggression
Aggression is behavior that is intended to cause harm or pain. It may involve physical violence against other ind ividuals. For
example, two male gorillas may fight and use their c anine teeth to inflict deep wounds. Expressing aggres sion this way may lead to
serious injury and even death.
In many species display behaviors, rather than actual physical attacks, are used to show aggression. This helps prevent injury and
death. Male gorillas, for example, are more likely to put on a display of aggression than to attack anoth er male. In fact, gorillas
have a whole series of display behaviors that they use to show aggression. They beat on their chest, dash ba ck and forth, and pound
the ground with their hands.
Competition
Aggressive behavior often occurs when individuals comp ete for the same resources. Animals may compete for te rritory, water,
food, or mates. There are two basic types of competition: intraspecific and interspecific.
Intraspecific competition occurs between members of the same species. For example, two m ale deer may compete for mates
by clashing their antlers together.
Interspecific competition occurs between members of different species. For example, one species of ant may attack and take
over the colony of another ant species.
Summary
Types of animal behavior include social behaviors such as c ooperation and communication.
Competition may lead to aggressive behaviors or displays o f aggression.
TED-Ed
Moral behavior in animals - Frans de
Moral behavior in animals - Frans de
Watch on

10.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1402Review
1. Explain why communication is necessary for social living.
2. Describe communication in ants.
3. What is aggression?
4. What type of competition occurs between two dogs?
5. Create a bulletin board or brief video to demonstrate the role of facial expressions in human communication.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Man facial expressions: All images
copyright Gorich, 2014; Chimp: Frans de
Waal/Emory University; Blue-footed
booby: A. Davey; Frigate bird: Image
copyright Mariko Yuki, 2014
Source: Chimp:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Young_
male_chimp.png; Blue-footed booby:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/adavey/49916
11190/; All other images:
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Chimp: CC BY 2.5; Blue-footed
booby: CC BY 2.0; All other images:
License from Shutterstock
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright noolwlee, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Man facial expressions: All images
copyright Gorich, 2014; Chimp: Frans de
Waal/Emory University; Blue-footed
booby: A. Davey; Frigate bird: Image
copyright Mariko Yuki, 2014
Source: Chimp:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Young_
male_chimp.png; Blue-footed booby:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/adavey/49916
11190/; All other images:
http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Chimp: CC BY 2.5; Blue-footed
booby: CC BY 2.0; All other images:
License from Shutterstock
This page titled 10.6: Social Behavior is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1224510.7: Cyclic Behavior
The seventh greatest wonder in the world. Really?
The Masai Mara Wildebeest Migration. The annual wildebee st migration in Kenya and Tanzania is arguably the mos t spectacular
natural event in Africa. More than 3 million large ma mmals have made the vast Masai Mara and Serengeti plai ns their home, and
each summer they migrate, looking for greener pastures. And ye s, some call it "the seventh greatest wonder in the world."
Cyclic Behaviors
Many animal behaviors occur in a regular cycle. Two type s of cyclic behaviors are circadian rhythms and migra tion.
Circadian rhythms are regular changes in biology or behavior that oc cur in a 24-hour cycle. In humans, for example, blood
pressure and body temperature change in a regular way throughout each 24-hour day. Animals may eat and drink at certain times of
day as well. Humans have daily cycles of behavior, too. Most people start to get sleepy after dark and have a hard time sleeping
when it is light outside. In many species, including hu mans, circadian rhythms are controlled by a tiny str ucture called the
biological clock. This structure is located in a gland at the base of the brain. The biological clock sends signals to the body. The
signals cause regular changes in behavior and body pr ocesses. The amount of light entering the eyes helps c ontrol the biological
clock. The clock causes changes that repeat every 24 hours.
Migration refers to seasonal movements of animals from one area to another. Migrants typically travel long distances, and travel
the same paths each seasonal cycle. Usually, the migran ts move to another area in order to find food or mat es. Many birds, fish, and
insects migrate. Mammals such as whales and caribou mig rate as well. Figure below shows the migration route of a bird called a
godwit. Another example of a behavior with a yearly cyc le is hibernation. Hibernation is a state in which an animal’s body
processes are slower than usual, and its body temperature falls. An animal uses less energy than usual during h ibernation. This
helps the animal survive during a time of year when f ood is scarce. Hibernation may last for weeks or months. Animals that
hibernate include species of bats, squirrels, and snak es. Most people think that bears hibernate. In fact, bears do not go into true
hibernation. In the winter, they go into a deep slee p. However, their body processes do not slow down very muc h. Their body
temperature also remains about the same as usual. Bears can be a wakened easily from their winter sleep.

10.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12245
Godwit Migration Route. Godwits make this incredibly long journey twice a y ear. In the fall, they migrate from the Arctic
to Antarctica. They make the return flight in the spring.
KQED: Flyways: The Migratory Routes of Birds
For thousands of years and countless generations, migrat ory birds have flown the same long-distance paths bet ween their breeding
and feeding grounds. Understanding the routes these b irds take, called flyways, helps conservation efforts and gives scientists
better knowledge of global changes, both natural and man-m ade.
Summary
Types of animal behavior include cyclic behaviors such a s circadian rhythms and migration.
Review
1. What are circadian rhythms? Give an example.
K QED
The Great Migration - KQED QUEST
The Great Migration - KQED QUEST
Watch on

10.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122452. Why is migration considered a cyclic behavior?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of US Geological Survey
Alaska Science Center
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bartailed_Godwit_migration.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of US Geological Survey
Alaska Science Center
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bartailed_Godwit_migration.jpg
License: Public Domain
10.7: Cyclic Behavior is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1224610.8: Reproductive Behavior
So when does the peacock extend his tail?
Peafowl are best known for the male's extravagant tail. Obviously though, a peacock cannot have his tail ex tended continuously. It
would make it very difficult to move around. And it m ay be very tiring. So when does the peacock extend his tail? The peacock
displays his tail as part of courtship.
Mating and Courtship
Mating refers to the union of a male and female of the sa me species for reproduction. The relationship between m ates varies by
species. Adults may have many mates, or they may mate with just one individual. Mates may stay together on ly while mating, for
an entire breeding season, or even for life.
Females are likely to be more selective than males in choosing mates. In many species, males put on courtship displays to
encourage females to choose them as mates. For exampl e, to attract a mate, a male bowerbird builds an elabor ate nest decorated
with hundreds of small blue objects (see Figure below).
Bowerbird Decorating His Nest. A male bowerbird spends many hours collecting bits of blue glass and other small blue
objects to decorate his nest. A female bowerbird inspects the nests of m any males before choosing as a mate the male with
the best nest.

10.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12246Parental Care
In most species of fish, amphibians, and reptiles, pa rents provide no care to their offspring. In birds an d mammals, on the other
hand, parental care is common. Most often, the mother pro vides the care. However, in some species, both parents or just the father
may be involved.
Parental care is generally longest and most involved in mammals. Besides feeding and protecting their offsp ring, parents may teach
their offspring skills they will need to survive on t heir own. For example, meerkat adults teach their pups how to eat scorpions.
They show the pups how to safely handle the poisonous ins ects and how to remove the stingers.
This mother killdeer is pretending she has a broken wing. She is trying to attract a predator’s attention in order to protect
her chicks. This behavior puts her at risk of harm. How can it increase her fitness?
Defending Territory
Some species of animals are territorial. This means that they defend their area. The area th ey defend usually contains their nest
and enough food for themselves and their offspring. A species is more likely to be territorial if there i s not very much food in their
area. Animals generally do not defend their territory by fighting. Instead, they are more likely to use di splay behavior. The behavior
tells other animals to stay away. It gets the message across without the need for fighting. Display behavior is generally safer and
uses less energy than fighting. Male gorillas use disp lay behavior to defend their territory. They pound o n their chests and thump
the ground with their hands to warn other male gorilla s to keep away from their area. The robin displays his red breast to warn
other robins to stay away (Figure below).

10.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12246
The red breast of this male robin is easy to see. The robin displays his bri ght red chest to defend his territory. It warns other
robins to keep out of his area.
Some animals deposit chemicals to mark the boundary of their territory. This is why dogs urinate on fire hydrants and other objects.
Cats may also mark their territory by depositing chem icals. They have scent glands in their face. They d eposit chemicals by
rubbing their face against objects.
Science Friday: "Hot" For Turkey
A male wild turkey's display conjures images of Ameri cana and festive feasts, but isn't intended for huma n eyes. In this video by
Science Friday, Dr. Richard Buchholz describes how female tur keys use it to discern a male's genetic prowess.
Science Friday: Shake Your Silk-Maker: The Dance of the Peacock Spider
With their ornately-colored bodies, rhythmic pulsation s, and booty-shaking dance moves, male peacock spider s attract the attention
of spectating females as well as researchers. In this video by Science Friday, researcher Madeline Girard int erprets what these
displays actually say to a female spider.
Sc iF ri
"Hot" For T urkey
"Hot" For T urkey
Watch on

10.8.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12246Science Friday:In A Flash: Firefly Communication
Fireflies communicate with a "language of light" that scientists still don't completely understand. In this video by Science Friday,
researchers James Lloyd and Marc Branham discuss uni que flash patterns and times for some of the 2,000 type s of fireflies that
light up the summer nights.
Summary
Behaviors relating to reproduction include mating, c ourtship, and parenting behaviors.
Review
1. Describe an example of courtship behavior in animals.
2. In what vertebrates is parental care common?
Sc iF ri
Shake Y our Silk-Maker: The Dance of
Shake Y our Silk-Maker: The Dance of
Watch on
Sc iF ri
In A Flash: Fire y Communication
In A Flash: Fire y Communication
Watch on

10.8.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122463. Give two examples of parental care.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Dwight Sipler
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/photofarmer/
5899245104/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Dfrg.msc/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BBNest.
jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: audreyjm529
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/98799884@
N00/3567167561/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Dwight Sipler
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/photofarmer/
5899245104/
License: CC BY 2.0
10.8: Reproductive Behavior is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Invertebrates
11.1: Arthropods
11.2: Insects
11.3: Echinoderms
11.4: Invertebrate Chordates
11.5: Invertebrate Diversity
11.6: Invertebrate Evolution
11.7: Invertebrate Classification
11.8: Sponges
11.9: Cnidarians
11.10: Flatworms
11.11: Roundworms
11.12: Mollusks
11.13: Annelids
This page titled 11: Invertebrates is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

11.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225711.1: Arthropods
What has more species than any other animal phylum?
Arthropods are not only the largest phylum of inverte brates. They are by far the largest phylum of the an imal kingdom. Roughly 80
percent of all animal species living on Earth today a re arthropods. Obviously, arthropods have been extremely successful. What
accounts for their success?
Arthropods
There are more than a million known species of arthrop ods. There may actually be ten times that many. Arthropods include
insects, spiders, lobsters, and centipedes. The arthropo ds pictured in Figure below give just a hint of the phylum’s diversity.
Arthropod Diversity. Dust mites are among the smallest of arthropods. Japanese spider crabs are the largest. Besides size,
what other differences among arthropods do you see in these photos?
Structure and Function of Arthropods
Arthropods range in length from about 1 millimeter to 4 meters (about 13 feet). They have a segmented bo dy with a hard
exoskeleton. They also have jointed appendages. The bo dy segments are the head, thorax, and abdomen (see Figure below). In
some arthropods, the head and thorax are joined together a s a cephalothorax.

11.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257
Arthropod Body Plan. Notice the three body segments of each organism.
The arthropod exoskeleton consists of several layer s of cuticle. The exoskeleton prevents water loss and gives support and
protection. It also acts as a counterforce for the contraction of muscles. The exoskeleton doesn’t grow as the animal grows.
Therefore, it must be shed and replaced with a new one perio dically through life. This is called molting.
The jointed appendages of arthropods may be used as legs for walking. Being jointed makes them more flexib le. Try walking or
climbing stairs without bending your knees, and you’l l see why joints are helpful. In most arthropods, the ap pendages on the head
have been modified for other functions. Figure below shows some of head appendages found in arthropod s. Sensory organs such as
eyes are also found on the head.
Arthropod Head. Arthropods have evolved a variety of specialized appendage s and other structures on their head.
Some arthropods have special excretory structures. T hey are called coxal glands and Malpighian tubules. Coxal glands collect
and concentrate liquid waste from blood. They excrete the waste from the body through a pore. Malpighian tub ules carry waste
from the digestive tract to the anus. The waste is excreted through the anus.
Like mollusks and annelids, aquatic arthropods may hav e gills to exchange gases with the water (discussed below). Terrestrial
arthropods, on the other hand, have special respirato ry structures to exchange gases with the air. These ar e described in Figure
below.

11.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257
How Terrestrial Arthropods Breathe Air. Terrestrial arthropods have r espiratory structures that let them breathe air.
Underwater Spiders
In the ponds of northern Europe lives a tiny brown sp ider that spends its entire life underwater. But jus t like land spiders, it needs
oxygen to breathe. So, how does this spider breath? Does it use book lungs? No. In fact, aquatic spiders, known as "diving bell
spiders," have gills. Every so often, the spider leaves its underwater web to visit the surface and bring ba ck a bubble of air that
sticks to its hairy abdomen. It deposits the bubble i nto a little silk air tank. This "diving bell" is a gill that sucks oxygen from the
water, allowing the spider to stay underwater for up to 24 hours.
Arthropod Reproduction
Arthropods have a life cycle with sexual reproduction. Most species go through larval stages after hatching. The larvae are very
different from the adults. They change into the adu lt form in a process called metamorphosis. This may take place within a
cocoon. A familiar example of metamorphosis is the t ransformation of a caterpillar (larva) into a butter fly (adult). Other arthropod
species, in contrast, hatch young that look like small adu lts. These species lack both larval stages and metamorpho sis.
DJ 's N a tu re P la n e t
Diving Bell Spider (Argyroneta aquat
Diving Bell Spider (Argyroneta aquat
Watch on

11.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257Evolution of Arthropods
The oldest known arthropods are trilobites. A fossil trilobite is shown in Figure below. Trilobites were marine arthropods. They
had many segments with paired appendages for walking. As arthropods continued to evolve, segments fused. Eve ntually,
arthropods with three major segments evolved. Appendages we re also lost or modified during the course of arthropod e volution.
Trilobite Fossil. This trilobite fossil represents the earliest arthropods. Trilobites first appeared more than 500 million yea rs
ago. They lived for at least 200 million years before going exti nct. They left behind large numbers of fossils.
Arthropods were the first animals to live on land. The earliest terrestrial arthropods were probably millipedes. They moved to land
about 430 million years ago. Early land arthropods evolved adaptations such as book lungs or trachea to breathe air. The
exoskeleton was another important adaptation. It prev ents an animal from drying out. It also provides supp ort in the absence of
buoyant water.
Classification of Arthropods
Living arthropods are divided into four subphyla. The y are described in Table below. The Hexapoda subphylum includes mainly
insects. There are so many insects and they are so import ant that they are described in greater detail below.

11.1.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257Subphylum (includes) Description Example
Myriapoda (centipedes, millipedes)terrestrial; herbivores or predators; 10–400
walking legs; poison claws for huntingcentipede
Chelicerata (spiders, scorpions, mites,
ticks, horseshoe crabs, sea spiders)mainly terrestrial; predators or parasites; 8
walking legs; appendages called chelicerae
for grasping prey; poison fangs for killing
prey; no mandibles, maxillae, antennae;
two body segmentsspider
Crustacea (lobsters, crabs, shrimp,
barnacles, krill)mainly aquatic, predators, scavengers, or
filter feeders; two pairs of antennae and
claws for hunting; unique larval stage
(called “nauplius”) with head appendages
for swimminglobster
Hexapoda (ants, flies, grasshoppers,
beetles, butterflies, moths, bees,
springtails)mainly terrestrial or aerial; herbivores,
predators, parasites, scavengers, or
decomposers; 6 walking legs; many
modified appendages, such as wings for
flyingbeetle
Summary
Arthropods are the largest phylum in the animal kingdom.
Most arthropods are insects. The phylum also includes spi ders, centipedes, and crustaceans.
The arthropod body consists of three segments with a hard ex oskeleton and jointed appendages.
Terrestrial arthropods have adaptations for life on land, such as trachea or book lungs for breathing air.
The earliest arthropods were trilobites. The earliest land arthropods were millipedes.
Review
1. Identify the distinguishing trait of arthropods.
2. What is molting? Why does it occur?
3. What are the Malpighian tubules?

11.1.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122574. Describe two structures that allow arthropods to breathe ai r.
5. Assume you see a “bug” crawling over the ground. It has two body segments and lacks antennae. Which arthropod subphy lum
does the “bug” belong to? Explain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mike Barlow
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/trailmixnet/3
098235611/; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Dust mite: Courtesy of FDA;
Spider crab: Michael Wolf, modified by
Hans Hillewaert; Barnacles: Mo Riza;
Millipede: Mick Talbot; Wasp:
Flickr:slgckgc; Scorpion: Mike Baird
Source: Dust mite:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:House_
Dust_Mite.jpg; Spider crab:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macroch
eira_kaempferi.jpg; Barnacles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/modomatic/2
394983702/; Millipede:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mickswildlife-macros/2800868043/; Wasp:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/slgc/5994915
303/; Scorpion:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikebaird/50
08387049/
License: Dust mite: Public Domain; Spider
Crab: CC BY 2.5; Barnacles: CC BY 2.0;
Millipede: CC BY 2.0; Wasp: CC BY 2.0;
Scorpion: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5] Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8062105

11.1.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257Source: CK-12 Foundation; By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work;
CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8062105
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Mike Barlow;By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8062105
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/trailmixnet/3
098235611/; By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉
This vector image was created with
Inkscape. - Own work; CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8062105
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC

11.1.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12257
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC
11.1: Arthropods is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225811.2: Insects
What dominates life on Earth?
Well, by numbers, it's not humans. This may look like a scary creature from your worst nightmare, but it wouldn’t hurt a fly. In fact,
it is a fly! The picture shows the charming portrait of a horsefly, up close and personal. Those big, striped, colorful orbs are its eyes.
Did you ever look through a kaleidoscope? If so, then you have an idea of what the world looks like to a horsefly.
What other organs do insects like this horsefly have? Besides sensing their environment, what other functi ons do their organs
serve?
Insects
Most members of the subphylum Hexapoda are insects (class Insecta). In fact, more than half of all known organisms are insects.
There may be more than 10 million insect species in the world, most of them yet to be identified. It’s cle ar that insects, and not
humans, dominate life on Earth.
Hexapoda. A cricket on green leaf. Can you find the six legs attache d to the thorax?
Structure and Function of Insects
Insects range in length from less than a millimeter t o about the length of your arm. They can be found in most habitats, but they are
mainly terrestrial. Many can fly, so they are also aerial. Like other a rthropods, insects have a head, thorax, and abdomen. They have
a wide variety of appendages, including six legs attached to the thorax.

11.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12258Insects have a pair of antennae for “smelling” and “ tasting” chemicals. Some insects can also use their an tennae to detect sound.
Other sensory organs on the head include several simple eyes and a pair of compound eyes. The compound eyes let insects see
images. Butterflies and bees can even see in color. Fo r feeding, the head contains one pair of mandibles and two pairs of maxillae.
Insects consume a wide range of foods, and their mouthp arts have become specialized. Several variations are shown in Figure
below.
Mouthpart Specialization in Insects. The mouthparts of insects are adapte d for different food sources. How do you think
the different mouthparts evolved?
An insect’s abdomen contains most of the internal org ans. Like other arthropods, insects have a complete di gestive system. They
also have an open circulatory system and central nerv ous system. Like other terrestrial arthropods, they have trachea for breathing
air and Malpighian tubules for excretion.
Insect Flight
The main reason that insects have been so successful is their ability to fly. Insects are the only invert ebrates that can fly and were
the first animals to evolve flight. Flight has important advantages. I t’s a guaranteed means of escape from nonflying pred ators. It
also aids in the search for food and mates.
Insects generally have two pairs of wings for flight. Wings are part of the exoskeleton and attached to the thorax. Insect wings show
a lot of variation. As you can see in Figure below, butterfly wings are paper-thin, whereas beetle wings are like armor. Not all
insect wings work the same way, either. They differ in h ow the muscles are attached and whether the two pairs of wings work
independently or together. Besides flight, wings serve other functions. They may protect the body (beetles), c ommunicate visually
with other insects (butterflies), or produce sounds to attr act mates (katydids).
Form and Function in Insect Wings. Beetles, butterflies, and katydids all have two pairs of wings that they use for flight.
However, the wings are very different because they have other functions a s well.

11.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12258Insect Reproduction
Nearly all insects reproduce sexually. Some can also r eproduce asexually. An example of an insect life cycl e is shown in Figure
below.
Insect Life Cycle. This diagram represents the life cycle of a mosquito. Most insects have a similar life cycle.
When an insect egg hatches, a larva emerges. The la rva eats and grows and then enters the pupa stage. Th e pupa is immobile and
may be encased in a cocoon. During the pupa stage, the insect goes through metamorphosis. Tissues and appendages of the larva
break down and reorganize into the adult form. How did such an incredible transformation evolve? Metamorpho sis is actually very
advantageous. It allows functions to be divided between life stages. Each stage can evolve adaptations to su it it for its specific
functions without affecting the adaptations of the other stage.
Insect Behavior
Insects are capable of a surprising range of behavio rs. Most of their behaviors, such as flying and mating, are instinctive. These are
behaviors that don’t need to be learned. They are la rgely controlled by genes. However, some insect behavio rs are learned. For
example, ants and bees can learn where food is located an d keep going back for more.
Many species of insects have evolved complex social beh aviors. They live together in large, organized coloni es (see Figure
below). This is true of ants, termites, bees, and wasps. Colonies may include millions of individual insect s. Colony members divide
up the labor of the colony. Different insects are spe cialized for different jobs. Some reproduce, while ot hers care for the young. Still
others get food or defend the nest.
Termite Nest. This cathedral-like structure is the nest of a huge colony of termites in Australia. In fact, it is the world’s
largest known termite nest. It towers 7.5 meters (25 feet) above the ground and houses millions of termites.

11.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12258Living in a large colony requires good communicatio n. Ants communicate with chemicals called pheromones. For example, an ant
deposits pheromones on the ground as it returns to the nest from a food source. It is marking the path so o ther ants can find the
food. Honeybees communicate by doing a “waggle dance.”
KQED: Ants: The Invisible Majority
Most of us think ants are just pests. But not Brian Fish er. Known as “The Ant Guy,” he's on a mission to show the world just how
important and amazing these little creatures are. I n the process, he hopes to catalog all of the world's 30,000 ant species before they
become casualties of habitat loss.
KQED: Ladybugs: A Population of Millions
Ladybugs, also known as ladybird beetles, have a life cyc le of four to six weeks. In one year as many as six gen erations of ladybird
beetles may hatch. In the spring, each adult female l ays up to 300 eggs in small clusters on plants where a phids are present. After a
week the wingless larvae hatch. Both the ladybird beet le larvae and adults are active predators, eating o nly aphids, scales, mites and
other plant-eating insects. The ladybugs live on the v egetation where their prey is found, which includes roses, oleander, milkweed
and broccoli. Adult ladybugs don’t taste very good. A bird careless enough to try to eat one will not swallow it.
By late May to early June, when the larvae have deplet ed the food supply, the adults migrate to the mounta ins. There, they eat
mainly pollen. The ladybugs gain fat from eating th e pollen and this tides them over during their nine- month hibernation.
Thousands of adults hibernate overwinter in tight cl usters, called aggregates, under fallen leaves and ground litter near streams. In
the clear, warmer days of early spring, the ladybugs break up the aggregates and begin several days of mating.
Insects and Humans
Most humans interact with insects every day. Many of these interactions are harmless and often go unnoticed. Howev er, insects
cause humans a lot of harm. They spread human diseases. For example, the deadly bubonic plague of the middle ages was spread
by fleas. Today, millions of people die each year from malaria, which is spread by mosquitoes. Insects also eat our crops.
Sometimes they travel in huge swarms that completely s trip the land of all plant material (see Figure below). On the other hand,
we depend on insects for the very food we eat. Without insects to pollinate them, flowering plants—including many food crops—
could not reproduce.
K QED
Ants: The Invisible Maj ority - KQED Q
Ants: The Invisible Maj ority - KQED Q
Watch on

11.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12258
Locust Swarm. A swarm of locusts in the African country of Maurita nia darkens the mid-day sky. The hungry insects will
eat virtually all the plants in their path.
KQED: Better Bees: Super Bee and Wild Bee
Honeybees are one of the most well-known insects on the planet. Bees are naturalized on every continent exce pt Antarctica.
Honeybees have a highly developed social structure and depend on their community, or colony, for survival, with a colony
containing up to 20,000 bees. When bees search plant s for nectar, pollen sticks to the fuzzy hairs that co ver their hind legs. At the
next flower, some of the pollen rubs off and fertilize s that flower. In this way, bees help improve fruit pr oduction. Bees pollinate an
estimated 130 different varieties of fruit, flowers, n uts and vegetables in the United States alone. Farmers ob viously depend on bees
to pollinate crops, such as fruit and nuts, but in r ecent years thousands of bee colonies have disappeare d. This could be a
devastating issue for farmers. Can anything be done? Meet two Northern California researchers looking for wa ys to make sure we
always have bees to pollinate crops.
Science Friday: The Road Best Traveled: A Tale of Ants, Slime Mold and the New Jersey Turnpike
For most people, getting stuck in a traffic jam on t he New Jersey Turnpike is a grueling lesson in futili ty. However, in this video by
Science Friday, Simon Garnier examines our collective be havior and how relatively simple organisms organize t hemselves so
dynamically.
K QED
Better Bees: Super Bee and Wild Bee
Better Bees: Super Bee and Wild Bee
Watch on

11.2.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12258Summary
Insects are arthropods in the class Hexapoda. They are the m ost numerous organisms in the world.
Most insects are terrestrial, and many are aerial.
Insects have six legs and a pair of antennae for sensing ch emicals. They also have several eyes and specialized mouthpa rts for
feeding.
Insects are the only invertebrates than can fly. Flight is the main reason for their success.
Insects may live in large colonies and have complex social behaviors.
Insects spread disease and destroy crops. However, they are e ssential for pollinating flowering plants.
Review
1. List two traits that characterize insects.
2. State two important advantages of flight in insects.
3. Give examples of insect behavior.
4. Present facts and a logical argument to support the foll owing statement: “Insects dominate life on Earth.”
5. Explain why distinctive life stages and metamorphosis a re adaptive.
Sc iF ri
The Road Best T raveled: A T ale of An
The Road Best T raveled: A T ale of An
Watch on

11.2.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122586. Diagram an insect life cycle.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
Source:
http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/n
dvi_locusts.html
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Hugo A. Quintero G.
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/haquintero/81
82319027/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Beetle: Richard; Butterfly: Diganta
Talukdar; Katydid: John Tann
Source: Beetle:
www.flickr.com/photos/wildpics/24503915
12/; Butterfly:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/nagaon/4394
582833/; Katydid:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/31031835@
N08/7208766480/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Hadi Zaher
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/hazara/90289
60551/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 7]Credit: Courtesy of Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
Source:
http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/n
dvi_locusts.html
License: Public Domain
11.2: Insects is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225911.3: Echinoderms
Believe it or not, this is an animal. See the mouth and arms?
It is a sea lily, a crinoid echinoderm. Crinoids are essenti ally a mouth on the top surface that is surrounded by fee ding arms. Although the basic echinoderm pattern of fivef old symmetry can be
recognized, most crinoids have many more than five arms. Crinoids usua lly have a stem used to attach themselves to a surface, but many beco me free-swimming as adults.
Echinoderms
Echinoderms are marine organisms that make up the phylum Echinod ermata. They can be found in the ocean from the equator to the poles. There are roughly 6000 living species of ech inoderms.
They are among the most distinctive organisms within the animal k ingdom. Members of the phylum include sea stars (starfish), sand doll ars, and feather stars, shown in Figure below.
Examples of Echinoderms. You may have seen sea stars and sand dollars at the beach because they l ive in shallow water near the shore. Other echinoderms, such as feather stars, are less
commonly seen because they live in the deep ocean.
Structure and Function of Echinoderms
Echinoderms are named for their “spiny skin.” However, the spines aren’t on their skin. They are part of the endoske leton. The endoskeleton consists of calcium carbonate pl ates and spines, covered
by a thin layer of skin. Adult echinoderms have radial symmetry. This is easy to see in the sea star and sand dollar i n Figure above. However, echinoderms evolved from an ancestor with bilat eral
symmetry. Evidence for this is the bilateral symmetry of their larvae.
A unique feature of echinoderms is their water vascular system. This is a network of canals that extend along each bod y part. In most echinoderms, the canals have external proj ections called tube
feet (see Figure below). The feet have suckers on the ends. Muscle contracti ons force water into the feet, causing them to extend outward. As the feet extend, they attach their suckers to new
locations, farther away from their previous points of attach ment. This results in a slow but powerful form of movement. Th e suckers are very strong. They can even be used to pry open the shells of
prey.
Tube Feet of a Sea Star. The tube feet of a sea star (in white) are part of its water vascula r system. There is a sucker on the end of each foot that allows the animal to “walk” slowly over a
surface. The suckers are strong enough to pry open shells.
Echinoderms lack respiratory and excretory systems. Inst ead, the thin walls of their tube feet allow oxygen to d iffuse in and wastes to diffuse out. Echinoderms also lack a centralized nervous system.
They have an open circulatory system and lack a heart. On the other hand, echinoderms have a well-developed coelom and a complete digestive system. Echinoderms use pheromon es to communicate
with each other. They detect the chemicals with sensory cells on their body surface. Some echinoderms also have simple eyes (ocelli) that can sense light. Like annelids, echinoderms have th e ability
to regenerate a missing body part.
Echinoderm Reproduction
Some echinoderms can reproduce asexually by fission, but mos t echinoderms reproduce sexually. They generally have se parate sexes and external fertilization. Eggs hatch i nto free-swimming larvae.
The larvae undergo metamorphosis to change into the adult form. Duri ng metamorphosis, their bilateral symmetry changes to radial s ymmetry.
Echinoderm Classification
Living echinoderms are placed in five classes. These five classes sho w many similarities. Organisms in each class are described in Table below.

11.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12259Class (includes) Description
Crinoidea
feathers stars
sea liliesfewer than 100 species; many have more than five arms; earliest and mo st primitive echinoderms; live on the ocean floor, mainly in deep wa ter; filter feeders
Asteroidea
sea starsalmost 2000 species; most have five arms; many are brightly colored; live on the ocean floor, mainly in shallow water; predators or scaven gers
Ophiuroidea
brittle starsabout 2000 species; central disk distinct from arms; move by flappin g their arms, which lack suckers; live on the ocean floor in shallow or deep water; predators, scavengers,
deposit feeders, or filter feeders
Echinoidea
sea urchins
sand dollars
sea biscuits
heart urchinsabout 100 species; do not have arms but do have tube feet; have a specialized mouth part with teeth to scrape food from rocks; live on t he ocean floor in shallow or deep wate
predators, herbivores, or filter feeders
Holothuroidea
sea cucumbersabout 1000 species; long body without arms; unlike other echino derms, have a respiratory system; live on the ocean floor in shallow or deep wa ter; deposit feeders, or filter
feeders
Summary
Echinoderms are marine invertebrates. They include sea stars, sand do llars, and feather stars.
Echinoderms have a spiny endoskeleton. They have radial symmet ry as adults but bilateral symmetry as larvae.
Echinoderms have a unique water vascular system with tube feet. Thi s allows slow but powerful movement.
B B C Stu dios
Army of Sea Urchins? | Planet Earth | BBC
Army of Sea Urchins? | Planet Earth | BBC
Watch on

11.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12259Review
1. Describe the echinoderm endoskeleton.
2. Give an example of an organism in each class of living echinoderms.
3. Adult sea stars and other echinoderms have obvious radial symmetry. Wha t evidence supports the claim that echinoderms evolved from a n ancestor with bilateral symmetry?

11.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122594. Explain the structure and function of the water vascular system.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Christian Musat, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Sand dollar: Flickr:TheTurducken; Sea star: Ron Kroetz;
Feather star: Courtesy of NOAA;By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This
vector image was created with Inkscape. - Own work, CC BY-SA
3.0, commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?curid=8062105
Source: Sand dollar:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/turducken/8881481190/; Sea star:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ronkroetz/7609957394/; Feather star:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harpacticoid_copepod_GLERL
_1.jpg; By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image was created
with Inkscape. - Own work; CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=8062105
License: Sand dollar and Sea Star: CC BY 2.0; Feather Star: Public
Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Christian Musat, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from Shutterstock.com
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC

11.3.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12259
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
11.3: Echinoderms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1322711.4: Invertebrate Chordates
Would you believe this animal eats its own brain?
This is a sea squirt, which is a tunicate. Many physical c hanges occur to the tunicate's body during metamorpho sis into an adult,
with one of the most interesting being the digestion of the cerebral ganglion, which controls movement and is the equivalent of the
human brain. From this comes the common saying that the s ea squirt "eats its own brain."
Invertebrate Chordates
Living species of chordates are classified into three m ajor subphyla: Vertebrata, Urochordata, and Cephaloch ordata. Vertebrates are
all chordates that have a backbone. The other two subp hyla are invertebrate chordates that lack a backbon e. Members of the
subphylum Urochordata are tunicates (also called sea squirts). Members of the subphylum C ephalochordata are lancelets. Both
tunicates and lancelets are small and primitive. The y are probably similar to the earliest chordates tha t evolved more than 500
million years ago.
Tunicates
There are about 3,000 living species of tunicates (se e Figure below). They inhabit shallow marine waters. Larval tu nicates are freeswimming. They have all four defining chordate trait s (see the "Chordates" concept). Adult tunicates are sessile. They no longer
have a notochord or post-anal tail.
Tunicates (Urochordata). Tunicates are one of two subphyla of invertebr ate chordates.
Adult tunicates are barrel-shaped. They have two openin gs that siphon water into and out of the body. The flow of water provides
food for filter feeding. Tunicates reproduce sexually. Each individual produces both male and female game tes. However, they avoid
self-fertilization. Tunicates can also reproduce asexual ly by budding.

11.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13227Lancelets
There are only about 25 living species of lancelets. They inhabit the ocean floor where the water is shallow. Lancelet larvae are
free-swimming. The adults can swim but spend most of thei r time buried in the sand. Like tunicates, lancelets a re filter feeders.
They take in water through their mouth and expel it through an opening called the atriopore (see Figure below). Lancelets
reproduce sexually and have separates sexes.
Lancelet (Cephalochordata). Unlike tunicates, lancelets retain all four defining chordate traits in the adult stage. Can you
find them?
Summary
Chordates include vertebrates and invertebrates that have a notochord.
Invertebrate chordates do not have a backbone.
Invertebrate chordates include tunicates and lancele ts. Both are primitive marine organisms.

11.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13227Review
1. Name and describe the two subphyla of invertebrate chor dates.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of US Geological
Survey;By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This
vector image was created with Inkscape. Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8062105
Source:
http://nas.er.usgs.gov/taxgroup/tunicates/;
By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector
image was created with Inkscape. - Own
work; CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8062105
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska;By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8062105
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work;
CC BY-SA 3.0;
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.ph
p?curid=8062105
License: CC BY-NC 3.0

11.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1322711.4: Invertebrate Chordates is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/138611.5: Invertebrate Diversity
What type of animal is a Sea Cucumber?
That is a Sea Cucumber, and it is an animal. The Sea C ucumber is a soft-bodied invertebrate that is relat ed to the starfish and sea
urchins. There are over 1,100 species that are found worldwi de in intertidal zones as well as deep waters.
Characteristics of Invertebrates
The majority of animals today are invertebrates. They have a wide range of p hysical traits and ways of life. Modern invertebrates
include animals as different as the sponge and tarant ula. Why are both of these animals classified as inver tebrates? What traits do
they have common?
Examples of Invertebrates. Both a sponge (left) and tarantula (ri ght) are invertebrates. Can you identify any traits they
share?
One trait invertebrates like the sponge and tarantula share is lack of a ba ckbone. In fact, they don’t have any bones at all. T hese
are defining traits of all invertebrates. Some inver tebrates have a skeleton, but it isn’t made of bone. Many other traits of
invertebrates show considerable diversity.
Digestion
Invertebrates have one of two types of digestive syste m: an incomplete or complete digestive system. Both ar e shown in Figure
below. An incomplete digestive system consists of a digestive cavity with one opening. The single opening serves as both mouth
and anus. A complete digestive system consists of a digestive tract with two openings. One ope ning is the mouth. The other is the
anus.

11.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1386
Two Types of Digestive Systems in Invertebrates. On the left is an i ncomplete digestive system, found in a jellyfish; on the
right is the complete digestive system of a roundworm. Invertebrates may have either of these two types of digestive system.
Find the parts of each digestive system in each drawing. How do the two systems di ffer?
Movement
All invertebrates can move on their own during at lea st some stage of their life cycle. However, they may di ffer in how they move.
Several ways are described below.
Some invertebrates are simply carried along by water currents. They cannot control their movement in a par ticular direction. An
example is a jellyfish.
Other invertebrates can contract muscles to move indepen dently of water currents or on solid surfaces. They can also control the
direction in which they move. An example is a roundworm. It can move forward and to the left or right.
Still other invertebrates have specialized appendages for movement. For example, they may have jointed legs fo r walking or
climbing or wings for flying. An example is an insect such as a fly.
Nervous System
Most invertebrates have a nervous system. The nervous system allows them to sense and respond to their environment. The
simplest invertebrate nervous system is just a networ k of nerves that can sense touch, called a nerve net (see Figure below). Most
invertebrates have a more complex nervous system. It may in clude a brain and several different sense organs.
The nervous system of invertebrates.
Reproduction
Most invertebrates reproduce sexually. Diploid adults produce haploid gametes (sperm and eggs). In some species, the same
individuals produce both sperm and eggs. In other sp ecies, sperm and eggs are produced by separate male a nd female individuals.
Fertilization occurs when a sperm and an egg fuse to form a diploid zygote. The zygote develops into an embryo and eventually
into a new adult organism. On the way, it may pass thro ugh one or more larval stages. A larva (plural, larvae) is a juvenile, or
immature, stage of an animal. It is generally quite different in form and function from the adult form o f the species. For example,
the larva may be able to swim freely, whereas the adult must remain permanently attached to a solid surface.
Some invertebrates can also reproduce asexually. This may occur by fission or budding. Fission takes place when an animal simply
divides into two parts. Each part then regrows the missing part. Th e result is two whole organisms. Budding may take place when a
parent forms a small bump, or bud. The bud remains attache d to the parent while it develops into a new individual.

11.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1386Summary
The majority of living animals are invertebrates. Invertebrates lack a backbone.
Invertebrates may have an incomplete or a complete dige stive system.
Invertebrates vary in how they move and in the complex ity of their nervous system.
Most invertebrates reproduce sexually. After hatching, man y invertebrates pass through one or more larval stages that are
different from the adult stage.
Review
1. Describe the range of variation in the nervous systems of invertebrates.
2. Compare and contrast incomplete and complete digestiv e systems.
3. Describe fission and budding.
H a ppy L e a rn in g En glish
Invertebrate Animals | Educational V
Invertebrate Animals | Educational V
Watch on

11.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13864. Create a diagram to show the life cycle of an invertebr ate with a larval stage. Include simple sketches of the adul t and larval
stages of the animal.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Sponge: Courtesy of US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
Spider: Arjun
Source: Sponge:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phakelli
a_600.jpg; Spider:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sand_tar
antula.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 11.5: Invertebrate Diversity is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/138511.6: Invertebrate Evolution
How many different types of beetles are there?
There are about 350,000 species of beetles spread al l over the world. But let's focus on this one. Look at the detail on this
Rhinoceros beetle. The horns are used in fighting o ther males during mating season, and for digging. The b ody of an adult rhino
beetle is covered by a thick exoskeleton. A pair of t hick wings lay atop another set of wings underneath, a llowing the rhinoceros
beetle to fly. Compare those evolutionary adaptation s to a simple sponge, and the evolutionary significa nce of invertebrates
becomes obvious.
Invertebrate Evolution
Invertebrates evolved several important traits before vertebrates even appeared. These traits are now found in j ust about all animals.
Multicellularity
The first animal trait to evolve was multicellularity. This was highly adaptive. Multiple cells could do different jobs. They could
evolve special adaptations that allowed them to do t heir job really well. However, the first invertebrates still lacked tissues.
Sponges represent the first organism at the multicellular stage of invertebrate evolution.
Tissues
Living cnidarians, such as jellyfish, represent the next stage of invertebrate evolution. This was the evolut ion of tissues. It was the
first step in the evolution of organs and organ syste ms. At first, invertebrates developed tissues from just two embryonic cell layers.
There was an outer cell layer called ectoderm and an inner cell layer called endoderm. The two cell layers allowed different types
of tissues to form.
Radial Symmetry
Another trait that evolved early on was symmetry. To understand symmetry, you need to see an animal t hat lacks symmetry. A
sponge, like the one in Figure below, lacks symmetry. This means it cannot be divi ded into two identical halves. A symmetrical
organism, in contrast, can be divided into two identical halv es. Both the coral polyp and the beetle in Figure below have symmetry.

11.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1385
Symmetry in Invertebrates. Sponges lack symmetry. Radial symmetr y evolved first. This was followed by bilateral
symmetry. How do the two types of symmetry differ?
The coral polyp in Figure above has radial symmetry. This was the first type of symmetry to evolve. The cor al has a distinct top
and bottom but not distinct ends. It can be divided into identical halves like a pie, but not into right and left halves. Animals with
radial symmetry have no sense of directions such as forward and backward or left and right. This makes con trolled movement in
these directions impossible.
Cephalization
Flatworms represent the next stage of invertebrate evo lution. They evolved cephalization. This is the concentration of nerve tissue
at one end of the body, forming a head region. This i s highly adaptive. It allows central control of the e ntire organism.
Cephalization was first step in the evolution of a brai n.
Bilateral Symmetry
An outcome of cephalization was bilateral symmetry. This is demonstrated by the beetle in Figure above. With concentrated
nerve tissue at the head but not at the tail end, th e two ends of the body are distinct from each other. The animal can be divided
down the middle to form identical right and left hal ves. It allows the animal to tell front from back and left from right. This is
needed for controlled movements in these directions.
Mesoderm
Ancestors of flatworms also evolved mesoderm. This is a third layer of cells between the ectoderm and the endoderm (see Figure
below). Evolution of this new cell layer allowed animals to develop new types of tissues, such as muscle.
Three Cell Layers in a Flatworm. A flatworm has three cell l ayers.
Complete Digestive System
Early invertebrates had an incomplete digestive syst em. There was just one opening for the mouth and anus. Ancestors of modern
roundworms were the first animals to evolve a complete digestive system. With a separate mouth and anus, food could move
through the body in just one direction. This made dig estion more efficient. An animal could keep eating whi le digesting food and
getting rid of waste. Different parts of the digestive tract could also become specialized for different di gestive functions. This led to
the evolution of digestive organs.

11.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1385Pseudocoelom and Coelom
Ancestors of roundworms also evolved a pseudocoelom. This is a partial body cavity that is filled with f luid. It allows room for
internal organs to develop. The fluid also cushions t he internal organs. The pressure of the fluid within t he cavity provides stiffness.
It gives the body internal support, forming a hydrostatic skeleton. It explains why roundworms are round and flatworms are flat.
Later, a true coelom evolved. This is a fluid-filled body cavity, comple tely enclosed by mesoderm. It lies between the digestive
cavity and body wall (see Figure below). Invertebrates with a true coelom include mollusk s and annelids.
Cross Section of an Invertebrate with a Coelom. The coelom forms wit hin the mesoderm.
Segmented Body
Segmentation evolved next. This is a division of the body into m ultiple segments. Both the earthworm and ant picture d in Figure
below have segmented bodies. This trait increases fle xibility. It permits a wider range of motion. All anneli ds and arthropods are
segmented. Arthropods also evolved jointed appendages. For example, they evolved jointed legs for walking and “feelers”
(antennae) for sensing.
Segmented Invertebrates. Earthworm (Annelid) and Black Ant (Arthropod). An earthwo rm consists of many small
segments. An ant has three larger segments. Notice the ants jointed legs and “feelers.”
Notochord
Some invertebrates evolved a notochord. This is the stiff support rod in a chordate. The first chordates were probably similar to
modern invertebrate chordates. The sea squirt in Figure below is an example. Later, some invertebrate chordates evolved into
vertebrates.

11.6.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1385
Notochord. A sea squirt is an invertebrate with a notochord.
Summary
Many important traits evolved in invertebrates. They inc lude: multicellularity, tissues and organs, radial and bi lateral symmetry,
cephalization, mesoderm, complete digestive system, coelom, segmented body, and notochord.
Review
1. Distinguish among asymmetry, radial symmetry, and bila teral symmetry.
2. Define cephalization. What is its relationship to bil ateral symmetry?
3. What is mesoderm? Name an invertebrate with mesoderm.
4. Define coelom. What invertebrates have a true coelom?
5. What is segmentation? Why is it advantageous?
Cra ig B a ls
29-1 Invertebrate Evolution (P art 1)
29-1 Invertebrate Evolution (P art 1)
Watch on
Cra ig B a ls
29-1 Invertebrate Evolution (P art 2)
29-1 Invertebrate Evolution (P art 2)
Watch on

11.6.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13856. Compare and contrast incomplete and complete digestiv e systems. Why is a complete digestive system more efficie nt?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin, using sponge image
by Pixabay:Josch13
Source: CK-12 Foundation (sponge:
pixabay.com/en/natural-sponge-sponge-seasponge-232368/)
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Sponge: Public
Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Earthworm: Flickr:Dodo-Bird;
Black ant: Pison Jaujip
Source: Earthworm:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dodobird/477499086/; Black ant:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/pisonjaujip/6
895645163/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Silke Baron
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silkebaron/46
2557699/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 11.6: Invertebrate Evolution is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/138711.7: Invertebrate Classification
Invertebrate, arthropod or insect?
This Monarch caterpillar is an invertebrate. It is also an insect and an arthropod. Of all the animal species, it is estimated that well
over 90% are invertebrates. Of all invertebrates, the insects are by far the most numerous. There are so ma ny species of insects that
scientists have yet to discover them all, let alone name or count them. Estimates of the total number o f insect species fall in the
range of 1 to 30 million. So, it helps if there are method s to classify not just the insects, but all invertebrates.
Classification of Invertebrates
Eight major phyla contain the majority of invertebrate species.
Major Invertebrate Phyla
Table below gives an overview of the eight invertebrate phyl a with the greatest number of species.
Phylum (includes) Notable Characteristics Example
Porifera (sponges)multicellularity, specialized cells but no
tissues, asymmetry, incomplete digestive
systemsponges
Cnidaria (jellyfish, corals)radial symmetry, true tissues, incomplete
digestive systemjellyfish
Platyhelminthes (flatworms, tapeworms,
flukes)cephalization, bilateral symmetry,
mesoderm, complete digestive systemflatworm
Nematoda (roundworms) pseudocoelom, complete digestive system roun dworm
Mollusca (snails, clams, squids)true coelom, organ systems, some with
primitive brainsnail
Annelida (earthworms, leeches, marine
worms)segmented body, primitive brain earthworm
Arthropoda (insects, spiders, crustaceans,
centipedes)segmented body, jointed appendages,
exoskeleton, braininsect (dragonfly)
Echinodermata (sea stars, sea urchins,
sand dollars, sea cucumbers)complete digestive system, coelom, spiny
internal skeletonsea urchin

11.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1387Protostomes and Deuterostomes
Most invertebrates (and higher animals) can be placed in one of two groups based on how they develop as em bryos. The two
groups are called protostomes and deuterostomes. As shown in Figure below, organisms in the two groups have different ways of
forming the coelom and mouth, among other difference s.
Mollusks, annelids, and arthropods are protostomes. Echinoderms and chordates are deuterostomes. This dist inction is important.
Why does it matter? It shows that echinoderms are mor e closely related to chordates than are the other i nvertebrate phyla. This is
not apparent based on other, more obvious traits.
Protostomes vs. Deuterostomes. In protostomes such as mollusks, the coelom fo rms within the mesoderm. In deuterostomes
such as echinoderms, the coelom forms from a pouch of endoderm. How doe s the formation of the mouth differ in these two
groups of animals?
Science Friday: Isn't this Octopus Adorabilis?
What do you call a tiny octopus with big eyes, gelat inous skin and is cute as a button? Nobody knows quite yet! In this video by
Science Friday, Stephanie Bush aims to classify and name thi s presently undescribed deep-sea cephalopod.
Summary
Eight invertebrate phyla contain most invertebrate spe cies.
Invertebrates (and higher animals) can also be plac ed in one of two groups based on how they develop as embryos.
Review
1. What are protostomes?
2. Describe evidence showing that echinoderms are more clo sely related to chordates than are other invertebrate p hyla.
Sc iF ri
Isn 't this Octopus Adorabilis?
Isn 't this Octopus Adorabilis?
Watch on

11.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13873. Assume you have discovered a new invertebrate. It has a segme nted body, a brain, and jointed appendages. In which phylu m
would you place it? Why?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 11.7: Invertebrate Classification is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/138911.8: Sponges
So what exactly is a sponge?
Here we have a giant barrel sponge. How can something th at looks like that be considered an animal? Where's the head? Where are
the legs? Where's the mouth?
Sponges
Invertebrates are animals without a backbone. They are the most numerous anima ls on Earth. Most invertebrates are insects.
However, simpler invertebrates evolved before insects. Som e, like the sponges you will read about in this conce pt, have existed
virtually unchanged for hundreds of millions of yea rs. Their continued existence is evidence that they a re well adapted for their
habitats. They also evolved some of the most importan t traits that are found in almost all animals today. Without the traits that
evolved in sponges and other simple invertebrates, you would not exist. Sponges are aquatic invertebrates that make up the phylum
Porifera. The word "porifera" means pore-bearing. The phylum i s aptly named. As you can see from Figure below, a sponge has a
porous body. There are at least 5,000 living species of sponges. Almost all of them inhabit the ocean, l iving mainly on coral reefs or
the ocean floor.
Sponge on a Coral Reef. This orange sponge is covered with pores. Can you predi ct the function of the pores?
Structure and Function of Sponges
Sponges come in a variety of shapes and sizes. For examp le, they may be shaped like tubes, fans, cones, or ju st blobs. They range
in diameter from about a centimeter (0.4 inches) to o ver a meter (3.3 feet). Many species live in colonies that may be quite large.
Adult sponges are sessile. This means they are unable to move from place to pl ace. Root-like projections anchor them to solid
surfaces such as rocks and reefs.
Sponges have an internal skeleton that gives them sup port and protection. An internal skeleton is called a n endoskeleton. A sponge
endoskeleton consists of short, sharp rods called spicules (see Figure below). Spicules are made of silica, calcium carbonat e, or
spongin, a tough protein. They grow from specialized cells in the body of the sponge.

11.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1389
Sponge Anatomy. A sponge lacks tissues and organs, but it has several types of s pecialized cells.
Sponges are filter feeders. They pump water into their body through their pores. The water flows t hrough a large central cavity
called the spongocoel (see Figure above). As the water flows by, specialized collar cells (which are also known as choanocytes)
filter out food particles such as bacteria. Collar cells have tiny hairs that trap the particles. They also h ave a flagellum that whips
the water and keeps it moving. Once the food is trapped, the collar cells digest it (see Figure below). Cells called amebocytes also
help digest the food. They distribute the nutrients to the rest of the body as well. Finally, the water f lows back out of the body
through an opening called the osculum. As water flows through the sponge, oxygen diffuses from the water to the sponge’s cells.
The cells also expel wastes into the water for removal throug h the osculum.
Collar Cell. The collar cells of sponges trap and digest food.
Sponge Reproduction
Sponges reproduce both asexually and sexually. Asexual r eproduction occurs by budding. Figure below shows the sponge life
cycle when sexual reproduction is involved. Adult sponge s produce eggs and sperm. In many species, the same individuals produce
both. However, they don’t produce eggs and sperm at the same time. As a result, self-fertilization is unlikely t o occur. What is an
advantage of avoiding self-fertilization?

11.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1389
The sponge life cycle includes sexual reproduction. Sponges may also reproduce asexually.
Sperm are released into the surrounding water through the osculum. If they enter a female sponge through a pore, they may be
trapped by collar cells. Trapped sperm are delivered to eggs inside the female body, where fertilization t akes place. The resulting
zygote develops into a larva. Unlike the adult, the l arva is motile. It is covered with cilia that propel i t through the water. As the
larva grows, it becomes more similar to an adult sponge and l oses its ability to swim.
Ecology of Sponges
Sponges that live on coral reefs have symbiotic relat ionships with other reef species. They provide shelter f or algae, shrimp, and
crabs. In return, they get nutrients from the metaboli sm of the organisms they shelter. Sponges are a sourc e of food for many
species of fish. Because sponges are sessile, they ca nnot flee from predators. Their sharp spicules provide some defense. They also
produce toxins that may poison predators that try to eat them.
Summary
Sponges are aquatic invertebrates. They make up the phy lum Porifera.
Sponges have specialized cells and an endoskeleton.
Sponges lack tissues and body symmetry.
B B C Stu dios
The Wonderful World of the Sea Spon
The Wonderful World of the Sea Spon
Watch on

11.8.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1389Adult sponges are sessile filter feeders.
Sponge larvae have cilia for swimming.
Review
1. Define sessile. Name an invertebrate with a sessile adult stage.
2. Describe the skeleton of a sponge.
3. Sponges have specialized cells called collar cells. Des cribe how collar cells are specialized for the function s they serve.
4. Create a diagram of an adult sponge body plan that shows how sponges obtain food.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of US National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Elephant
-ear-sponge.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 11.8: Sponges is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/138811.9: Cnidarians
The sea anemone. Plant or animal?
It may look like a plant, but it's not. Sea anemones are a group of water-dwelling, predatory animals in the phylum Cnidaria. A sea
anemone is a polyp attached at the bottom to the sur face beneath it. They can have anywhere from a few te ns of tentacles to a few
hundred tentacles. And they eat small fish and shrimp.
Cnidarians
Cnidarians are invertebrates such as jellyfish and corals. They belong to the phylum Cnidaria. All cnidarians are aq uatic. Most of
them live in the ocean. Cnidarians are a little more complex than sponges. They have radial symmetry and tissues. There are more
than 10,000 cnidarian species. They are very diverse, as sh own in Figure below.
Cnidarian Diversity. Cnidarians show a lot of variability.
Structure and Function of Cnidarians
All cnidarians have something in common. It’s a nematoc yst, like the one shown in Figure below. A nematocyst is a long, thin,
coiled stinger. It has a barb that may inject poison. These tiny poison "darts" are propelled out of specia l cells. They are used to
attack prey or defend against predators.

11.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1388
Cnidarian Nematocyst. A cnidarian nematocyst is like a poison dart. I t is ejected from a specialized cell.
There are two basic body plans in cnidarians. They are called the polyp and medusa. Both are shown in Figure below. The polyp
has a tubular body and is usually sessile. The medusa (plural, medusae) has a bell-shaped body and is typically motile. Som e
cnidarian species alternate between polyp and medusa for ms. Other species exist in just one form or the other.
Cnidarian Body Plans. Cnidarians may exist in the polyp (left) or medusa (right) form.
The body of a cnidarian consists of two cell layers, ec toderm and endoderm. The cells surround a digestive cavity called the
coelenteron (see Figure below). Cnidarians have a simple digestive system. Th e single opening is surrounded by tentacles, which
are used to capture prey. The tentacles are covered with nematocyst cells. Digestion takes place in the coelenteron. Nutrients a re
absorbed and gases exchanged through the cells lining t his cavity. Fluid in the coelenteron creates a hydrost atic skeleton.
Cnidarians have a simple nervous system consisting o f a nerve net that can detect touch. They may also have other sen sory
structures. For example, jellyfish have light-sensing structures and gravity-sensing structures. These sense s give them a sense of up
versus down. It also helps them balance.

11.9.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1388Cnidarian Reproduction
Figure below shows a general cnidarian life cycle. Polyps usually r eproduce asexually. One type of asexual reproduction in polyps
leads to the formation of new medusae. Medusae usually reproduce sexually. Sexual reproduction forms a zygot e. The zygote
develops into a larva called a planula. The planula, in turn, develops into a polyp. There are many variations on the general life
cycle. Obviously, species that exist only as polyps or medu sae have a life cycle without the other form.
General Cnidarian Life Cycle. Cnidarians may reproduce both asexually and s exually.
Ecology of Cnidarians
Cnidarians can be found in almost all ocean habitat s. They may live in water that is shallow or deep, warm or cold. A few species
live in freshwater. Some cnidarians live alone, while others live in colonies.
Corals form large colonies in shallow tropical water. They are confined to shallow water because they have a mutualistic
relationship with algae that live inside them. The alg ae need sunlight for photosynthesis, so they must be r elatively close to the
surface of the water. Corals exist only as polyps. They catch plankton with their tentacles. Many secrete a c alcium carbonate
exoskeleton. Over time, this builds up to become a co ral reef (see Figure below). Coral reefs provide food and shelter to many
ocean organisms. They also help protect shorelines fro m erosion by absorbing some of the energy of waves. Cor al reefs are at risk
of destruction today.
Great Barrier Reef. The Great Barrier Reef is a coral reef off the coast of Australia.
Unlike corals, jellyfish spend most of their lives as m edusae. They live virtually everywhere in the ocean. They are typically
carnivores. They prey on zooplankton, other invertebra tes, and the eggs and larvae of fish.
KQED: Amazing Jellies
Jellyfish. They are otherworldly creatures that glow in the dark, without brains or bones, some more than 1 00 feet long. And there
are many different types. Jellyfish are free-swimmin g members of the phylum Cnidaria. Jellyfish are foun d in every ocean, from
the surface to the deep sea.

11.9.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1388Summary
Cnidarians include jellyfish and corals.
Cnidarians are aquatic invertebrates. They have tissues and radial symmetry. They also have tentacles with stingers.
There are two cnidarian body plans: the polyp and the me dusa. They differ in several ways.
Many corals secrete an exoskeleton that builds up to become a coral reef.
Review
1. What is a nematocyst? What is its function?
2. How do coral reefs form?
K QED
Amazing Jellies - KQED QUEST
Amazing Jellies - KQED QUEST
Watch on

11.9.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13883. Compare and contrast cnidarian polyps and medusae.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Kyle Taylor
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kyletaylor/48
75051470/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Laszlo Ilyes, Courtesy of National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Tims/Wikipedia, NBPhotostream
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/laszlophoto/2110755960/
License: CC BY
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;ck foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation; ck foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 6]Credit: Kyle Taylor
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kyletaylor/48
75051470/
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 11.9: Cnidarians is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139111.10: Flatworms
Would you believe that this gold-dotted creature is a flatworm?
No? Well it is. There are more than 25,000 different ty pes of flatworms, so they can be very different in h ow they appear. And
many don't even look like your typical worm.
Flatworms
Flatworms belong to the phylum Platyhelminthes. Examples of flatworms are shown in Figure below. There are more than
25,000 species in the flatworm phylum.
Platyhelminthes. Platyhelminthes include flatworms, tapeworms, and fl ukes.
Structure and Function of Flatworms
Flatworms range in length from about 1 millimeter (0.04 inches) to more than 20 meters (66 feet). They have a flat body because
they do not have a coelom or even a pseudocoelom. T hey also lack a respiratory system. Instead, their cells exchange gases by
diffusion directly with the environment. They have an incomplete digestive system.
Flatworms reflect several major evolutionary advances i n invertebrates. They have three embryonic cell layer s, including
mesoderm. The mesoderm layer allows them to develop org an systems. For example, they have muscular and excreto ry systems.
The muscular system allows them to move from place to place over solid surfaces. The excretory system lets them maintain a
proper balance of water and salts. Flatworms also show cephalization and bilateral s ymmetry.

11.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1391Flatworm Reproduction
Flatworms reproduce sexually. In most species, the same i ndividuals produce both eggs and sperm. After fertilization occurs, the
fertilized eggs pass out of the adult’s body and hat ch into larvae. There may be several different larval stages. The final larval stage
develops into the adult form, and the life cycle repea ts.
Ecology of Flatworms
Both flukes and tapeworms are parasites with vertebrate hosts, including human hosts. Flukes live in the host’ s circulatory system
or liver. Tapeworms live in the host’s digestive system. Usually, more than one type of host is required to complete the parasite’s
life cycle. Look at the life cycle of the liver flu ke in Figure below. As an adult, the fluke has a vertebrate host. As a larva, it has an
invertebrate host. If you follow the life cycle, you can see how each host becomes infected so the fluke can continue it s life cycle.
Life Cycle of the Sheep Liver Fluke. The sheep liver fluke has a compl icated life cycle with two hosts. How could such a
complicated way of life evolve?
Tapeworms and flukes have suckers and other structure s for feeding on a host. Tapeworms also have a scolex, a ring of hooks on
their head to attach themselves to the host (see Figure below). Unlike other invertebrates, tapeworms lack a m outh and digestive
system. Instead, they absorb nutrients directly from the ho st’s digestive system with their suckers.
Tapeworm Suckers and Hooks. The head of a tapeworm has several suckers. At the ve ry top of the head is a “crown” of
hooks called a scolex.
Not all flatworms are parasites. Some are free-living ca rnivores. They eat other small invertebrates and decay ing animals. Most of
the free-living species live in aquatic habitats, but so me live in moist soil.
Summary
Platyhelminthes are flatworms such as tapeworms and flukes.
Flatworms have a mesoderm cell layer and simple organ syste ms. They also show cephalization and bilateral symmetry.
Many flatworms are parasites with vertebrate hosts. Some are fre e-living carnivores that live mainly in aquatic habitats.
Review
1. Flatworms were the first to evolve the mesoderm. What adv antage does the mesoderm provide?
2. Describe specialized feeding structures of parasitic p latyhelminthes.

11.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13913. Some parasitic flatworms have a very complicated life c ycle with more than one host. Infer why this might be ada ptive.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: shutterstock.com
Source: commons.wikimedia.org
License: CC BY
[Figure 2]Credit: Neville Wootton; Tapeworm:
Courtesy of Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; Fluke:
User:Anilocra/Wikipedia
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/nevillewootto
n/9364345716/
License: CC BY
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Courtesy of the CDC
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taenia_s
olium_tapeworm_scolex_with_its_four_suc
kers_and_two_rows_of_hooks_5262_lores.
jpg
License: Public Domain
This page titled 11.10: Flatworms is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

11.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225411.11: Roundworms
When most people picture a worm, do they picture a roundworm?
Actually, they do not. Whereas flatworms are flat, roun dworms obviously appear round. With over 80,000 species, t here are plenty
of different types of roundworms. But these are still not the types of worms most people picture when they think of wo rms.
Roundworms
Roundworms make up the phylum Nematoda. This is a very diverse animal phyla. It has more than 80,000 known species.
Structure and Function of Roundworms
Roundworms range in length from less than 1 millimete r to over 7 meters (23 feet) in length. As their name suggests, they have a
round body. This is because they have a pseudocoelom. This is one way they differ from flatworms. Another way is their complete
digestive system. It allows them to take in food, digest foo d, and eliminate wastes all at the same time.
Roundworms have a tough covering of cuticle on the su rface of their body. It prevents their body from exp anding. This allows the
buildup of fluid pressure in the pseudocoelom. As a r esult, roundworms have a hydrostatic skeleton. This prov ides a counterforce
for the contraction of muscles lining the pseudocoelom. Th is allows the worms to move efficiently along solid surfa ces.
Roundworm Reproduction
Roundworms reproduce sexually. Sperm and eggs are produced by separate male and female a dults. Fertilization takes place inside
the female organism. Females lay huge numbers of eggs, sometimes as many as 100,000 per day! The eggs hatch into larvae, which
develop into adults. Then the cycle repeats.
Ecology of Roundworms
Roundworms may be free-living or parasitic. Free-living worms are found mainly in freshwater habitats. Some live in soil. They
generally feed on bacteria, fungi, protozoans, or decaying organic matter. By b reaking down organic matter, they play an important
role in the carbon cycle.
Parasitic roundworms may have plant, vertebrate, or i nvertebrate hosts. Several species have human hosts. Fo r example,
hookworms, like the one in Figure below, are human parasites. They infect the human int estine. They are named for the hooks they
use to grab onto the host’s tissues. Hookworm larvae ent er the host through the skin. They migrate to the int estine, where they
mature into adults. Adults lay eggs, which pass out of the host in feces. Then the cycle repeats.

11.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12254
Hookworm Parasite. Hookworms like this one are common human parasites.
Tiny pinworms are the most common roundworm parasites of people in the U.S. In some areas, as many as one out of three
children are infected. Humans become infected when they ingest the nearly microscopic pinworm eggs. The eggs h atch and
develop into adults in the host’s digestive tract. Adu lts lay eggs that pass out of the host’s body to con tinue the cycle. Pinworms
have a fairly simple life cycle with only one host.
Summary
Roundworms make up the phylum Nematoda.
Roundworms have a pseudocoelom and hydrostatic skelet on. Their body is covered with tough cuticle.
Free-living roundworms are found mainly in freshwater habit ats.
Parasitic roundworms have a variety of hosts, including hu mans.
Review
1. How do free-living nematodes contribute to the carbon cyc le?
2. Apply what you know about pinworms to develop one or more re commendations for preventing pinworm infections in human s.
N ASA Scie n ce
ScienceCasts: Roundworms Have the
ScienceCasts: Roundworms Have the
Watch on

11.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122543. Platyhelminthes and nematodes are both worms. Justify classif ying them in different invertebrate phyla.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of the CDC
Source:
phil.cdc.gov/phil/details_linked.asp?
pid=1374;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taenia_s
olium_tapeworm_scolex_with_its_four_suc
kers_and_two_rows_of_hooks_5262_lores.
jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the CDC
Source:
phil.cdc.gov/phil/details_linked.asp?
pid=1374;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taenia_s
olium_tapeworm_scolex_with_its_four_suc
kers_and_two_rows_of_hooks_5262_lores.
jpg
License: Public Domain
11.11: Roundworms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225511.12: Mollusks
Fish or squid?
Neither. This is a mollusk, a cuttlefish to be specific. What is a mollusk? Well, to start, mollusks are aqu atic species that are not
fish. There are over 100,000 different mollusks, so there ar e bound to be some interesting looking organisms, like this one.
Mollusks
Have you ever been to the ocean or eaten seafood? If you have, then you probably have encountered member s of the phylum
Mollusca. Mollusks include snails, scallops, and squids, as sho wn in Figure below. There are more than 100,000 known species of
mollusks. About 80 percent of mollusk species are gastro pods.
This figure shows some of the more common and familiar mollusks.
Structure and Function of Mollusks
Mollusks are a very diverse phylum. Some mollusks are n early microscopic. The largest mollusk, a colossal squ id, may be as long
as a school bus and weigh over half a ton! The basic body plan of a mollusk is shown in Figure below. The main distinguishing
feature is a hard outer shell. It covers the top of th e body and encloses the internal organs. Most mollusks h ave a distinct head
region. The head may have tentacles for sensing the e nvironment and grasping food. There is generally a m uscular foot, which may
be used for walking. However, the foot has evolved modificati ons in many species to be used for other purposes.
Basic Mollusk Body Plan. The basic body plan shown here varies among mollusk classes. For example, several mollusk
species no longer have shells. Do you know which ones?

11.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12255Two unique features of mollusks are the mantle and ra dula (see Figure above). The mantle is a layer of tissue that lies between the
shell and the body. It secretes calcium carbonate to form the shell. It forms a cavity, called the mantle cavity, between the mantle
and the body. The mantle cavity pumps water for filter feeding. The radula is a feeding organ with teeth made of chitin. It is
located in front of the mouth in the head region. Her bivorous mollusks use the radula to scrape food such a s algae off rocks.
Predatory mollusks use the radula to drill holes in the she lls of their prey.
Mollusks have a coelom and a complete digestive syste m. Their excretory system consists of tube-shaped orga ns called nephridia
(see Figure above). The organs filter waste from body fluids and release the waste into the coelom. Terrestrial mollusks exchange
gases with the surrounding air. This occurs across th e lining of the mantle cavity. Aquatic mollusks “brea the” under water with
gills. Gills are thin filaments that absorb gases and exchange them bet ween the blood and surrounding water.
Mollusks have a circulatory system with one or two hea rts that pump blood. The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood
through the circulatory system when its muscles contract. The circulatory system may be open or closed, depending on t he species.
The major classes of mollusks vary in structure and functi on. You can read about some of their differences in Figure below.
Use this figure to compare and contrast gastropods, bivalves, and cephalo pods
Mollusk Reproduction
Mollusks reproduce sexually. Most species have separate male and female sexes. Gametes are released into th e mantle cavity.
Fertilization may be internal or external, depending on the species. Fertilized eggs develop into larvae. The re may be one or more
larval stages. Each one is different from the adult st age. Mollusks have a unique larval form called a trochophore. It is a tiny
organism with cilia for swimming.
Ecology of Mollusks
Mollusks live in most terrestrial, freshwater, and marine habitats. However, the majorit y of species live in the ocean. They can be
found in both shallow and deep water and from tropical to polar latitudes. Mollusks are a major food sourc e for other organisms,
including humans. You may have eaten mollusks such as clams, oy sters, scallops, or mussels.
The different classes of mollusks have different ways of o btaining food.
Gastropods may be herbivores, predators, or internal parasites. The y live in both aquatic and terrestrial habitats. Marine species
live mainly in shallow coastal waters. Gastropods use their f oot to crawl slowly over rocks, reefs, or soil, looking for f ood.

11.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12255Bivalves are generally sessile filter feeders. They live in both f reshwater and marine habitats. They use their foot to attac h
themselves to rocks or reefs or to burrow into mud. Bivalve s feed on plankton and nonliving organic matter. They f ilter the food
out of the water as it flows through their mantle cavity.
Cephalopods are carnivores that live only in marine habitats. They m ay be found in the open ocean or close to shore. They are
either predators or scavengers. They generally eat other in vertebrates and fish.
KQED: Cool Critters: Dwarf Cuttlefish
What's the coolest critter in the ocean under 4 inc hes long? The Dwarf Cuttlefish! Cuttlefish are marine animals that belong to the
class Cephalopoda. Despite their name, cuttlefish are n ot fish but mollusks. Recent studies indicate that cu ttlefish are among the
most intelligent invertebrates, with one of the larg est brain-to-body size ratios of all invertebrates. Cu ttlefish have an internal shell
called the cuttlebone and eight arms and two tentacles furnished with suckers, with whi ch they secure their prey.
KQED: The Fierce Humboldt Squid
The Humboldt squid is a large, predatory invertebrate found in the waters of the Pacific Ocean. A mysterious s ea creature up to 7
feet long, with 10 arms, a sharp beak and a ravenous ap petite, packs of fierce Humboldt Squid attack nearly e verything they see,
from fish to scuba divers. Traveling in groups of 1,00 0 or more and swimming at speeds of more than 15 miles an hour, these
animals hunt and feed together, and use jet propulsion to s hoot out of the water to escape predators. Humboldt s quid live at depths
of between 600 and about 2,000 feet, coming to the sur face at night to feed. They live for approximately two years and spend much
of their short life in the ocean's oxygen-minimum z one, where very little other life exists. Because the y live at such depths, little is
known about these mysterious sea creatures. The Humbold t squid usually lives in the waters of the Humboldt C urrent, ranging
from the southern tip of South America north to Califo rnia, but in recent years, this squid has been found as far north as Alaska.
Marine biologists are working to discover why they have h eaded north from their traditional homes off South Ameri ca.
K QED
Cool Critters: Dwarf Cuttle  sh - KQED
Cool Critters: Dwarf Cuttle  sh - KQED
Watch on

11.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12255Where's the Octopus?
When marine biologist Roger Hanlon captured the first scene in this video, he started screaming. Hanlon, senior scientist at the
Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, studies camouflage in cephalopods: squi d, cuttlefish and octopuses. They are
masters of optical illusion.
Science Friday: I, Octopus
With thousands of chemically-sensitive suckers, colo r-changing skin, and a brain that literally stretches when they eat, octopuses
seem like aliens living in our oceans. In this vide o by Science Friday, Frank Grasso explains their physical adaptations and how
octopuses might process their own sensations.
K QED
The Fierce Humboldt Squid | KQED Q
The Fierce Humboldt Squid | KQED Q
Watch on
Th e N e w York Tim e s
Cuttle  sh Camou age | The New Y or
Cuttle  sh Camou age | The New Y or
Watch on

11.12.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12255Science Friday: The Unlikely Tale of a Tenacious Snail
For over 70 years, no one had seen the oblong rocksn ail. Declared extinct in 2000, the species was consider ed to be another native
Alabaman mollusk gone and forgotten. But one day in t he spring of 2011, biology grad student Nathan Whela n picked up a tiny
rock and got a big surprise.
Summary
Mollusks are invertebrates such as snails, scallops, and squids.
Mollusks have a hard outer shell. There is a layer of t issue called the mantle between the shell and the body.
Most mollusks have tentacles for feeding and sensing, and ma ny have a muscular foot.
Mollusks also have a coelom, a complete digestive system, and specialized organs for excretion.
The majority of mollusks live in the ocean.
Different classes of mollusks have different ways of obtain ing food.
Review
1. List the three major classes of mollusks.
2. Describe the basic body plan of a mollusk.
3. Describe the mantle and radula.
4. What are gills? What is their function?
Sc iF ri
I, Octopus
I, Octopus
Watch on
Sc iF ri
The Unlikely T ale of a T enacious Sna
The Unlikely T ale of a T enacious Sna
Watch on

11.12.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122555. Create a Venn diagram to show important similarities and differences among the three major classes of mollusk s.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Snail: User:Takahashi/Wikimedia
Commons, Clam: Neville Wootton;
Octopus: Silke Baron
Source: Snail:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Euhadra
_peliomphala.jpg; Clam:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/nevillewootto
n/9364282490/; Octopus:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silkebaron/43
51183836/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Snail: Flickr:macrophile; Scallop:
Dann Blackwood/US Geological Survey;
Squid: Courtesy of NOAA
Source: Snail:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Commo
n_snail.jpg; Scallop:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Placope
cten_magellanicus.jpg; Squid:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lycoteut
hidae_sp.jpg
License: Snail CC BY 2.0; Scallop Public
Domain; Squid Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation;By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=8062105
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work;
CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8062105
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4] Credit: Snail: User:Takahashi/Wikimedia
Commons, Clam: Neville Wootton;
Octopus: Silke Baron
Source: Snail:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Euhadra
_peliomphala.jpg; Clam:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/nevillewootto
n/9364282490/; Octopus:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silkebaron/43
51183836/

11.12.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12255License: Snail Public Domain; Clam CC
BY 2.0; Octopus CC BY 2.0
11.12: Mollusks is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1225611.13: Annelids
How can this be an animal?
This is a worm. And even though it is blue, this is a Chr istmas tree worm. These "Christmas tree" structures are actually specialized
mouth appendages. Each spiral is composed of feather-l ike tentacles which are heavily ciliated. These appe ndages trap prey and
transport the food straight towards the worm's mouth. And these worms are annelids.
Annelids
The phylum Annelida is made up of segmented worms such as earthworms. Segmented worms are divided into many repeating
segments. There are roughly 15,000 species of annel ids. Most belong to one of three classes. A species i n each class is pictured in
Figure below.
Classes of Annelids. The majority of annelids are polychaetes. They live on the ocean floor, so you may not be familiar with
them.
Structure and Function of Annelids
Annelids range in length from less than 1 millimeter t o over 3 meters. They never attain the large size of some mollusks. Like
mollusks, however, they have a coelom. In fact, the anne lid coelom is even larger, allowing greater developmen t of internal organs.
Annelids have other similarities with mollusks, includin g:
A closed circulatory system (like cephalopods).
An excretory system consisting of tubular nephridia.
A complete digestive system.
A brain.
Sensory organs for detecting light and other stimuli.
Gills for gas exchange (but many exchange gas through their sk in).

11.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12256The segmentation of annelids is highly adaptive. For one thing, it all ows more efficient movement. Each segment generally has its
own nerve and muscle tissues. Thus, localized muscle cont ractions can move just those segments needed for a particular motion.
Segmentation also allows an animal to have specialized segments to carry out particular functions. This all ows the whole animal to
be more efficient. Annelids have the amazing capacity t o regrow segments that break off. This is called regeneration.
Annelids have a variety of structures on the surface o f their body for movement and other functions. These vary, depending on the
species. Several of the structures are described in Figure below.
Annelid External Structures. Many annelids have bristles and other types of e xternal structures. Each structure is not
present in all species.
Annelid Reproduction
Most species of annelids can reproduce both asexually a nd sexually. However, leeches can reproduce only sexua lly. Asexual
reproduction may occur by budding or fission. Sexual repr oduction varies by species.
In some species, the same individual produces both sperm and eggs. But worms mate to exchange sperm, rather tha n selffertilizing their own eggs. Fertilized eggs are deposited i n a mucous cocoon. Offspring emerge from the cocoon loo king like
small adults. They grow to adult size without going through a larval stage.
In polychaete species, there are separate sexes. Adult wor ms go through a major transformation to develop reproduct ive organs.
This occurs in many adults at once. Then they all swim to t he surface and release their gametes in the water, where fertilization
takes place. Offspring go through a larval stage before developing into adults.
Ecology of Annelids
Annelids live in a diversity of freshwater, marine, and terrestrial habitats. They vary in what they feed on and how the y obtain their
food.
Earthworms are deposit feeders. They burrow through the ground, eating soil and extracting o rganic matter from it. Earthworm
feces, called worm casts, are very rich in plant nutrients. Earthworm burrows help aerate soil, which is also good for plants.
Polychaetes live on the ocean floor. They may be sedentary filter feeders, active predators, or scavengers. Active species c rawl
along the ocean floor in search of food.
Leeches are either predators or parasites. As predators, they capt ure and eat other invertebrates. As parasites, they feed off the
blood of vertebrate hosts. They have a tubular organ, cal led a proboscis, for feeding.
Comparison of Worms
The following table compares the three worm phyla (Table below).

11.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12256Phylum Common Name Body Cavity Segmented Digestive System Example
Platyhelminthes Flatworm No No Incomplete Tapeworm
Nematoda Roundworm Yes No Complete Heartworm
Annelida Segmented worm Yes Yes Complete Earthworm
Summary
Annelids are segmented worms such as earthworms and leeches.
Annelids have a coelom, closed circulatory system, excreto ry system, and complete digestive system. They also ha ve a brain.
Earthworms are important deposit feeders that help form a nd enrich soil.
Leeches are either predators or parasites. Parasitic leec hes feed off the blood of vertebrate hosts.
Review
1. Discuss the advantages of segmentation.
2. Define regeneration.
3. Polychaete worms have an interesting reproductive stra tegy. Describe this strategy and infer its adaptive signi ficance.

11.13.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/122564. What are deposit feeders?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Bristles: Deryk Tolman; Paired
appendages: User:C-Ack/Wikipedia;
Feeding tentacles: Courtesy of Chris
Gotschalk/National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration; Suckers:
Frank Vassen;Kerry Wixted
Source: Bristles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/derykt/57438
56993/; Paired appendages:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bearded
_Fireworm_%28Small%29.jpg; Feeding
tentacles:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Featherd
uster_300.jpg; Suckers:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/42244964@
N03/11916858975/;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/kwixted0/190
882258/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Marine worm: Laszlo Ilyes;
Earthworm: Flickr:net_efekt; Leech: Mick
Talbot;By WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This
vector image was created with Inkscape. Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...rid=8062
105;By User Necrophorus on de.Wikipedia
- Foto: de:Benutzer:Necrophorus, CC BYSA 3.0, commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...?
curid=1037045
Source: Marine worm:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/laszlophoto/5287830740/; Earthworm:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wheatfields/3
409167144/; Leech:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mickswildlife-macros/3382088779/; By
WYassineMrabetTalk ✉This vector image
was created with Inkscape. - Own work;
CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=8062105; By User Necrophorus on
de.Wikipedia - Foto:
de:Benutzer:Necrophorus; CC BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=1037045
License: CC BY 2.0

11.13.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/12256
[Figure 3]Credit: Bristles: Deryk Tolman; Paired
appendages: User:C-Ack/Wikipedia;
Feeding tentacles: Courtesy of Chris
Gotschalk/National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration; Suckers:
Frank Vassen
Source: Bristles:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/derykt/57438
56993/; Paired appendages:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bearded
_Fireworm_%28Small%29.jpg; Feeding
tentacles:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Featherd
uster_300.jpg; Suckers:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/42244964@
N03/11916858975/
License: Bristles CC BY 2.0; Paired
Appendages CC BY 2.5; Feeding tentacles
Public Domain; Suckers CC BY 2.0
11.13: Annelids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Vertebrates
12.1: Amphibian Structure and Function
12.2: Amphibian Reproduction
12.3: Amphibian Classification
12.4: Amphibian Evolution and Ecology
12.5: Reptile Structure and Function
12.6: Reptile Reproduction
12.7: Reptile Classification
12.8: Reptile Evolution
12.9: Reptile Ecology
12.10: Bird Structure and Function
12.11: Chordates
12.12: Bird Reproduction
12.13: Bird Classification
12.14: Bird Evolution
12.15: Bird Ecology
12.16: Mammal Overview
12.17: Mammal Structure and Function
12.18: Endothermy
12.19: Locomotion
12.20: Placental Mammals
12.21: Marsupials
12.22: Vertebrate Diversity
12.23: Monotremes
12.24: Mammal Ancestors
12.25: Mammal Evolution
12.26: Mammal Classification
12.27: Vertebrate Reproduction
12.28: Vertebrate Classification
12.29: Vertebrate Evolution
12.30: Fish
12.31: Fish Reproduction
12.32: Fish Classification
12.33: Fish Evolution and Ecology
This page titled 12: Vertebrates is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.

12.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1323812.1: Amphibian Structure and Function
So how did vertebrates move from the water onto land?
There had to be some major modifications. Modificati ons in how the animal moves, how the animal breathes, an d modifications in
the animals skin.
Structure and Function in Amphibians
Amphibians are vertebrates that exist in two worlds: they divide their time between freshwater and terrestrial habitats. They share
a number of features with air-breathing lungfish, but they also differ from lungfish in many ways. One way they differ is their
appendages. Modern amphibians include frogs, salamanders, and caecilians, as shown Figure below.
Examples of Living Amphibians. In what ways do these three amphibians appear t o be similar? In what ways do they
appear to be different?
Amphibians are the first true tetrapods, or vertebrates with four limbs. Amphibians have less variation in size than fish, ranging in
length from 1 centimeter (2.5 inches) to 1.5 meters (a bout 5 feet). They generally have moist skin without scales. Their skin
contains keratin, a tough, fibrous protein found in the skin, scales, feathers, hair, and nails of tetrapod vertebrates, from

12.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13238amphibians to humans. Some forms of keratin are toughe r than others. The form in amphibian skin is not ver y tough, and it allows
gases and water to pass through their skin.
Amphibian Ectothermy
Amphibians are ectothermic, so their internal body temperature is generally about the same as the temperature of t heir
environment. When it’s cold outside, their body temp erature drops, and they become very sluggish. When the outside temperature
rises, so does their body temperature, and they are much more active. What do you think might be some of the pros and cons of
ectothermy in amphibians?
Amphibian Organ Systems
All amphibians have digestive, excretory, and reproduct ive systems. All three systems share a body cavity call ed the cloaca. Wastes
enter the cloaca from the digestive and excretory sy stems, and gametes enter the cloaca from the reprod uctive system. An opening
in the cloaca allows the wastes and gametes to leave the body.
Amphibians have a relatively complex circulatory syst em with a three-chambered heart. Their nervous system is also rather
complex, allowing them to interact with each other and their environment. Amphibians have sense organs to smell and taste
chemicals. Other sense organs include eyes and ears. Of all amphibians, frogs generally have the best vision and hearing. Frogs
also have a larynx, or voice box, to make sounds.
Most amphibians breathe with gills as larvae and with lu ngs as adults. Additional oxygen is absorbed through t he skin in most
species. The skin is kept moist by mucus, which is secret ed by mucous glands. In some species, mucous glands also produce toxins,
which help protect the amphibians from predators. The go lden frog shown in Figure below is an example of a toxic amphibian.
Toxic Frog. This golden frog is only about 5 centimeters (2 inches) long, but it’s the most poisonous vertebrate on Earth.
One dose of its toxin can kill up to 20 humans!
Summary
Amphibians are ectothermic vertebrates that divide the ir time between freshwater and terrestrial habitats.
Amphibians are the first true tetrapods, or vertebrates wi th four limbs.
Amphibians breathe with gills as larvae and with lungs as ad ults. They have a three-chambered heart and relatively complex
nervous system.
Review
1. What is a tetrapod?
2. How does the temperature of the environment affect the level of activity of an a mphibian?
3. What is the cloaca? What functions does it serve in amphibians?
4. Describe the different ways that amphibians may obta in oxygen.

12.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13238Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons;Flight: Sami Sieranoja; Down:
Hans Braxmeier
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsmtnpra
irie/22849558584/in/photolist-AP8XGCdpsWAp-oT4vXF-dpt5Bb-nHTESb853uob-zjDhaY-dpsTJV-dpt36G-dpt5bfpPBMEx-oSW25z-pNuxEh-pCidrMdpsSYT-dpt3C3-dpsTuV-87wNYEpNrquE-87dh1f-dpt4CL-oSTx9u-62Zzia5mfEgV-5mfEB2-pxihxy-dpt6aU-oSX2XedpsWWi-pxjxnv-oSXoeM-dpsVZRdpt6No-dpsSUx-dpsSK2-dpt5tW-dpsWeK87a5PX-zZGrcU-APejNe-zKcx5Gz5XtpA-BjvmxN-rvpsaJ-GZ2c3w-zZHccYx3keQG-xGKasm-xX2Nab-rwByvn
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Frog: Vlastimil Koutecky;
Salamander: William Warby; Caecilian: M
Wilkinson, E Sherratt, F Starace, DJ Gower
Source: Frog:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/vlastimil_kou
tecky/9490584567/; Salamander:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wwarby/6983
047006/; Caecilian:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Adult_
Microcaecilia_dermatophaga_in_life__journal.pone.0057756.g005-top.png
License: Frog and Salamander: CC BY 2.0;
Caecillian: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3] Credit: Brian Gratwicke
Source:
n a tu ra listou tre a c h
Amphibian Behavior and Diversity
Amphibian Behavior and Diversity
Watch on

12.1.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13238http://www.flickr.com/photos/briangratwick
e/3624354133/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.1: Amphibian Structure and Function is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1323912.2: Amphibian Reproduction
What changes must occur for these tadpoles to move onto land?
These are tadpoles of the Yellow-Bellied Toad. Of course these tadpoles are born in the water. You can see the beginning of the
formation of the hind limbs.
Amphibian Reproduction and Development
Amphibians reproduce sexually with either external or internal fertilization. They attract mates in a va riety of ways. For example,
the loud croaking of frogs is their mating call. Eac h frog species has its own distinctive call that other m embers of the species
recognize as their own. Most salamanders use their sens e of smell to find a mate. The males produce a chem ical odor that attracts
females of the species.
Amphibian Eggs
Unlike other tetrapod vertebrates (reptiles, birds, a nd mammals), amphibians do not produce amniotic egg s. Therefore, they must
lay their eggs in water so they won’t dry out. Their eggs are usually covere d in a jelly-like substance, like the frog eggs shown in
Figure below. The “jelly” helps keep the eggs moist and offers some protection from predators.
Frog Eggs. Frog eggs are surrounded by “jelly.” What is its function?
Amphibians generally lay large number of eggs. Often, man y adults lay eggs in the same place at the same time. This helps to
ensure that eggs will be fertilized and at least some of the embryos will survive. Once eggs have been laid, most amphibians are
done with their parenting.
Amphibian Larvae
The majority of amphibian species go through a larv al stage that is very different from the adult form, as you can see from the frog
in Figure below. The early larval, or tadpole, stage resembles a fish. It lacks legs and has a lo ng tail, which it uses to swim. The

12.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13239tadpole also has gills to absorb oxygen from water. As the larva undergoes metamorphosis, it grows legs, loses its tail, and
develops lungs. These changes prepare it for life on land as an adult frog.
Frog Development: From Tadpole to Adult. A frog larva (tadpole) g oes through many changes by adulthood. Notice the
visible changes that occur at each stage. How do these changes prepare i t for life as an adult frog?
Summary
Amphibians reproduce sexually with either external or in ternal fertilization.
Amphibians may attract mates with calls or scents.
Amphibians do not produce amniotic eggs, so they must reprod uce in water.
Amphibian larvae go through metamorphosis to change into th e adult form.
Review
1. Describe the life cycle of frogs.
2. Describe the parental involvement of most amphibians.
Dia n a An dra de
The Life Cycle of a Frog
The Life Cycle of a Frog
Watch on

12.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132393. Define metamorphosis.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Ian Kirk
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/thekrankis/8478536
231/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
12.2: Amphibian Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324012.3: Amphibian Classification
Frog, toad, or salamander? What's the difference?
Look closely at the face of this salamander. It is stri kingly similar to that of a frog or toad. As the fir st vertebrates to evolve from
life in the sea to life on land, amphibians share a number of important evolutionary adaptations.
Classification of Amphibians
There are about 6,200 known species of living amphibians. They are placed in three different orders:
1. Frogs and toads
2. Salamanders and newts
3. Caecilians
Frogs and Toads
One feature that distinguishes frogs and toads from other amphibians is lack of a tail in adulthoo d. Frogs and toads also have much
longer back legs than other amphibians. Their back le gs are modified for jumping. Frogs can jump up to 20 t imes their own body
length. That’s the same as you jumping at least 100 f eet, or more than the length of a basketball court. Think how fast you could
move if you could travel that far on one jump!
Frogs and toads are closely related, but they differ i n several ways. Generally, frogs spend more time in water, and toads spend
more time on land. As you can see from Figure below, frogs also have smoother, moister skin than toa ds, as well as longer hind
legs.

12.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13240
Frog and Toad. Frogs (a) and toads (b) are placed in the same amphibian or der. What traits do they share?
Salamanders and Newts
Unlike frogs and toads, salamanders and newts keep their tails as adults (see Figure below). They also have a long body with
short legs, and all their legs are about the same leng th. This is because they are adapted for walking and s wimming rather than
jumping. An unusual characteristic of salamanders is thei r ability to regenerate, or regrow, legs that have been lost to predators.
Salamander and Newt. Salamanders and newts can walk or swim. Salamander on a leaf (left), newt swimming in the water
(right).
Caecilians
Caecilians are most closely related to salamanders. As you can see from Figure below, they have a long, worm-like body without
legs. Caecilians evolved from a tetrapod ancestor, but they lost their legs during the course of their evolution.
Swimming Caecilian. Caecilians are the only amphibians without legs.

12.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13240Summary
There are about 6,200 known species of living amphibians. They are classified into three orders: frogs and toads, salamanders
and newts, and caecilians.
Frogs and toads are adapted for jumping. Salamanders and newt s may walk or swim. Caecilians live in the water or soil and are
the only amphibians without legs.
Review
1. Distinguish frogs from toads.
2. What is an unusual characteristic of salamanders.
Ca liforn ia Aca de m y of Scie n ce s
7,000 Kinds of Amphibians | Californ
7,000 Kinds of Amphibians | Californ
Watch on

12.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132403. Compare and contrast the three orders of living amphi bians.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: (a) Brian Gratwicke; (b) Courtesy
of W. Battaglin/US Geological Survey
Source: (a)
https://www.flickr.com/photos/briangratwic
ke/5005613104/; (b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bufo_a
mericanus1.jpg
License: (A) CC BY 2.0; (B) Public
Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Brian Gratwicke
Source: Salamander:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/briangratwick
e/3470286309; Newt:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/briangratwick
e/5677221366/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Cliff
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aquatic
_Caecilian_%28Typhlonectes_natans%29.j
pg
License: CC BY 2.0
12.3: Amphibian Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324112.4: Amphibian Evolution and Ecology
Why were amphibians so successful?
They might not have had many predators on land 365 million years ago. Given plenty of land and food, the y had the resources to
thrive. This is a frog fossil from the Eocene epoch. The vertebral column and four limbs are easily identifiabl e.
Evolution of Amphibians
Fossil evidence shows that amphibians evolved about 36 5 million years ago from a lobe-finned lungfish ance stor. As the earliest
land vertebrates, they were highly successful. Some o f them were much larger than today’s amphibians. For more than 100 million
years, amphibians remained the dominant land vertebra tes. Then some of them evolved into reptiles. Once rep tiles appeared, with
their amniotic eggs, they replaced amphibians as the do minant land vertebrates.
Ecology of Amphibians
Amphibians can be found in freshwater and moist terrestrial habitats throughout the world. The only continent wit hout amphibians
is Antarctica. Amphibians are especially numerous in temp erate lakes and ponds and in tropical rainforests.
Amphibians as Prey and Predators
Amphibians are an important food source for animals such as birds, snakes, raccoons, and fish. Amphibians are also important
predators. As larvae, they feed mainly on small aquatic animals such as water insects. They may also feed on algae. As adults,
amphibians are completely carnivorous. They may catch and eat worms, snails, and insects, as t he frog in Figure below is doing.
Unlike other amphibians, caecilians are burrowers. They use their head to dig in the soil, and they fe ed on earthworms and other
annelids. Caecilians can be found in moist soil near rive rs and streams in tropical regions.

12.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13241
Frog Predator. A frog eating its insect prey.
The Threat of Amphibian Extinction
Currently, almost one third of all amphibian species fac e the threat of extinction. The reasons include habitat loss, pollution, climate
change, and the introduction of non-native species. Most of these problems are the result of human actions.
Amphibians have permeable skin that easily absorbs s ubstances from the environment. This may explain why t hey seem to be
especially sensitive to pollution. Monitoring the hea lth and survival of amphibians may help people detect pollution early, before
other organisms are affected.
Summary
Amphibians evolved about 365 million years ago from a lo be-finned fish ancestor.
As the earliest land vertebrates, amphibians were highly su ccessful for more than 100 million years until reptiles to ok over as
the dominant land vertebrates.
Amphibians are found throughout the world except in Antar ctica and Greenland.
Amphibians are important prey for animals such as birds, snakes, and raccoons. They are important pr edators of insects, worms,
and other invertebrates.
Up to one third of all amphibian species are at risk of e xtinction because of human actions, such as habitat destru ction, climate
change, and pollution.
Review
1. Explain why amphibians were able to become the dominant land vertebrates for millions of years.
2. What was the ancestor of amphibians?
TED-Ed
Why are frogs disappearing? - Kerry M
Why are frogs disappearing? - Kerry M
Watch on

12.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132413. Why were amphibians replaced by reptiles as the dominant land vertebrate?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright wizdata, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
12.4: Amphibian Evolution and Ecology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324212.5: Reptile Structure and Function
Why did amphibians evolve into reptiles?
It probably has to do with food and land. Having to l ive close to water limits the resources available to a species. Having the ability
to live away from water allowed reptiles to search for additi onal food.
Structure and Function in Reptiles
Reptiles are a class of tetrapod vertebrates that produce amn iotic eggs. They include crocodiles, alligators, liz ards, snakes, and
turtles. The reptile class is one of the largest classe s of vertebrates. It consists of all amniotes except birds and mammals. Reptiles
have several adaptations for living on dry land that amphibians lack. For example, as shown in Figure below, the skin of most
reptiles is covered with scales. The scales, which are made of very tough keratin, protect reptiles from injury and prevent them
from losing water.
Crocodile Scales. These crocodiles are covered with tough, waterproof scales.
Reptile Respiration
The scales of reptiles prevent them from absorbing o xygen through their skin, as amphibians can. Instead, reptiles breathe air only
through their lungs. However, their lungs are more effic ient than the lungs of amphibians, with more surface area for gas exchange.
This is another important reptile adaptation for life o n land.
Reptiles have various ways of moving air into and out of their lungs. Lizards and snakes use muscles of the chest wall for this
purpose. These are the same muscles used for running, so lizards have to hold their breath when they run. Crocodiles and alligators

12.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13242have a large sheet of muscle below the lungs, called a diaphragm, that controls their breathing. This is a structure t hat is also found
in mammals.
Ectothermy in Reptiles
Like amphibians, reptiles are ectotherms with a slow metabolic rate. Their metabolism doesn’t g enerate enough energy to keep
their body temperature stable. Instead, reptiles regulate their body temper ature through their behavior. For example, the crocodi le in
Figure below is soaking up heat from the environment by ba sking in the sun. Because of their ectothermy, reptile s can get by with
as little as one tenth the food needed by endotherm s such as mammals. Some species of reptiles can go sever al weeks between
meals.
Heat Transfer to an Ectothermic Reptile. This crocodile is being war med by the environment in three ways. Heat is
radiating directly from the sun to the animal’s back. Heat is also bei ng conducted to the animal from the rocks it rests on.
In addition, convection currents are carrying warm air from surrounding ro cks to the animal’s body.
Other Reptile Structures
Like amphibians, most reptiles have a heart with three chambers, although crocodiles and alligators have a four-chambered heart
like birds and mammals. The reptile brain is also si milar in size to the amphibian brain, taking into acc ount overall body size.
However, the parts of the reptile brain that control the se nses and learned behavior are larger than in amphibians.
Most reptiles have good eyesight and a keen sense of smell. Snakes smell scents in the air using their fork ed tongue (see Figure
below). This helps them locate prey. Some snakes have h eat-sensing organs on their head that help them find endothermic prey,
such as small mammals and birds.
Snake “Smelling” the Air. A snake flicks its tongue in and out to capture scent molecules in the air.

12.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13242Summary
Reptiles are a class of ectothermic, tetrapod vertebrates.
Reptiles have several adaptations for living on dry land, su ch as tough keratin scales and efficient lungs for breathing air.
Reptiles have a three-chambered heart and relatively well- developed brain.
Review
1. Describe reptile scales and the functions they serve.
2. What is a diaphragm? What does it do?
3. Describe two senses that snakes may use to locate prey.
N a tu re Ch a n n e l7
Reptiles (Discovery Channel)
Reptiles (Discovery Channel)
Watch on

12.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132424. Pretend you are a reptile such as a lizard. Explain how y ou might stay warm on a cold day.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Karunakar
Rayker;User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons;Flight: Sami Sieranoja; Down:
Hans Braxmeier;Linda Cronin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsmtnpra
irie/22849558584/in/photolist-AP8XGCdpsWAp-oT4vXF-dpt5Bb-nHTESb853uob-zjDhaY-dpsTJV-dpt36G-dpt5bfpPBMEx-oSW25z-pNuxEh-pCidrMdpsSYT-dpt3C3-dpsTuV-87wNYEpNrquE-87dh1f-dpt4CL-oSTx9u-62Zzia5mfEgV-5mfEB2-pxihxy-dpt6aU-oSX2XedpsWWi-pxjxnv-oSXoeM-dpsVZRdpt6No-dpsSUx-dpsSK2-dpt5tW-dpsWeK87a5PX-zZGrcU-APejNe-zKcx5Gz5XtpA-BjvmxN-rvpsaJ-GZ2c3w-zZHccYx3keQG-xGKasm-xX2Nab-rwByvn;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oldflints/4721
680188/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright OlegD,
2014;Leigh Bedford
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Karunakar Rayker
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/krayker/2120
341021/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Linda Cronin
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/oldflints/4721
680188/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.5: Reptile Structure and Function is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324312.6: Reptile Reproduction
What are the advantages of a water-tight egg?
Obviously, water-tight eggs can be laid anywhere. They d o not have to be kept constantly moist. There is no danger of the
developing fetus dehydrating. Shown above is a turtle hatchin g.
Reptile Reproduction
Most reptiles reproduce sexually and have internal fer tilization. Males have one or two penises that pass sperm from their cloaca to
the cloaca of a female. Fertilization occurs within th e cloaca, and fertilized eggs leave the female’s bo dy through the opening in the
cloaca. In a minority of species, the eggs are retained inside the female’s body until they hatch. Then the offspring leave the
mother’s body through the cloaca opening.
Amniotic Eggs
Unlike amphibians, reptiles produce amniotic eggs (see Figure below). The shell, membranes, and other structures of an amniotic
egg protect and nourish the embryo. They keep the em bryo moist and safe while it grows and develops. They als o provide it with a
rich, fatty food source (the yolk).
The amniotic egg is an important adaptation in fully terrestrial ver tebrates. It first evolved in reptiles. The shells of reptile
eggs are either hard or leathery.
Reptile Young
Unlike amphibians, reptiles do not have a larval sta ge. Instead, newly hatched reptiles look like smaller v ersions of the adults. They
are able to move about on their own, but they are vul nerable to predators. Even so, most reptile parents provide no care to their
hatchlings. In fact, most reptiles don’t even take ca re of their eggs. For example, female sea turtles lay their eggs on a sandy beach
and then return to the ocean. The only exceptions ar e female crocodiles and alligators. They may defend th eir nest from predators
and help the hatchlings reach the water. If the young remain in the area, the mother may contin ue to protect them for up to a year.

12.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13243Summary
Most reptiles reproduce sexually and have internal ferti lization.
Reptile eggs are amniotic, so they can be laid on land inst ead of in water.
Reptiles do not have a larval stage, and their hatchlin gs are relatively mature.
Reptile parents provide little if any care to their you ng.
Review
1. Outline the structure and function of an amniotic egg.
2. Describe young reptiles.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
12.6: Reptile Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324412.7: Reptile Classification
With so many possible colors, how would a chameleon be classified?
Chameleons are a distinctive and highly specialized t ype of lizard. They are distinguished partly by their p arrot-like feet, their separately mobile and stereoscopic e yes, their very long, highly
modified, and rapidly extrudable tongues, crests or horns on their distinctively shaped heads, and the ability of some to change color. But there are approximately 160 species of chameleons. So how
are they classified?
Classification of Reptiles
There are more than 8,200 living species of reptiles, with the majori ty being snakes or lizards. They are commonly placed in four different o rders. The four orders are described in Table below.

12.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13244O
r
d
e
rCharacteristics Example
C
r
o
c
o
d
i
l
i
a
c
r
o
c
o
d
i
l
e
s
a
l
l
i
g
a
t
o
r
s
c
a
i
m
a
n
s
g
h
a
r
i
a
l
sThey have four sprawling legs that can be used to gallop; they replace their teeth throughout life; they have strong jaws and a powerful bite; they have a more advanced
brain and greater intelligence than other reptiles; they have a f our-chambered heart.caiman
S
p
h
e
n
o
d
o
n
t
i
a
t
u
a
t
a
r
a
sThey are the least specialized of all living reptiles; their brain i s very similar to the amphibian brain; they have a three-chambe red heart, but it is more primitive than the
heart of other reptiles.tuatara
S
qLizards: most have four legs for running or climbing, and they can also swim; many change color when threatened; they have a three-chambere d heart. lizard

12.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13244O
r
d
e
rCharacteristics Example
u
a
m
a
t
a
l
i
z
a
r
d
s
s
n
a
k
e
sSnakes: they do not have legs, although they evolved f rom a tetrapod ancestor; they have a very flexible ja w for swallowing large prey whole; some inject venom into
their prey through fangs; they have a three-chambered heart.
T
e
s
t
u
d
i
n
e
s
t
u
r
t
l
e
s
t
o
r
t
o
i
s
e
s
t
e
r
r
a
p
i
n
sThey have four legs for walking; they have a hard shell covering most of th eir body; they have a three-chambered heart.terrapin

12.7.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13244Summary
There are more than 8,200 living species of reptiles, and they are p laced in four orders: Crocodilia, which includes crocodiles and all igators; Sphenodontia, or tuataras; Squamata, which includes
lizards and snakes; and Testudines, such as turtles and tortoises.
F re e Sch ool
All About Reptiles: What Makes it a Reptile? - Free Schoo
All About Reptiles: What Makes it a Reptile? - Free Schoo
Watch on

12.7.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13244Review
1. Compare and contrast crocodilians with other orders of reptiles.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: William Warby
Source: http://www.flickr.com/photos/wwarby/3895166303/
License: CC BY 4.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Miguel Vieira
Source: www.flickr.com/photos/miguelvieira/6245132006/
License: CC BY 4.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Knutschie
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Tuatara.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Brian Gratwicke
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phelsuma_quadriocellata;
_Peacock_day_gecko.jpg
License: CC BY 4.0

12.7.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13244
[Figure 5]Credit: Ltshears
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diamondback_Terrapin.jpg
License: Public Domain
12.7: Reptile Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324512.8: Reptile Evolution
So what exactly is a dinosaur?
Dinosaurs were not lizards. Rather, they were a separate group of reptiles with a distinct upright posture no t found in lizards.
Dinosaurs can be described as large, powerful reptiles. And many were very big. But dinosaurs were more than that. They were a
varied group of animals with over 1,000 non-avian species.
Evolution of Reptiles
The earliest amniotes evolved about 350 million yea rs ago. They resembled small lizards, but they were n ot yet reptiles. Their
amniotic eggs allowed them to move away from bodies of water and become larger. They soon became the most importan t land
vertebrates.
Synapsids and Sauropsids
By about 320 million years ago, early amniotes had div erged into two groups, called synapsids and sauropsids. Synapsids were
amniotes that eventually gave rise to mammals. Sauropsids were amniotes that evolved into reptiles, dinosaurs, an d birds. The two
groups of amniotes differed in their skulls. The ear liest known reptile, pictured in Figure below, dates back about 315 million
years.
Earliest Reptile:
Hylonomus
. The earliest known reptile is given the genus name
Hylonomus
. It was about 20 to 30 centimeters (8 to 12 inches) long, lived i n swamps, and ate insects and other small invertebrates.
At first, synapsids were more successful than sauropsids. They became the most common vertebrates on land. However, d uring the
Permian mass extinction 245 million years ago, most synapsids went extinct. Their niches were taken over by s auropsids, which
had been relatively unimportant until then. This is calle d the Triassic takeover.

12.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13245Rise and Fall of the Dinosaurs
By the middle of the Triassic about 225 million yea rs ago, sauropsids had evolved into dinosaurs. Dinosaurs became increasingly
important throughout the rest of the Mesozoic Era, a s they radiated to fill most terrestrial niches. This is why the Mesozoic Era is
called the Age of the Dinosaurs. During the next mass extinction, which occurred at th e end of the Mesozoic Era, all of the
dinosaurs went extinct. Many other reptiles survived, however, and they eventually gave rise to modern reptiles.
Evolution of Modern Reptile Orders
Figure below shows a traditional phylogenetic tree of living reptiles. Based on this tree, some of the earliest reptiles to diverge
were ancestors of turtles. The first turtle-like reptil es are thought to have evolved about 250 million ye ars ago. Ancestral
crocodilians evolved at least 220 million years ago. Tuataras may have diverged from squamates (snakes and lizards) not long after
that. Finally, lizards and snakes went their separate ways about 150 million years ago.
Traditional Reptile Phylogenetic Tree. This phylogenetic tree is based on physical traits of living and fossil reptiles. Trees
based on DNA comparisons may differ from the traditional tree and from e ach other, depending on the DNA sequences
used. Reptile evolution is currently an area of intense research and consta nt revision.
Summary
The earliest amniotes appeared about 350 million yea rs ago, and the earliest reptiles evolved from a saurops ida ancestor by
about 315 million years ago.
Dinosaurs evolved around 225 million years ago and domi nated animal life on land until 65 million years ago, wh en they all
went extinct.
Other reptiles survived and evolved into the classes of rept iles that exist today.
Review
1. Identify amniotes called synapsids and sauropsids.
2. Give a brief overview of reptile evolution.

12.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132453. Explain why reptiles were able to replace amphibians as th e dominant land vertebrates.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Duncan Wright
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Great_F
rigatebird_chick_begging.JPG
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Nobu Tamura
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hylono
mus_BW.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
12.8: Reptile Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324612.9: Reptile Ecology
Where do reptiles live?
Anywhere and everywhere. Shown here is a sea turtle. Obviously, this reptile lives in the ocean. But reptiles can al so live in the
desert, jungle, forest, or even your backyard. Reptiles l ive in practically every type of habitat.
Ecology of Reptiles
Today, reptiles live in a wide range of habitats. The y can be found on every continent except Antarctica. Many turtles live in the
ocean, while others live in freshwater or on land. Liza rds are all terrestrial, but their habitats may range from deserts to rainf orests,
and from underground burrows to the tops of trees. Most sn akes are terrestrial and live in a wide range of habitats, but some snak es
are aquatic. Crocodilians live in and around swamps or bodies of fre shwater or salt water.
Reptile Diets
What reptiles eat is also very diverse, but the major ity of reptiles are carnivores. Large reptiles such as crocodilians are the top
predators in their ecosystems, preying on birds, fish, de er, turtles, and sometimes domestic livestock. Their powerful jaws can crush
bones and even turtle shells. Smaller reptiles—includ ing tuataras, snakes, and many lizards—are also impor tant predators, preying
on insects, frogs, birds, and small mammals such as mice.
Most terrestrial turtles are herbivores. They graze on grasses, leaves, flowers, and fruits. Mari ne turtles and some species of lizards
are omnivores, feeding on plants as well as insects, worms, a mphibians, and small fish.
Reptiles at Risk
Many species of reptiles, especially marine reptiles, are at risk of extinction. Some are threatened by habitat loss. For example,
many beaches where turtles lay their eggs have been t aken over and developed by people. Other marine rept iles have been overhunted by humans. Marine turtles and their eggs are still ea ten in some countries despite being protected species.
Some reptiles are preyed upon by non-native species i ntroduced by humans. For example, marine iguanas on th e Galápagos Islands
are threatened by dogs and cats that people have bro ught to the islands. The iguanas are slow and tame and have no adaptations to
these new predators.
Summary
Reptiles can be found on every continent except Antarcti ca.
Reptiles may live in terrestrial, freshwater, or marine habit ats.
Most reptiles are carnivores, and large reptiles are the to p predators in their ecosystems.
Many species of reptiles, especially marine reptiles, are a t risk of extinction.

12.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13246Review
1. Describe the habitats of most lizards.
2. What do reptiles eat? Describe the diet of a crocodilia n.
3. Why are some reptiles at risk?
Explore More
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
1. What makes a good meal for giant anaconda?
2. How do anaconda sense their prey?
3. Describe how anaconda hunt and kill their prey.
4. Why is a good meal important for anaconda?
5. How long may a pregnant female anaconda go between meals?
6. How long might it take an anaconda to ingest and digest a lar ge meal?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
12.9: Reptile Ecology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
N a tion a l Ge ogra ph ic
Anaconda Stalks World' s Largest Rod
Anaconda Stalks World' s Largest Rod
Watch on

12.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324712.10: Bird Structure and Function
Why is flight so important to birds?
One of the defining traits of many birds is the abili ty to fly. Obviously, flight is a major evolutionary advantage. But together with
the ability to fly must come a number of structural m odifications. What do you think these might be?
Structure and Function in Birds
Birds are endothermic tetrapod vertebrates. They are biped al, which means they walk on two legs. Birds also lay am niotic eggs
with hard, calcium carbonate shells. Although birds are t he most recent class of vertebrates to evolve, they are now the most
numerous vertebrates on Earth. Why have birds been so successful? What traits allowed them to increase and diversify so rapidly?
Birds can vary considerably in size, as you can see from the world’s smallest and largest birds, pictured in Figure below. The tiny
bee hummingbird is just 5 centimeters (2 inches) lon g, whereas the ostrich towers over people at a height o f 2.7 meters (9 feet). All
modern birds have wings, feathers, and beaks. They hav e a number of other unique traits as well, most of whi ch are adaptations for
flight. Flight is used by birds as a means of locomotion in order to find food and mates and to avoid predators. Alth ough not all
modern birds can fly, they all evolved from ancestors that could.
Range of Body Size in Birds. The bee hummingbird is the smallest bird. T he ostrich is the largest.

12.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13247Wings and Feathers
Wings are an obvious adaptation for flight. They are actu ally modified front legs. Birds move their wings using muscles in the
chest. These muscles are quite large, making up as much as 35 percent of a bird’s body weight.
Feathers help birds fly and also provide insulation and serve other purposes. Birds actually have two basic types of feathers: flight
feathers and down feathers. Both are shown in Figure below. Flight feathers are long, stiff and waterproof. They provide lift and
air resistance without adding weight. Down feathers are short and fluffy. They trap air next to a bird’s skin for insulation.
Types of Bird Feathers. These two types of bird feathers have differe nt uses. How is each feather’s structure related to its
function?
Organ Systems Adapted for Flight
Birds need a light-weight body in order to stay aloft. Even so, flying is hard work, and flight muscles need a constant supply of
oxygen- and nutrient-rich blood. The organ systems of bir ds are adapted to meet these needs.
Birds have light-weight bones that are filled with air. T hey also lack a jaw, which in many vertebrates is a dense, heavy bone
with many teeth. Instead, birds have a light-weight keratin beak without teeth.
Birds have air sacs that store inhaled air and push it into the lungs like bellows. This keeps the lungs constantly filled with
oxygenated air. The lungs also contain millions of ti ny passages that create a very large surface area for gas exchange with the
blood (see Figure below).
Birds have a relatively large, four-chambered heart. The heart beats rapidly to keep oxygenated blood flowing to muscles and
other tissues. Hummingbirds have the fastest heart rate at u p to 1,200 beats per minute. That’s almost 20 times faster th an the
human resting heart rate!
Birds have a sac-like structure called a crop to store and moisten food that is waiting to be digested. They also have an organ
called a gizzard that contains swallowed stones. The stones make up for the l ack of teeth by grinding food, which can then be
digested more quickly. Both structures make it easier for the digestive system to produce a steady supply of nutrients fro m food.
Organ System Adaptations for Flight. The intricate passageways in a bird’s lung are adapted for efficient gas exchange.
Find the crop and gizzard in the digestive tract diagram. What are their functions? Bird Lung (left), Bird Digestive Tract
(right)

12.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13247Nervous System and Sense Organs
Birds have a large brain relative to the size of th eir body. Not surprisingly, the part of the brain th at controls flight is the most
developed part. The large brain size of birds is also reflected by their high level of intelligence and c omplex behavior. In fact, birds
such as crows and ravens may be more intelligent tha n many mammals. They are smart enough to use object s such as twigs for
tools. They also demonstrate planning and cooperation. Most birds have a poor sense of smell, but they make up for it with their
excellent sense of sight. Predatory birds have especi ally good eyesight. Hawks, for example, have vision that is eight times sharper
than human vision.
Summary
Birds are endothermic tetrapod vertebrates. They are b ipedal and have wings and feathers.
Bird organ systems are adapted for flight. For example, th ey have light-weight air-filled bones and a large four-c hambered
heart.
Birds also have relatively large brains and a high level of intelligence.
Review
1. Why do birds fly?
2. List two functions of feathers in birds.
3. Describe the bird crop and gizzard. What are their fu nctions?
4. How do birds keep their lungs filled with oxygenated air?
th e pe n du lu m swin g
How Do Birds Fly?
How Do Birds Fly?
Watch on

12.10.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132475. Give an example of bird behavior that shows their relative ly great intelligence.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons;Mike Weston
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikeweston/3
31214460/
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hummingbird: Dhiren Patel;
Ostrich: Marie
Hale;User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons;Flight: Sami Sieranoja; Down:
Hans Braxmeier
Source: (a)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dhiren2/2574
614930/; (b)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/15016964@
N02/5917699497/;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsmtnpra
irie/22849558584/in/photolist-AP8XGCdpsWAp-oT4vXF-dpt5Bb-nHTESb853uob-zjDhaY-dpsTJV-dpt36G-dpt5bfpPBMEx-oSW25z-pNuxEh-pCidrMdpsSYT-dpt3C3-dpsTuV-87wNYEpNrquE-87dh1f-dpt4CL-oSTx9u-62Zzia5mfEgV-5mfEB2-pxihxy-dpt6aU-oSX2XedpsWWi-pxjxnv-oSXoeM-dpsVZRdpt6No-dpsSUx-dpsSK2-dpt5tW-dpsWeK87a5PX-zZGrcU-APejNe-zKcx5Gz5XtpA-BjvmxN-rvpsaJ-GZ2c3w-zZHccYx3keQG-xGKasm-xX2Nab-rwByvn
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flight: Sami Sieranoja; Down:
Hans Braxmeier
Source: Flight:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/n0rthw1nd/44
18311590/; Down: pixabay.com/en/swanfeather-spring-swan-slightly-16314/
License: Flight: CC BY 2.0; Down: Public
Domain
[Figure 4] Credit: Zachary Wilson and Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal
(LadyofHats);User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;

12.10.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13247commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
12.10: Bird Structure and Function is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/140912.11: Chordates
What's a chordate?
Most chordates are animals with backbones. These range from small fish to giant whales, from playful dogs to ferocious cats. Not
nearly as diverse as the invertebrates. But chordates do have many amazing species. The white tiger (Panthera tigris) is a chordate.
The tiger is also from the class Mammalia, order Carni vora, and family Felidae, meaning it is a meat-eating ca t.
Introduction to Chordates
The phylum Chordata consists of both invertebrate a nd vertebrate chordates. It is a large and diverse phylum. It includes some
60,000 species. Chordates range in length from about a centimeter to over 30 meters (100 feet). They li ve in marine, freshwater,
terrestrial, and aerial habitats. They can be found from the equ ator to the poles. Several examples of chordates are p ictured in
Figure below.
Diversity of Chordates. These six species illustrate the diversity o f the phylum Chordata.
Characteristics of Chordates
Chordates have three embryonic cell layers. They al so have a segmented body with a coelom and bilateral symmetry. Chordates
have a complete digestive system and a closed circul atory system. Their nervous system is centralized. There are four additional
traits that are unique to chordates. These four traits, sh own in Figure below, define the chordate phylum.
1. Post-anal tail: The tail is opposite the head and extends past the anu s.
2. Dorsal hollow nerve cord: The nerve cord runs along the top, or dorsal, side of the animal. (In non chordate animals, the nerve
cord is solid and runs along the bottom).
3. Notochord: The notochord lies between the dorsal nerve cord a nd the digestive tract. It provides stiffness to counte rbalance the
pull of muscles.
4. Pharyngeal slits: Pharyngeal slits are located in the pharynx. The pharynx is the tube that joins the mouth to the digestive and
respiratory tracts.
Body Plan of a Typical Chordate. The body plan of a chordate includes a po st-anal tail, notochord, dorsal hollow nerve
cord, and pharyngeal slits.

12.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1409In some chordates, all four traits persist throughou t life and serve important functions. However, in many chordates, including
humans, all four traits are present only during the emb ryonic stage. After that, some of the traits disappea r or develop into other
organs. For example, in humans, pharyngeal slits are prese nt in embryos and later develop into the middle ear.
Classification of Chordates
Living species of chordates are classified into thr ee major subphyla: Vertebrata, Urochordata, and Ceph alochordata. Vertebrates
are all chordates that have a backbone. The other two su bphyla are invertebrate chordates that lack a backbone.
Summary
Chordates include vertebrates and invertebrates that have a notochord.
Chordates also have a post-anal tail, dorsal hollow ner ve cord, and pharyngeal slits.
Vertebrate chordates have a backbone.
Review
1. What is a vertebrate?
2. Identify the four defining traits of chordates.
7a ctive stu dio
P HYLUM – CHORDA T A
P HYLUM – CHORDA T A
Watch on

12.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14093. Adult humans lack some of the defining traits of chorda tes. Why are humans still classified in the chordate phy lum?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Tunicate: Chika Watanabe;
Rhinoceros: Brian Snelson; Kangaroo:
Subhash Chandra; Shark: Terry Goss;
Cormorant: Linda Tanner; Whale: Courtesy
of US National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Source: Tunicate:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/chikawatanab
e/61157859/; Rhinoceros:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/exfordy/2961
323775/; Kangaroo:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ysc/21797981
00/; Shark:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:White_s
hark.jpg; Cormorant:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/goingslo/230
6021399/in/photostream/; Whale:
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mam
mals/cetaceans/bluewhale.htm
License: Tunicate, Rhinocerous, Kangaroo,
Shark, Cormorant: CC BY 2.0; Whale:
Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 12.11: Chordates is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324812.12: Bird Reproduction
Is this pair of birds actually a “couple”?
Yes. Birds do actually pair up each mating season, if not for life. And the male better be prepared to treat his female properly. There
is actually an elaborate process in which the female choo ses her mate.
Bird Reproduction
Reproduction in birds may be quite complicated and lengthy. Birds reproduce sexually and have separate se xes and internal
fertilization, so males and females must mate for fert ilization to occur. Mating is generally preceded by courtship. In most species,
parents also take care of their eggs and hatchlings.
Courtship and Mating
Courtship is behavior that is intended to attract a mate. It may involve singing specific courtship songs or put ting on some type of
visual display. For example, a bird may spread out and display its tail feathers or do a ritualized matin g “dance.” Typically, males
perform the courtship behavior, and females choose a ma te from among competing males.
During mating, a male bird presses his cloaca against his mate’s cloaca and passes sperm from his cloaca to hers. After
fertilization, eggs pass out of the female’s body, exitin g through the opening in the cloaca.
Nesting and Incubation
Eggs are usually laid in a nest. The nest may be lit tle more than a small depression in the ground, or it may be very elaborate, like
the weaver bird nest in Figure below. Eggs that are laid on the ground may be camo uflaged to look like their surroundings (also
shown in Figure below). Otherwise, eggs are usually white or pastel colors suc h as pale blue or pink.

12.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13248
Variation in Bird Nests. A weaver bird uses grasses to weave an elabo rate nest (left). The eggs of a ground-nesting gull are
camouflaged to blend in with the nesting materials (right).
After birds lay their eggs, they generally keep the egg s warm with their body heat while the embryos inside cont inue to develop.
This is called incubation, or brooding. In most species, parents stay together for at least t he length of the breeding season. In some
species, they stay together for life. By staying toget her, the males as well as females can incubate the egg s and later care for the
hatchlings. Birds are the only nonhuman vertebrates with this level of male parental involvement.
Hatchlings
Nest of a marsh warbler (
Acrocephalus palustris
) with baby birds
Ground-nesting birds, such as ducks and chickens, have h atchlings that are able to run around and feed them selves almost as soon
as they break through the eggshell. Being on the gr ound makes them vulnerable to predators, so they need to be relatively mature
when they hatch in order to escape. In contrast, bir ds that nest off the ground—in trees, bushes, or build ings—have hatchlings that
are naked and helpless. The parents must protect and feed the immature offspring for weeks or even months. However, this gives
the offspring more time to learn from the parents before they leave the nest and go out on their own.
Parental Care
In birds, 90% to 95% of species are monogamous, meaning the male and female remain together for b reeding for a few years or
until one mate dies. Birds of all types, from parrots to eagles and falcons, are monogamous. Usually, the parents take turns

12.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13248incubating the eggs. Birds usually incubate their eg gs after the last one has been laid. In polygamous species, where there is more
than one mate, one parent does all of the incubating. Th e wild turkey is an example of a polygamous bird.
The length and type of parental care varies widely a mongst different species of birds. At one extreme, i n a group of birds called the
megapodes (which are chicken-like birds), parental c are ends at hatching. In this case, the newly-hatched chick digs itself out of the
nest mound without parental help and can take care o f itself right away. These birds are called precocial. Other precocial birds
include the domestic chicken and many species of du cks and geese. At the other extreme, many seabirds ca re for their young for
extended periods of time. For example, the chicks of t he Great Frigatebird receive intensive parental care for six months, or until
they are ready to fly, and then take an additional 1 4 months of being fed by the parents (Figure below). These birds are the
opposite of precocial birds and are called altricial.
In most animals, male parental care is rare. But it is very common in birds. Often both parents share tasks such as defen se of
territory and nest site, incubation, and the feeding o f chicks. Since birds often take great care of their young, some birds have
evolved a behavior called brood parasitism. This happens when a bird leaves her eggs in another bird’s nest. The host bird often
accepts and raises the parasite bird's eggs.
Great Frigatebird adults are known to care for their young for up to 20 mo nths after hatching, the longest in a bird species.
Here, a young bird is begging for food.
Summary
Birds reproduce sexually and have internal fertilization.
Mating is generally preceded by courtship.
Birds' amniotic eggs have hard shells and are laid in a nes t. The eggs are usually incubated until they hatch.
Most species have a relatively long period of parental ca re.
Ale x Iva n ov
Astounding Mating Dance Birds of P a
Astounding Mating Dance Birds of P a
Watch on

12.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13248Review
1. What is courtship? Give an example.
2. Contrast hatchling maturity in birds that are ground-n esting and those that nest off the ground.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Duncan Wright
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Great_F
rigatebird_chick_begging.JPG
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Weaver nest: JM Garg; Gull eggs:
Matt Poole/US Fish and Wildlife
Service;Weaver nest:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fi...W_IMG
_0657.jpg; Gull eggs:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsno...t/11
837318023/
Source: Weaver nest:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Baya_W
eaver_%28Ploceus_philippinus%29_Male_making_nest_W_IMG_0657.jpg;
Gull eggs:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsnorthea
st/11837318023/
License: Weaver Nest: CC BY 3.0; Gull
eggs: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Vishnevskiy
Vasily, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 4]Credit: Duncan Wright
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Great_F
rigatebird_chick_begging.JPG
License: Public Domain
12.12: Bird Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1324912.13: Bird Classification
Raptor vs. landfowl. Any obvious differences?
Of course there are. That is like comparing a turkey to an owl. And there are also flightless birds, birds that live near water, and parrots. With almost 10,000 species of birds, there are bound to be
significant differences.
Classification of Birds
There are about 10,000 living species of birds. Almost all of them can fl y, but there are several exceptions.
Flightless Birds
Some birds have lost the ability to fly during the course of their evolution. Several flightless birds are shown in Figure below. They include the ostrich, kiwi, rhea, cassowary, and moa. All of these
birds have long legs and are adapted for running. The pe nguins shown in the figure are also flightless birds, but they have a very different body shape. That’s because they are adapted for swimming
rather than running.
Flightless Birds. Flightless birds that are adapted for running include the ostrich, kiwi, rhea, c assowary, and moa. Penguins are flightless birds adapted for swimming.
Flying Birds
Birds that are able to fly are divided into 29 orders th at differ in their physical traits and behaviors. Table below describes seven of the most common orders. As shown in the table, the majority of
flying birds are perching birds, like the honeyeater desc ribed in the last row of the table. The order of perching birds has more species than all the other bird orders combine d. In fact, this order of
birds is the largest single order of land vertebrates.

12.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249O
r
d
e
rDescription Example
L
a
n
d
f
o
w
l
t
u
r
k
e
y
s
c
h
i
c
k
e
n
s
p
h
e
a
s
a
n
t
sThey are large in size; they spend most of their time on the ground; they usually have a thick neck and short, rounded wings; their flig ht tends to be brief and close to
the ground.turkey
W
a
t
e
r
f
o
w
l
d
u
c
k
s
g
e
e
s
e
s
w
a
n
sThey are large in size; they spend most of their time on the water surface; they have webbed feet and are good swimmers; most are strong flye rs.ducks
S
h
o
r
e
b
i
r
d
sThey range from small to large; most live near the water, and some are sea birds; they have webbed feet and are good swimmers; mos t are strong flyers. puffin

12.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249O
r
d
e
rDescription Example
p
u
f
f
i
n
s
g
u
l
l
s
p
l
o
v
e
r
s
D
i
u
r
n
a
l
R
a
p
t
o
r
s
h
a
w
k
s
f
a
l
c
o
n
s
e
a
g
l
e
sThey range from small to large; they are active during the day an d sleep during the night; they have a sharp, hooked beak and stro ng legs with clawed feet; they hunt by
sight and have excellent vision.hawk
N
o
c
t
u
r
n
a
l
R
a
p
t
o
rThey range from small to large; they are active during the night and sleep during the day; they have a sharp, hooked beak and stron g legs with clawed feet; they have
large, forward-facing eyes; they have excellent hearing and can hu nt with their sense of hearing alone.burrowing owl

12.13.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249O
r
d
e
rDescription Example
s
b
u
r
r
o
w
i
n
g
o
w
l
s
b
a
r
n
o
w
l
s
h
o
r
n
e
d
o
w
l
s
P
a
r
r
o
t
s
c
o
c
k
a
t
o
o
s
p
a
r
r
o
t
s
p
a
r
a
k
e
e
t
sThey range from small to large; they are found in tropical region s; they have a strong, curved bill; they stand upright on strong legs with c lawed feet; many are brightly
colored; they are very intelligent.cockatoo
P
eThey are small in size; they perch above the ground in trees and on bui ldings and wires; they have four toes for grasping a perch; many are songbi rds. honeyeater

12.13.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249O
r
d
e
rDescription Example
r
c
h
i
n
g
B
i
r
d
s
h
o
n
e
y
e
a
t
e
r
s
s
p
a
r
r
o
w
s
c
r
o
w
s
Summary
There are about 10,000 living species of birds, almost all of which can f ly.
Flying birds are divided into 29 orders. The most common orders i nclude landfowl, waterfowl, shorebirds, diurnal and nocturnal raptors, p arrots, and perching birds.
Review
1. Name and describe flightless birds.
2. Compare and contrast nocturnal and diurnal raptors.
3. Give examples of landfowl and waterfowl.

12.13.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132494. Describe parrots.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia Commons
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brains-fr.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Greater Rhea: Ron Knight; Double Wattled Cassowary:
Michael Bentley; New Zealand moas: John Megahan; Masai
ostrich: Christiaan Kooyman; Brown Kiwi: Maungatautari
Ecological Island Trust; Penguin: Christopher Michel
Source: Greater Rhea:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/sussexbirder/8077636147/; Double
Wattled Cassowary:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/donhomer/5521522226/; New
Zealand moas:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Giant_Haasts_eagle_attacking_
New_Zealand_moa.jpg; Masai ostrich:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Masai_ostrich.jpg; Brown
Kiwi: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TeTuatahianui.jpg;
Penguin: http://www.flickr.com/photos/cmichel67/11866023003 /
License: Greater Rhea: CC BY 2.0; Duoble Wattled Cassowary:
CC BY 2.0; New Zeland moas: CC BY 2.5; Masai Ostrich: Public
Domain; Brown Kiwi: Public Domain; Penguin: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC

12.13.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC

12.13.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13249
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC
12.13: Bird Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325012.14: Bird Evolution
Did birds really evolve from dinosaurs?
One is an ostrich, the other is a mononykus dinosaur. T he structural relationship is obvious. Mononykus mov ed about on two legs,
was very nimble, and could run at high speeds, something that would have been useful in the open desert plai ns where they lived. It
had a small skull, and its teeth were small and pointe d, suggesting that it ate insects and small animals, such as lizards and
mammals.
Evolution of Birds
Birds are thought to have evolved from a group of b ipedal dinosaurs called theropods. The ancestor of birds was probably similar
to the theropod called Deinonychus, which is represented by the sketch in Figure below. Fossils of Deinonychus were first
identified in the 1960s. This was an extremely important discovery. It finally convinced most scientists that birds had descended
from dinosaurs, which had been debated for almost a century.
Extinct Bird Relative: Deinonychus. Deinonychus shared many traits with bi rds. What similarities with birds to you see?
What was Deinonychus?
Deinonychus is the genus name of an extinct dinosaur that is cons idered to be one of the closest non-bird relatives of modern birds.
It lived about 110 million years ago in what is now Nort h America. Deinonychus was a predatory carnivore with many bird-like
features. For example, it had feathers and wings. It also had strong legs with clawed feet, similar to modern rap tors. Its respiratory,
circulatory, and digestive systems were similar to thos e of birds as well. The location of fossilized eggs ne ar Deinonychus fossils
suggests that it may have brooded its eggs. This would mean that it was endothermic. (Can you explain why?) On the other hand,
Deinonychus retained a number of reptile-like traits, such as jaws with teeth, and hands with claws at the tips of its wings.

12.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13250Evolution of Flight
Scientists have long speculated about the evolution of flight in birds. They wonder how and why birds evolve d wings from a pair of
front limbs. Several hypotheses have been suggested. Her e are just two:
1. Wings evolved in a bird ancestor that leapt into the air to avoid predators or to capture prey. Therefore, win gs are modified arms
that helped the animal leap higher.
2. Wings evolved in a bird ancestor that lived in trees. Thu s, wings are modified arms that helped the animal glide from branch to
branch.
Scientists still don’t know how or why wings and flight e volved, but they continue to search for answers. In add ition to fossils, they
are studying living vertebrates such as bats that also evo lved adaptations for flight.
Summary
Birds are thought to have evolved from theropod dinosaurs around 150 million years ago.
Bird ancestors may have been similar to the extinct therop od Deinonychus, whose fossils convinced most scientists that birds
evolved from dinosaurs.
Scientists still don’t know how or why wings and flight evol ved, but they continue to search for answers.
Review
1. What was the bird ancestor?
2. What was Deinonychus? What bird-like traits were evident in Deinonychus?
An th on y
Bird Evolution and Adaptations
Bird Evolution and Adaptations
Watch on

12.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132503. What are the two ideas associated with the evolution of fligh t?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Nobu Tamura and
User:Dinoguy2/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deinony
chus_BW-2.png
License: CC BY 2.5
12.14: Bird Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325112.15: Bird Ecology
Where do birds live?
Practically anywhere they want. From some of the coldest regions on the planet to the warmest. Look at these p enguins and where
they live. Would you want to live there?
Ecology of Birds
Birds live and breed in most terrestrial habitats on all seven continents, from the Arctic t o Antarctica. Because they are
endothermic, birds can live in a wider range of clima tes than reptiles or amphibians, although the greatest diversity of birds occurs
in tropical regions. Birds are important members of e very ecosystem in which they live, occupying a wide ran ge of ecological
positions.
Bird Diets
Some birds are generalists. A generalist is an organism that can eat many different types of food. Other birds are highly specialized
in their food needs and can eat just one type of food.
Raptors such as hawks and owls are carnivores. They hunt and eat mammals and other birds. Vultures are scavengers. They eat
the remains of dead animals, such as roadkill. Aquatic birds generally eat fish o r water plants. Perching birds may eat insects, fruit,
honey, or nectar. Many fruit-eating birds play a key role in se ed dispersal, and some nectar-feeding birds are importa nt pollinators.
Bird beaks are generally adapted for the food they e at. For example, the sharp, hooked beak of a raptor i s well suited for killing and
tearing apart prey. The long beak of the hummingbir d in Figure below co-evolved with the tube-shaped flowers from whic h it sips
nectar.
Hummingbird Sipping Nectar. A hummingbird gets nectar from flowers and pollinate s the flowers in return. What type of
relationship exists between the bird and the flowering plant?

12.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13251Birds at Risk
Hundreds of species of birds have gone extinct as a r esult of human actions. A well-known example is the p assenger pigeon. It was
once the most common bird in North America, but overhun ting and habitat destruction led to its extinction i n the 1800s. Habitat
destruction and use of the pesticide DDT explain the r ecent extinction of the dusky seaside sparrow. This n ative Florida bird was
declared extinct in 1990.
Today, some 1,200 species of birds are threatened with e xtinction by human actions. Humans need to take step s to protect this
precious and important natural resource. What can you do to help?
The Golden Eagle
Although not as famous as its bald cousin, Golden Eagl es are much easier to find in Northern California - one of the largest
breeding populations for Golden Eagles. The largest of the raptors, Golden Eagles weigh typically between 8 and 12 pounds, and
their wing span is around 6 to 7 feet. These eagles dive towa rds earth to catch prey, and can reach speeds of up to 20 0 mph!
The Great Horned Owl
Owls are amazing creatures. They have many adaptations that allow them to thrive in their environments. The ir claws are enormous
and powerful, they have excellent hearing, and fantasti c vision in low light. And the Great Horned Owl can fly al most silently due
to "fringes" on their feathers that help to break up the sound of air passing over their wings.
K QED
Cool Critters: The Golden Eagle - KQE
Cool Critters: The Golden Eagle - KQE
Watch on
K QED
Cool Critters: Great Horned Owls | KQ
Cool Critters: Great Horned Owls | KQ
Watch on

12.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13251Summary
Birds live and breed in most terrestrial habitats on all seven continents. They occupy a wide ra nge of ecological positions.
Raptors are carnivores; aquatic birds eat fish or water plants; and perching birds may eat insects, fruit, honey, or nectar.
Some birds are pollinators that co-evolved with plants.
Human actions have caused the extinction of hundreds of sp ecies of birds, and some 1,200 species are threatened with
extinction today.
Review
1. What is a generalist?
2. Why did the hummingbird pictured sipping nectar above evo lve such a long, pointed beak?
3. What bird would eat insects, fruit, honey, or nectar?
4. Draw a sketch of a hypothetical bird that preys on small mammals. The bird must exhibit traits that suit it for it s predatory role.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mike Baird
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikebaird/72
36676284/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.15: Bird Ecology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325212.16: Mammal Overview
One of these is not a mammal. Which one?
Mammals are a class of endothermic vertebrates. They ha ve four limbs and produce amniotic eggs. Examples o f mammals include
bats, whales, mice, and humans. Clearly, mammals are a very diverse group. Nonetheless, they share many traits that set them apart
from other vertebrates.
Characteristics of Mammals
Two characteristics are used to define the mammal class. They are mammary glands and body hair (or fur).
1. Female mammals have mammary glands. The glands produce milk after the birth of offspring. Milk is a nutritious fluid. It
contains disease-fighting molecules as well as all the nu trients a baby mammal needs. Producing milk for offspring is c alled
lactation.
2. Mammals have hair or fur. It insulates the body to help cons erve body heat. It can also be used for sensing and comm unicating.
For example, cats use their whiskers to sense their surr oundings. They also raise their fur to look larger and mo re threatening
(see Figure below).
Cat Communicating a Warning. By raising its fur, this cat is “saying ” that it’s big and dangerous. This might discourage a
predator from attacking.
Most mammals share several other traits. The traits in th e following list are typical of, but not necessarily unique t o, mammals.
Th ki f l i d i h l d Th l d d h l fl id h h l l h b d

12.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13252The skin of many mammals is covered with sweat glands. The g lands produce sweat, the salty fluid that helps cool the bo dy.Mammalian lungs have millions of tiny air sacs called alveoli. They provide a very large surface area for gas exchang e.
The heart of a mammal consists of four chambers. This ma kes it more efficient and powerful for delivering oxygen ated blood to
tissues.
The brain of a mammal is relatively large and has a coverin g called the neocortex. This structure plays an important role in
many complex brain functions.
The mammalian middle ear has three tiny bones that carr y sound vibrations from the outer to inner ear. The bone s give
mammals exceptionally good hearing. In other vertebrate s, the three bones are part of the jaw and not involved in he aring.
Mammals have four different types of teeth. The teeth o f other vertebrates, in contrast, are all alike.
Dolphins are mammals that have adapted to swimming and reproducing in water.
Summary
Mammals are a class of endothermic vertebrates.
Mammals have four limbs and produce amniotic eggs.
The mammal class is defined by the presence of mammary gl ands and hair (or fur).
Other traits of mammals include sweat glands in their skin, alveoli in their lungs, a four-chambered heart, and a brai n covering
called the neocortex.

12.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13252Review
1. List five traits that are shared by all mammals, including the two traits that are used to define the mammal class.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia
Commons;Flight: Sami Sieranoja; Down:
Hans Braxmeier
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brainsfr.svg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsmtnpra
irie/22849558584/in/photolist-AP8XGCdpsWAp-oT4vXF-dpt5Bb-nHTESb853uob-zjDhaY-dpsTJV-dpt36G-dpt5bfpPBMEx-oSW25z-pNuxEh-pCidrMdpsSYT-dpt3C3-dpsTuV-87wNYEpNrquE-87dh1f-dpt4CL-oSTx9u-62Zzia5mfEgV-5mfEB2-pxihxy-dpt6aU-oSX2XedpsWWi-pxjxnv-oSXoeM-dpsVZRdpt6No-dpsSUx-dpsSK2-dpt5tW-dpsWeK87a5PX-zZGrcU-APejNe-zKcx5Gz5XtpA-BjvmxN-rvpsaJ-GZ2c3w-zZHccYx3keQG-xGKasm-xX2Nab-rwByvn
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Luis Miguel Bugallo Sánchez
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gato_en
ervado_pola_presencia_dun_can.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:talkrhubarb
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/talkrhubarb/2
23175100/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.16: Mammal Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325312.17: Mammal Structure and Function
Does this mammal breathe like all other mammals?
Essentially, yes it does. A whale is a mammal, so it has a pair of lungs, not gills like fish. As shown here, whales take oxygen out of the air, not out of water.
Eating and Digesting Food
Maintaining a high metabolic rate takes a lot of ener gy. The energy must come from food. Therefore, mammals nee d a nutritious and plentiful diet. The diets of mammals are diverse. Except for leaf
litter and wood, almost any kind of organic matter may be eaten by ma mmals.
Some mammals are strictly herbivores or strictly carnivores. However, most mammals will eat other foods if necessary. Some mammals are omnivores. They routinely eat a variety of both plant and
animal foods. Most mammals also feed on a variety of o ther species. The few exceptions include koalas, which feed only on eucalyptus plants, and giant pandas, which feed only on bamboo. Types of
mammalian diets and examples of mammals that eat them are given in Table below. How would you classify your own diet?

12.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13253T
y
p
e
o
f
D
i
e
tFoods Eaten Examples of Mammals with this Type of Diet
h
e
r
b
i
v
o
r
o
u
s
d
i
e
t
p
l
a
n
t
sleaves, grasses, shoots, stems, roots, tubers, seeds, nuts, fruits, bark, conifer nee dles, flowersrabbit, mouse, sea cow, horse, goat, elephant, zebra, giraffe, d eer, elk, hippopotamus,
kangaroo, monkey
c
a
r
n
i
v
o
r
o
u
s
d
i
e
t
a
n
i
m
a
l
sother mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, mollusks, worms, insectsaardvark, anteater, whale, hyena, dog, jackal, dolphin, wolf, we asel, seal, walrus, cat,
otter, mole
o
m
n
i
v
o
r
o
u
s
d
i
e
t
p
l
a
n
t
s
aany of the foods eaten in herbivorous and carnivorous diets bear, badger, mongoose, fox, raccoon, human, rat, chimpanzee, pig

12.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13253T
y
p
e
o
f
D
i
e
tFoods Eaten Examples of Mammals with this Type of Diet
n
d
a
n
i
m
a
l
s
Different diets require different types of digestive syst ems. Mammals that eat a carnivorous diet generally have a relatively simple digestive system. Their food consists m ainly of proteins and fats that
are easily and quickly digested. Herbivorous mammals, on the other hand, tend to have a more complicated digesti ve system. Complex plant carbohydrates such as cellulose a re more difficult to
digest. Some herbivores have more than one stomach. The stomachs st ore and slowly digest plant foods.
Mammalian teeth are also important for digestion. Mamma ls have four different types of teeth. The teeth of other vertebrates, in contrast, are all alike. The four types of teeth are specialized for
different feeding functions, as shown in Figure below. Together, the four types of teeth can cut, tear, and grind foo d. This makes food easier and quicker to digest.
Mammalian Teeth (Human). With their different types of teeth, mammals can eat a wide range o f foods.
Lungs and Heart of Mammals
Keeping the rate of metabolism high takes a constant a nd plentiful supply of oxygen. That’s because cellular respiration, which produces energy, requires oxygen. The lungs and hea rt of mammals
are adapted to meet their oxygen needs.
The lungs of mammals are unique in having alveoli. These are tiny, sac-like structures. Each alveolus is surro unded by a network of very small blood vessels (see Figure below). Because there are
millions of alveoli in each lung, they greatly increase the surface area for gas exchange between the lungs and bl oodstream. Human lungs, for example, contain about 300 mil lion alveoli. They give
the lungs a total surface area for gas exchange of up to 90 square meters (9 68 square feet). That’s about as much surface area as one side of a volleyb all court!
Alveoli of Mammalian Lungs. Clusters of alveoli resemble tiny bunches of grapes. They a re surrounded by many blood vessels for gas exchange.
Mammals breathe with the help of a diaphragm. This is the large muscle that extends across the bottom of the chest below the lungs. When the diaphragm contract s, it increases the volume of the
chest. This decreases pressure on the lungs and allows air to flow in. W hen the diaphragm relaxes, it decreases the volume of the chest. Th is increases pressure on the lungs and forces air out.
The four-chambered mammalian heart can pump blood in t wo different directions. The right side of the heart pumps blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen. The left side o f the heart pumps blood
containing oxygen to the rest of the body. Because of the dual pum ping action of the heart, all of the blood going to body cells is rich in oxygen.
The Mammalian Brain
Of all vertebrates, mammals have the biggest and most co mplex brain for their body size (see Figure below). The front part of the brain, called the cerebrum, is especially large in mammals. This
part of the brain controls functions such as memory and learning.

12.17.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13253
Vertebrate Brains. Vertebrate brains come in a range of sizes. Even the brains of mammals show a lot of variation in size. The area of the neocortex is greatest in humans.
The brains of all mammals have a unique layer of nerve cells covering the cerebrum. This layer is called the neocortex (the pink region of the brains in Figure above). The neocortex plays an
important role in many complex brain functions. In some mammals, such as rats, the neocortex is relatively smooth. In other mammals, especially humans, the neocortex has man y folds. The folds
increase the surface area of the neocortex. The larger this area is, t he greater the mental abilities of an animal.
Intelligence of Mammals
Mammals are very intelligent. Of all vertebrates, they are t he animals that are most capable of learning. Mammalian offspring are fed and taken care of by their parents for a relatively long time. This
gives them plenty of time to learn from their parents. By learning, they can benefit from the experiences of their elders. The ability to learn is the main reason that the large mammalian brain evolved.
It’s also the primary reason for the success of mammals.
Summary
Mammals may be herbivores, carnivores, or omnivores. They have four ty pes of teeth, so they can eat a wide range of foods.
Traits of the heart and lungs keep the cells of mammals well supplied with oxygen and nutrients.
Mammals have a relatively large brain and a high level of intell igence.
Review
1. Identify three mammals that are herbivores, three that are carnivores, a nd three that are omnivores.
2. What are alveoli? What is their function?
3. Explain how mammalian teeth differ from the teeth of other verte brates.
F re e Sch ool
All About Mammals for Children: Cats, Bears, Elepha nts,
All About Mammals for Children: Cats, Bears, Elepha nts,
Watch on

12.17.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132534. Compare and contrast the mammalian brain with the brains of other vert ebrates. How is the brain of mammals related to their ability to learn?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia Commons;Flight: Sami
Sieranoja; Down: Hans Braxmeier
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brains-fr.svg;
https://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsmtnprairie/22849558584/in/p h
otolist-AP8XGC-dpsWAp-oT4vXF-dpt5Bb-nHTESb-853uobzjDhaY-dpsTJV-dpt36G-dpt5bf-pPBMEx-oSW25z-pNuxEhpCidrM-dpsSYT-dpt3C3-dpsTuV-87wNYE-pNrquE-87dh1fdpt4CL-oSTx9u-62Zzia-5mfEgV-5mfEB2-pxihxy-dpt6aUoSX2Xe-dpsWWi-pxjxnv-oSXoeM-dpsVZR-dpt6No-dpsSUxdpsSK2-dpt5tW-dpsWeK-87a5PX-zZGrcU-APejNe-zKcx5Gz5XtpA-BjvmxN-rvpsaJ-GZ2c3w-zZHccY-x3keQG-xGKasmxX2Nab-rwByvn
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5]Credit: 3D rendered mouth: Image copyright Zoltan Pataki, 2014;
Composite created by CK-12 Foundation
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: 3D rendered mouth: Used under license of
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 6]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from Shutterstock.com
[Figure 7]Credit: User:Bourrichon/Wikimedia Commons
Source: commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brains-fr.svg
License: Public Domain
12.17: Mammal Structure and Function is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325412.18: Endothermy
Is this bear cold?
Not really. Like all mammals, polar bears maintain a stabl e internal temperature. They do not need to stay warm by lying in the sun.
This allows them to live in cold climates.
Endothermy in Mammals
Many structures and functions in mammals are related to endothermy. Mammals can generate and conserve heat when it’s col d
outside. They can also lose heat when they become overh eated. How do mammals control their body temperature in these ways?
How Mammals Stay Warm
Mammals generate heat mainly by keeping their metabo lic rate high. The cells of mammals have many more mitochondria than
the cells of other animals. The extra mitochondria generate enough energy to keep the rate of metabolism high. Mammals can also
generate little bursts of heat by shivering. Shivering occurs when many muscles contract a little bit all a t once. Each muscle that
contracts produces a small amount of heat.
Conserving heat is also important, especially in smal l mammals. A small body has a relatively large surface area compared to its
overall size. Because heat is lost from the surface o f the body, small mammals lose a greater proportion o f their body heat than
large mammals. Mammals conserve body heat with their hair or fur. It traps a layer of warm air next to the skin. Most mammals
can make their hair stand up from the skin, so it b ecomes an even better insulator. Even humans automati cally contract these
muscles when they are cold, causing goosebumps (see Figure below). Mammals also have a layer of fat under the sk in to help
insulate the body. This fatty layer is not found in other ve rtebrates.
Mammals raise their hair with tiny muscles in the skin. Even humans automati cally contract these muscles when they are
cold. They cause “goosebumps,” as shown here.

12.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13254How Mammals Stay Cool
One way mammals lose excess heat is by increasing blood flow to the skin. This warms the skin so heat can be gi ven off to the
environment. That’s why you may get flushed, or red in the face, when you exercise on a hot day. You are li kely to sweat as well.
Sweating also reduces body heat. Sweat wets the skin, and when it evaporates, it cools the body. Evaporation uses e nergy, and the
energy comes from body heat. Animals with fur, such as dogs, use panting instead of sweating to lose body heat (see Figure
below). Evaporation of water from the tongue and other moist surfaces of the mouth and th roat uses heat and helps cool the body.
Panting Dog. This dog is overheated. It is losing excess body heat by pa nting.
Summary
Mammals have several ways of generating and conserving hea t, such as a high metabolic rate and hair to trap heat.
Mammals also have several ways to stay cool, including sweat ing or panting.
Review
1. Describe how mammals stay warm and conserve heat?
2. What is the function of sweating? Explain your answer.
3. How do animals with fur lose excess heat?

12.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13254Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animal_
mitochondrion_diagram_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Flickr:Evert
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Goose_b
umps.jpg
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Jan-Erik Finnberg
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/wheany/2690
791608/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.18: Endothermy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Se e ke r
Warm-Blooded vs. Cold-Blooded: Wh
Warm-Blooded vs. Cold-Blooded: Wh
Watch on

12.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325512.19: Locomotion
What allows this cheetah to be so fast?
Do you think it has something to do with the placemen t of the limbs? Well, it does. Look closely at the ch eetah's body. Can you
describe why it is so fast?
Social Living in Mammals
Many mammals live in social groups. Social living evolved be cause it is adaptive. Consider these two examples:
1. Herbivores such as zebras and elephants live in herds. Adults in the herd surround and protect the young, who are m ost
vulnerable to predators.
2. Lions live in social groups called prides. Adult females in the pride hunt cooperatively, which is more efficient than hunting
alone. Then they share the food with the rest of the pride. For their part, adult males defend the pride’s territ ory from other
predators.
Locomotion in Mammals
Mammals are noted for the many ways they can move abou t. Generally, their limbs are very mobile. Often, they can be rotated.
Many mammals are also known for their speed. The fastest land animal is a predatory mammal. Can you guess what it is? Racing
at speeds of up to 112 kilometers (70 miles) per hou r, the cheetah wins hands down. In addition, the limbs of mammals let them
hold their body up above the ground. That’s because the limbs are attached beneath the body, rather th an at the sides as in reptiles
(see Figure below).

12.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13255
Limb Positions in Reptiles and Mammals. The sprawling limbs of a repti le keep it low to the ground. A mammal has a more
upright stance.
Mammals may have limbs that are specialized for a par ticular way of moving. They may be specialized for r unning, jumping,
climbing, flying, or swimming. Mammals with these differe nt modes of locomotion are pictured in Figure below.
Mammalian Locomotion. Mammals have many different modes of loc omotion.
The deer in the Figure above is specialized for running. Why? It has long legs and hard hooves. Can you see why the other animals
in the figure are specialized for their particular habitats? Notice how arboreal, or tree-living animals, have a variety of different
specializations for moving in trees. For example, they may have:
A prehensile, or grasping, tail. This is used for climbing and hanging from branches.
Very long arms for swinging from branch to branch. This wa y of moving is called brachiation.
Sticky pads on their fingers. The pads help them cling to t ree trunks and branches.

12.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13255Summary
Mammals live in social groups, which are an adaptive benef icial trait.
Mammals have many ways of moving about and may move very qu ickly.
Review
1. Name five types of movement found in mammals?
2. A certain mammal has very long forelimbs. What does t hat suggest about where the animal lives and how it moves?
3. What type of movement is found in the above question.
th e bra in scoop
The Origin of Mammal Movement: H
The Origin of Mammal Movement: H
Watch on

12.19.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132554. What is the purpose of a prehensile tail?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Lizard: Benny Trapp; Meerkat:
Ken Banks
Source: Lizard:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benny_
Trapp_Podarcis_milensis.jpg; Meerkat:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Suricata
_suricatta_-Durrell_Wildlife_Park; _Jersey
; _UK-8.jpg
License: Lizard: CC BY 3.0; Meerkat: CC
BY 2.0
[Figure 3] Credit: Deer: Scott Bauer/Agricultural
Research Society; Kangaroo: Chris Samuel;
Spider monkey: Gustav Mützel; Gibbon:
Troy B Thompson; Tarsier: Roberto Verzo;
Bat: F Chanut; Dolphin: US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Source: Deer:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deer_ru
nning.jpg; Kangaroo:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/chrissamuel/5
366854530/; Spider monkey:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Klamme
raffe-drawing.jpg; Gibbon:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Brachiating_Gi
bbon_%28Some_rights_reserved%29.jpg;
Tarsier:
www.flickr.com/photos/verzo/1009489040/
in/photostream/; Bat:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bat_flyi
ng_at_night.png; Dolphin:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spottedd
olphin1.jpg
License: (Deer) Public Domain;
(Kangaroo) CC BY 2.0; (Spider monkey)

12.19.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13255Public Domain; (Gibbon) CC BY 3.0;
(Tarsier) CC BY 2.0; (Bat) CC BY 2.5;
(Dolphin) Public Domain
12.19: Locomotion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325612.20: Placental Mammals
Is this kangaroo a placental mammal?
You know that female kangaroos have a pouch for the final development of their babies. So, no, kangaroos ar e not placental
mammals. What is a placental mammal?
Therian Mammals
Like other female vertebrates, all female mammals ha ve ovaries. These are the organs that produce eggs (see Figure below).
Therian mammals also have two additional female reproductive struct ures that are not found in other vertebrates. They ar e the
uterus and vagina.
The uterus (plural, uteri) is a pouch-like, muscular organ. The e mbryo or fetus develops inside the uterus. Muscular
contractions of the uterus push the offspring out during b irth.
The vagina is a tubular passageway through which the embryo or fet us leaves the mother’s body during birth. The vagina is
also where the male deposits sperm during mating.
Female Reproductive System of a Therian Mammal (Human). Therian mamm als are
viviparous
, giving birth to an embryo or infant rather than laying eggs. The fe male reproductive system of all therian mammals is
similar to that of humans.

12.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13256Therian mammals are divided into two groups: placenta l mammals and marsupial mammals. Each group has a somewha t different
reproductive strategy.
Placental Mammals
Placental mammals are therian mammals in which a placenta develops dur ing pregnancy. The placenta sustains the fetus while i t
grows inside the mother’s uterus. Placental mammals giv e birth to relatively large and mature infants. Most m ammals are placental
mammals.
The Placenta
The placenta is a spongy structure. It consists of membranes and blood vessels from both mother and embryo (see Figure below).
The placenta passes oxygen, nutrients, and other usefu l substances from the mother to the fetus. It also pas ses carbon dioxide and
other wastes from the fetus to the mother. The placenta lets blood from the fetus and mother exchange substan ces without actually
mixing. Thus, it protects the fetus from being attacked by t he mother’s immune system as a “foreign parasite.”
Placenta of a Placental Mammal (Human). The placenta allows the excha nge of gases, nutrients, and other substances
between the fetus and mother.
Pros and Cons of Placental Reproduction
The placenta permits a long period of fetal growth i n the uterus. As a result, the fetus can become large and mature before birth.
This increases its chances of surviving.
On the other hand, supporting a growing fetus is very draining and risky for the mother. The mother has to eat more food to nourish
the fetus. She also becomes heavier and less mobile as the fetus gets larger. As a result, she may be less ab le to escape from
predators. Because the fetus is inside her, she can ’t abandon it to save her own life if she is pursued or if food is scarce. Giving
birth to a large infant is also risky. It may even result in the mother’s death.

12.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13256Summary
Therian mammals are viviparous. They give birth to an em bryo or infant rather than laying eggs.
The female reproductive system of a therian mammal inclu des a uterus and a vagina.
There are two groups of therian mammals: placental mamma ls and marsupials.
Placental mammals give birth to a relatively large and mat ure fetus. This is possible because they have a placenta to nourish the
fetus and protect it from the mother’s immune system. This a llows for a long period of growth and development before b irth.
Because the offspring of placental mammals is relatively l arge and mature at birth, it has a good chance of survivin g. However,
carrying and giving birth to a large fetus is risky for th e mother. It also requires her to eat more food.
Review
1. What are therian mammals? What structures are found in th ese mammals that are absent in other vertebrates?
2. What are the functions of the uterus and vagina in theria n mammals?
3. What is the placenta?
4. Describe how the placenta functions?
L e a rn oH u b - Cla ss 11, 12
Biology Evolution part 9 (Adaptive Ra
Biology Evolution part 9 (Adaptive Ra
Watch on

12.20.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132565. Placental mammals greatly outnumber the other two groups of mammals. Infer why placental mammals have been so
successful.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Charlie Marshall
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/100915417@N07/9
667430048/
License: CC BY 4.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, User:Mysid/Wikimedia
Commons, modified by Raymond
Chou/CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Scheme
_female_reproductive_system-en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Convit, 2014;By
Nobu Tamura
http://paleoexhibit.blogspot.com/
http://spinops.blogspot.com/
http://www.palaeocritti.com - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=19
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com; By
Nobu Tamura http://spinops.blogspot.com/
http://www.palaeocritti.com - Own
workhttp://paleoexhibit.blogspot.com/; CC
BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=19459893
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
12.20: Placental Mammals is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325712.21: Marsupials
Is it really a bear?
The koala. Or sometimes called the koala bear. The ko ala is a marsupial native to Australia. And it is very d ifferent to any other
bear.
Marsupials
Marsupials have a different way of reproducing that re duces the mother’s risks. A marsupial is a therian mammal in which the
embryo is born at an early, immature stage. The emb ryo completes its development outside the mother’s body in a pouch on her
belly. Only a minority of therian mammals are marsupi als. They live mainly in Australia. Examples of marsupi als are pictured in
Figure below.
Marsupials. Marsupials include the kangaroo, koala, and opossum.
The Marsupial Embryo
The marsupial embryo is nourished inside the uterus wit h food from a yolk sac instead of through a placent a. The yolk sac stores
enough food for the short period of time the embryo remains in the uterus. After the embryo is born, it m oves into the mother’s
pouch, where it clings to a nipple. It remains inside the pouch for several months while it continues to grow and develop. Even after

12.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13257the offspring is big enough to leave the pouch, it m ay often return to the pouch for warmth and nourishm ent. Eventually, the
offspring is mature enough to remain outside the pouch on i ts own.
Pros and Cons of Marsupial Development
In marsupials, the short period of development within the mother’s uterus reduces the risk of her immune sys tem attacking the
embryo. In addition, the marsupial mother doesn’t hav e to eat extra food or carry a large fetus inside h er. The risks of giving birth
to a large fetus are also avoided. Another pro is that the mother can expel the embryo from her pouch if she is pursued by a predator
or if food is scarce. On the other hand, a newborn mars upial is tiny and fragile. Therefore, it may be less likely to survive than a
newborn placental mammal.
The North American Marsupial: The Opossum
Most people think of opossums as scary creatures. Is th is because they look kind of funny, walk kind of funny, have beady eyes and
sharp teeth, and can emit a very foul odor? Maybe. B ut what is so different about opossums is that they a re the only marsupial in
North America.
These opossums, however, can be beneficial to humans. The y use their sharp teeth to crush bone – which means tha t they are good
getting rid of unwanted rodents in your neighborhood. They have excellent immune systems and they emit th at terrible odor for
protection.
Summary
Marsupials give birth to a tiny, immature embryo. The e mbryo then continues to grow and develop in a pouch on th e mother’s
belly.
Marsupial development is less risky for the mother. However, the embryo is fragile, so it may be less likely to survive than the
fetus of a placental mammal.
SciSh ow K ids
Why Do Kangaroos Have P ouches? |
Why Do Kangaroos Have P ouches? |
Watch on
K QED
Cool Critters: Opossums - KQED QUE
Cool Critters: Opossums - KQED QUE
Watch on

12.21.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13257Review
1. What is a marsupial?
2. Where does a marsupial embryo develop? How is it nourished?
3. Name two advantages of marsupial development?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Kangaroo: Subhash Chandra;
Koala: Brian Gratwicke; Opossum: Jessie
Hirsch;By Nobu Tamura
http://paleoexhibit.blogspot.com/
http://spinops.blogspot.com/
http://www.palaeocritti.com - Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=19
Source: Kangaroo:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ysc/21797981
00/; Koala:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/briangratwick
e/5337546645/; Opossum:
www.flickr.com/photos/jhirsch/2484508614
/; By Nobu Tamura
http://spinops.blogspot.com/
http://www.palaeocritti.com - Own
workhttp://paleoexhibit.blogspot.com/; CC
BY-SA 3.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=19459893
License: CC BY 2.0
12.21: Marsupials is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/141012.22: Vertebrate Diversity
What traits set this animal apart from invertebrate chordates?
This small colorful fish is a vertebrate - it has a backbone. And vertebral columns first evolved in fis h. Think about the invertebrate
chordates. They live in the ocean, so it only makes se nse that fish would be the first true vertebrates. Ver tebrates are a subphylum
of the phylum Chordata. Like all chordates, vertebrat es have a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyn geal slits, and a postanal tail. What other characteristics do vertebrates hav e?
Characteristics of Vertebrates
The main distinguishing feature of vertebrates is th eir vertebral column, or backbone (see Figure below). The backbone runs
from the head to the tail along the dorsal (top) si de of the body. The vertebral column is the core of t he endoskeleton. It allows a
vertebrate to hold its shape. It also houses and pro tects the spinal (nerve) cord that passes through it. The vertebral column is made
up of repeating units called vertebrae (singular, vertebra). In many species, there are shock-absorbing discs b etween the vertebrae
to cushion them during movement.
Human Vertebral Column and Vertebrae. The human vertebral column consist s of 33 vertebrae. Two vertebrae are shown
here enlarged.
Vertebrate Endoskeleton
Another distinguishing feature of vertebrates is an e ndoskeleton made of bone or cartilage. Cartilage is a tough tissue that contains
a protein called collagen. Bone is a hard tissue that consists of a collagen matrix, or framework, filled in with minerals such as
calcium. Bone is less flexible than cartilage but str onger. An endoskeleton made of bone rather than carti lage allows animals to
grow larger and heavier. Bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs.
As shown in Figure below, the vertebrate endoskeleton includes a cranium, or skull, to enclose and protect the brain. It also
generally includes two pairs of limbs. Limb girdles (such as the human hips and shoulders) connect the l imbs to the rest of the
endoskeleton.

12.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1410
Vertebrate Endoskeletons. The vertebrate endoskeleton includes a ve rtebral column, cranium, limbs, and limb girdles. Can
you find these parts in each endoskeleton shown here?
Other Vertebrate Traits
There are several additional traits found in virtually al l vertebrates.
Vertebrates have a system of muscles attached to the endosk eleton to enable movement. Muscles control movement by
alternately contracting (shortening) and relaxing (len gthening). Generally, muscles work together in opposing pa irs.
Vertebrates have a closed circulatory system with a heart. Bl ood is completely contained within blood vessels that carry the
blood throughout the body. The heart is divided into ch ambers that work together to pump blood. There are between two and
four chambers in the vertebrate heart. With more chamb ers, there is more oxygen in the blood and more vigorous pum ping
action.
Most vertebrates have skin covered with scales, feathers, fur, o r hair. These features serve a variety of functions, such as
waterproofing and insulating the body.
Vertebrates have an excretory system that includes a pair o f kidneys. Kidneys are organs that filter wastes from blood so they
can be excreted from the body.
Vertebrates have an endocrine system of glands that secret e hormones. Hormones are chemical messengers that control many
body functions.
Vertebrates have an adaptive immune system. The immune system is the organ system that defends the body from pathoge ns
and other causes of disease. Being adaptive means that the im mune system can "learn" to recognize specific pathogens. Th en it
can produce tailor-made proteins called antibodies to "attack" them. This allows the immune system to launc h a rapid attack
whenever the pathogens invade the body again.
Vertebrates have a centralized nervous system. As shown in Figure below, the nervous system consists of a brain in the head
region. It also includes a long spinal cord that runs from th e brain to the tail end of the backbone. Long nerve fibers e xtend from
the spinal cord to muscles and organs throughout the b ody.

12.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1410
Nervous System (Human). The vertebrate nervous system includes a brain and spina l cord. It also includes a body-wide
network of nerves, called peripheral nerves. They connect the spinal cor d with the rest of the body.
Summary
Vertebrates are a subphylum of chordates that have a verteb ral column and an endoskeleton made of cartilage or bon e.
Vertebrates also have complex organ systems, including a clos ed circulatory system with a heart, an excretory system wi th a
pair of kidneys, and an adaptive immune system.
Review
1. Describe the vertebrate vertebral column, and list its functions.
2. Contrast cartilage and bone, and state the advantage s of a bony endoskeleton relative to a cartilaginous endo skeleton.
3. Identify the components of the vertebrate nervous sys tem.
H a ppy L e a rn in g En glish
Vertebrate Animals | Educational Vid
Vertebrate Animals | Educational Vid
Watch on

12.22.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14104. What is an adaptive immune system?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: User:The Emirr/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:T
E-Nervous_system_diagram.svg
License: CC BY 3.0
This page titled 12.22: Vertebrate Diversity is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325812.23: Monotremes
Can a mammal lay an egg?
This is a mammal. But it is unlike placental or mars upial mammals. If a mammal does not develop within a placenta or a pouch,
what type of development is left? Eggs!
Monotremes
Only five living species of mammals are not therian m ammals. They are called monotremes. Monotremes are mammals that
reproduce by laying eggs. The only living monotreme s pecies are the platypus and echidnas (see Figure below and Figure below).
They are found solely in Australia and New Guinea (an island not far from Australia).
This egg-laying, venomous, duck-billed, beaver-tailed, otter-footed mammal is a platypus, a monotreme mammal that
reproduces by laying eggs.
Like the platypus, the echidna is a monotreme. The only living monotreme spe cies inhabit Australia and New Guinea.

12.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13258Eggs and Lactation in Monotremes
Female monotremes lack a uterus and vagina. Instead, they have a cloaca with one opening, like the cloacas of reptiles and birds.
The opening is used to excrete wastes as well as lay eggs.
Monotreme eggs have a leathery shell, like the eggs of r eptiles. The eggs are retained inside the mother’s b ody for at least a couple
of weeks. During that time, the mother provides the egg s with nutrients. Platypus females lay their eggs in a burrow. Echidna
females have a pouch in which they store their eggs. Fe male monotremes have mammary glands but lack nipples. Instead, they
“sweat” milk from a patch on their belly.
Pros and Cons of Monotreme Reproduction
The mother’s risks are less in monotremes than in ther ian mammals. The mother doesn’t need to eat more or put herself at risk by
carrying and delivering a fetus or an embryo. On the other hand, externally laid eggs are more difficult to protect than an embryo in
a pouch or a fetus in a uterus. Therefore, monotreme offsprin g may be less likely to survive than the offspring of theri an mammals.
Summary
Monotremes reproduce by laying eggs.
Monotremes have a cloaca instead of a uterus and vagin a. The eggs pass through the opening of the cloaca.
Monotreme reproduction is the least risky for the mother. However, eggs are harder to protect than is an embryo or a f etus in a
pouch or uterus. Therefore, monotreme offspring may ha ve a lower chance of surviving than the offspring of ther ian mammals.
Review
1. What are monotremes?
2. Describe eggs and egg laying in monotremes.
3. How does lactation differ in monotremes and therian m ammals?

12.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132584. Create a chart that you could use to explain to a younger student the different ways that mammals reproduce.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Joel Bauchat
Grant, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: S J Bennett
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/quollism/847
0348736/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.23: Monotremes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.24.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1325912.24: Mammal Ancestors
Which mammalian trait evolved first? What was the first mammal like? When did the earliest mammal
live?
Detailed answers to these questions are still in disput e, though it is probably safe to say the earliest mamm als were not like this
giraffe. Obviously, the giraffe has some specialized tr aits.
Major Events in Mammalian Evolution
Scientists do generally agree on the major events in the evolution of mammals. These are summarized in Table below. Refer back
to the table as you read about the events in this concept. * mya = millions of years ago

12.24.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13259Era Period Epoch Major Events Start (mya)*
Cenozoic Neogene HoloceneRise of human
civilization; spread and
dominance of modern
humans0.01
- - PleistoceneSpread and then
extinction of many large
mammals; appearance of
modern humans1.8
- - PlioceneAppearance of many
existing genera of
mammals, including the
genus Homo5.3
- - MioceneAppearance of
remaining modern
mammal families;
diversification of horses
and mastodons; first
apes23.0
- Paleogene OligoceneRapid evolution and
diversification of
placental mammals33.9
- - EoceneAppearance of several
modern mammal
families; diversification
of primitive whales55.8
- - PaleoceneAppearance of the first
large mammals65.5
Mesozoic Cretaceous -Emergence of
monotreme, marsupial,
and placental mammals;
possible first appearance
of four clades
(superorders) of
placental mammals
(Afrotheria, Xenarthra,
Laurasiatheria,
Supraprimates)145.5
- Jurassic -Spread of mammals,
which remain small in
size199.6
- Triassic -Evolution of cynodonts
to become smaller and
more mammal-like;
appearance of the first
mammals251.0

12.24.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13259Era Period Epoch Major Events Start (mya)*
Paleozoic Permian -Evolution and spread of
synapsids (pelycosaurs
and therapsids)299.0
- Carboniferous -Appearance of amniotes,
the first fully terrestrial
vertebrates359.0
Mammalian Ancestors
Ancestors of mammals evolved close to 300 million ye ars ago. They were amniotes called synapsids. Figure below shows how
modern mammals evolved from synapsids. The stages of ev olution from synapsids to mammals are described below.
Phylogeny of Mammalian Evolution. This diagram represents the evoluti on of mammals.
Pelycosaurs
Synapsids called pelycosaurs became the most common land vertebrates during the first half of the Permian Period. A pelycosaur
genus called Dimetrodon is shown in Figure below. Dimetrodon had sprawling legs and walked like a lizard. It also had a fairly
small brain. However, it had started to develop some of the t raits of mammals. For example, it had teeth of different ty pes.
Pelycosaur Synapsid:
Dimetrodon
Dimetrodon
was a pelycosaur. It lived about 275 million years ago.

12.24.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13259Therapsids
Some pelycosaurs gave rise to a group of animals called therapsids. The earliest therapsids lived about 260 million yea rs ago. At
first, the therapsids looked a lot like Dimetrodon. But after a while, they could easily be mistaken f or mammals. They evolved a
number of mammalian traits, such as legs positioned un der the body instead of along the sides. Therapsids b ecame the most
common and diverse land vertebrates during the second h alf of the Permian Period.
The Permian Period ended about 250 million years ago with a mass extinction. Most therapsids went extinct. Thei r niches were
taken over by sauropsids. These were the amniotes that evolved into dinosaur s, reptiles, and birds. Not all therapsids went extinc t,
however. The few that remained no longer had to compet e with many other therapsids. Some of them eventually ev olved into
mammals.
Cynodonts
The surviving therapsids were small animals. Some of the most successful were the cynodonts (see Figure below). They
flourished worldwide during the first half of the Trias sic Period. Some of them ate insects and were nocturnal, or active at night.
Being nocturnal may have helped save them from exti nction. Why? A nocturnal niche was one of the few niche s that dinosaurs did
not take over in the Triassic Period.
Cynodonts became more mammal-like as they continued to evolve. Some of their mammalian traits may have be en adaptations to
their nocturnal niche. For example:
The ability to regulate body temperature might have been selected for because it would allow noctu rnal animals to remain
active in the cool of the night.
A good sense of hearing might have been selected for beca use it would be more useful than good vision when hunting in the
dark.
Probable Mammalian Ancestor: Cynodont. Cynodonts were mammal-like therapsids. They may have been ancestral to
mammals. They were about the size of a rat.
By the end of the Triassic Period, cynodonts had becom e even smaller in size. They also had evolved many mammalian traits. For
example, they had
Four different types of teeth
A relatively large brain
Three tiny bones in the middle ear
A diaphragm for breathing
Endothermy
Lactation
Hair
Cynodonts probably gave rise to mammals about 200 mi llion years ago. However, they are not considered to be mammals
themselves. In fact, competition with early mammals ma y have led to their extinction. They went extinct so metime during the
Jurassic or Cretaceous Period.

12.24.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13259Summary
Amniotes called synapsids were the ancestors of mammals.
Synapsids named pelycosaurs had some of the traits of mam mals by 275 million years ago.
Some synapsids evolved into therapsids, which became widespr ead during the Permian Period.
The few therapsids that survived the Triassic takeover were small, arboreal insect eaters. They were also nocturnal. B eing active
at night may explain why they survived and evolved still m ore mammalian traits.
Review
1. What were the synapsids? When were they most widespread?
2. Identify the therapsids. How were they related to mammals?
3. Describe cynodonts. What is their place in the evolu tion of mammals?
Am e rica n M u se u m of N a tu ra l H istory
Science Bulletins: Ancestor of All P la
Science Bulletins: Ancestor of All P la
Watch on

12.24.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132594. Describe mammalian traits found in cynodonts.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Nobu Tamura
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dimetro
don_BW.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 4]Credit: Nobu Tamura
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steropo
don_BW.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
12.24: Mammal Ancestors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.25.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1326012.25: Mammal Evolution
Could you argue that the duckbilled platypus has some characteristics of other species?
Like a bird or a fish? You could. This might suggest that an ancestor of this species may have been one o f the early mammals to
evolve.
Evolution of Early Mammals
The earliest mammals evolved from cynodonts. But the evolution of mammals didn’t end there. Mamma ls continued to evolve.
Monotreme mammals probably split off from other mamma ls first. They were followed by marsupials. Placental mam mals
probably evolved last.
Evolution of Monotremes
The first monotremes may have evolved about 150 mil lion years ago. Early monotreme fossils have been foun d in Australia. An
example is a genus called Steropodon, shown in Figure below. It may have been the ancestor of the platypu s. Early monotremes
retained some of the traits of their therapsid ances tors. For example, they laid eggs and had a cloaca. T hese traits are still found in
modern monotremes.
Probable Monotreme Ancestor:
Steropodon
. Like the platypus,
Steropodon
probably had a bill.
Evolution of Marsupials
The first marsupials may have evolved about 130 milli on years ago. One of the earliest was the extinct gen us Sinodelphys.
Sinodelphys was about 15 centimeters (6 inches) long. Its limb st ructure suggests that it was a climbing animal. It c ould escape
from predators by climbing into trees. It probably lived on a diet of insects and worms.

12.25.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13260Evolution of Placental Mammals
The earliest placental mammals may have evolved about 110 million years ago. The ancestor of placental mam mals may be the
extinct genus Eomaia. Fossils of Eomaia have been found in what is now China. It was only abo ut 10 centimeters (4 inches) long.
It was a tree climber and probably ate insects and wor ms. Eomaia had several traits of placental mammals. Figure below shows
how Eomaia may have looked.
Probable Ancestor of Placental Mammals:
Eomaia
Eomaia
lived a little over 100 million years ago.
The placental mammal descendants of Eomaia were generally more successful than marsupials and mo notremes. On most
continents, placental mammals became the dominant mam mals, while marsupials and monotremes died out. Marsupia ls remained
the most common and diverse mammals in Australia. The reaso n for their success there is not yet resolved.
Evolution of Modern Mammals
The Cretaceous Period ended with another mass extinctio n. This occurred about 65 million years ago. All of th e dinosaurs went
extinct at that time. Did the extinction of the dinosaurs a llow mammals to take over?
Traditional View
Scientists have long assumed that the extinction of the dinosaurs opened up many niches for mammals to ex ploit. Presumably, this
led to an explosion of new species of mammals early in Cenozoic Era. Few mammalian fossils from the early Cen ozoic have been
found to support this theory. Even so, it was still widely accep ted until recently.
SciSh ow
Why Aren 't Mammals as Big as Dinos
Why Aren 't Mammals as Big as Dinos
Watch on

12.25.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13260View from the Mammalian Supertree
In 2007, an international team of scientists compar ed the DNA of almost all known species of living mamma ls. They used the data
to create a supertree of mammalian evolution. The supertree shows that plac ental mammals started to diversify as early as 95
million years ago.
What explains the diversification of mammals long be fore the dinosaurs went extinct? What else was happenin g at that time? One
change was a drop in Earth’s temperature. This may have favored endothermic mammals over ectothermic dinosaurs. Flowering
plants were also spreading at that time. They may have prov ided new and plentiful foods for small mammals or their in sect prey.
The supertree also shows that another major diversific ation of mammals occurred about 50 million years ag o. Again, worldwide
climate change may have been one reason. This time Ea rth’s temperature rose. The warmer temperature led to a greater divers ity of
plants. This would have meant more food for mammals or t heir prey.
Summary
Monotremes evolved about 150 million years ago. Like mode rn monotremes, they had a cloaca and laid eggs.
Marsupials evolved about 130 million years ago. They were very small and ate insects and worms.
Placental mammals evolved about 110 million years ago. T hey were also small and climbed trees.
Placental mammals became the dominant land mammals. Most marsupials and monotremes died out, except in Australia.
The mammalian supertree shows that placental mammals started to diversify as early as 95 million years ago.
Review
1. Outline the evolution of monotreme, marsupial, and place ntal mammals.
2. Describe Sinodelphys.
3. Describe Eomaia.
4. What is the mammalian supertree?
5. Explain why the extinction of most therapsids may have allowed mammals to evolve.
6. What explains the diversification of mammals long be fore the dinosaurs went extinct?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Nobu Tamura
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steropo
don_BW.jpg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:emf1947
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/emf1947/68277852
64/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.25: Mammal Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.26.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1326112.26: Mammal Classification
How would you classify this mammal?
Obviously it is a camel, but is there more to it than that? There are 17 orders of placental mammals. But then these mammals need to be further
classified into families, genera, and finally speci es.
Classification of Placental Mammals
Traditional classifications of mammals are based on similarities in structure and function. Increasingl y, mammals are being classified on the
basis of molecular similarities. DNA analyses has rece ntly shown that the traditional orders include mamma ls that may not be closely related.
Traditional Classification
The most widely accepted traditional classification of mammals divides living placental mammals into 17 orders. These orders are shown in
Table below. This classification of mammals was widely acc epted for more than 50 years. Placental mammals are s till commonly placed in
these orders. However, this classification is not very useful for studies of mammalian evolution. That’s b ecause it groups together some
mammals that do not seem to be closely related by de scent from a recent common ancestor.

12.26.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261O
r
d
e
rExample Sample Trait
I
n
s
e
c
t
i
v
o
r
amole
small sharp teeth
E
d
e
n
t
a
t
aanteater
few or no teeth
P
h
o
l
i
d
o
t
apangolin
large plate-like scales
C
h
i
r
o
p
t
e
r
abat
digits support membranous wings
C
a
r
n
i
v
o
r
acoyote long pointed canine teeth

12.26.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261O
r
d
e
rExample Sample Trait
R
o
d
e
n
t
i
amouse
incisor teeth grow continuously
L
a
g
o
m
o
r
p
h
arabbit
chisel-like incisor teeth
P
e
r
i
s
s
o
d
a
c
t
y
l
ahorse
odd-toed hooves
A
r
t
i
odeer even-toed hooves

12.26.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261O
r
d
e
rExample Sample Trait
d
a
c
t
y
l
a
C
e
t
a
c
e
awhale
paddle-like forelimbs
P
r
i
m
a
t
e
smonkey
five digits on hands and feet
P
r
o
b
o
s
c
i
d
e
aelephant
tusks
H
y
r
a
c
o
i
d
e
ahyrax
rubbery pads on feet
D
e
rcolugo membrane of skin between legs for gliding

12.26.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261O
r
d
e
rExample Sample Trait
m
o
p
t
e
r
a
P
i
n
n
i
p
e
d
i
aseal
feet with fins
S
i
r
e
n
i
amanatee
paddle-like tail
T
u
b
u
l
i
d
e
n
t
a
t
aaardvark
teeth without enamel
Phylogenetic Classification
The mammalian supertree classifies placental mammals phylogenetically. It uses the analysis of DNA sequences to group togethe r mammals
that are evolutionarily closely related, sharing a recent common ancestor. These groups are not necessa rily the same as the traditional groups
based on structure and function.
The supertree classification places placental mammal s in four superorders. The four superorders and some of the mammals in th em are:
Afrotheria—aardvarks, elephants, manatees.
Xenarthra—anteaters, sloths, armadillos.
Laurasiatheria—bats, whales, hoofed mammals, carnivore s.
Supraprimates—primates, rabbits, rodents.

12.26.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261All four superorders appear to have become distinct fr om one another between 85 and 105 million years ago. The exact relationships among
the superorders are still not clear. Revisions in th is classification of mammals may occur as new data b ecome available.
Summary
Mammals used to be classified on the basis of simila rities in structure and function into 17 different orders.
Recently, DNA analyses have shown that the traditional orders include mammals that are not closely related.
Phylogenetic classification, based on DNA data, groups placental mammals in four superorders. The superorders appear to have become
distinct from each other 85–105 million years ago.
Review
1. Compare traditional and phylogenetic classificat ions of placental mammals. Explain which type of class ification is more useful for
understanding how mammals evolved.
Sh e ppa rdSoftwa re Com
Mammal Classi  cation
Mammal Classi  cation
Watch on

12.26.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132612. Assume that a new species of placental mammal has be en discovered. Scientists have examined it closely an d studied its DNA. It has wings
similar to a bat that it uses for gliding. Its DNA is m ost similar to the DNA of rodents such as mice. How would you classify the new
mammal? Explain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC

12.26.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC

12.26.9 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 11] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 12] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 13] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 14] License: CC BY-NC

12.26.10 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13261
[Figure 15] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 16] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 17] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 18] License: CC BY-NC
12.26: Mammal Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.27.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/141212.27: Vertebrate Reproduction
Does the embryo develop in the mother or in an egg?
Is the egg within the mother or not? Vertebrate repr oduction occurs by one of three methods. These bird eg gs demonstrate one of
three types of vertebrate reproduction.
Vertebrate Reproduction
Vertebrates reproduce sexually, and almost all of the m have separate male and female sexes. Recall that sexual reproduction is the
joining of gametes during fertilization, producing g enetically variable offspring. Generally, aquatic speci es have external
fertilization, whereas terrestrial species have internal fertilization. Can you think of a reason why aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates
differ in this way?
Vertebrates have one of the following three reproductive str ategies: ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary.
Ovipary refers to the development of an embryo within an egg out side the mother’s body. This occurs in most amphibians an d
reptiles and in all birds.
Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg wit hin the mother’s body until it hatches. The mother
provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside th e egg. This occurs in some species of fish and reptiles.
Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embry o within the mother’s body. Birth may be followed by a peri od
of parental care of the offspring. This reproductive str ategy occurs in almost all mammals.
What type of reproduction occurs in kangaroos?

12.27.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1412Summary
Vertebrates reproduce sexually, and almost all have separat e male and female sexes.
Aquatic species generally have external fertilization, wher eas terrestrial species usually have internal fertilization.
Vertebrates have one of three reproductive strategies, known as ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary.
Review
1. Define ovipary, ovovivipary, and vivipary.
2. Which vertebrates use each type of reproductive strateg y?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Subhash Chandra
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Subhash Chandra
License: CC BY 2.0
This page titled 12.27: Vertebrate Reproduction is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
M a rk Drollin ge r
Sexual Reproduction
Sexual Reproduction
Watch on

12.28.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/141112.28: Vertebrate Classification
The stingray. Fish?
Of course. But what type? Of the nine classes of vertebrat es, five are fish. Each of the five classes has distinguishing characteristics that allow members to be classified ap propriately. Stingray are
cartilaginous fish, related to sharks.
Vertebrate Classification
There are about 50,000 vertebrate species, and they a re placed in nine different classes. Five of the classes ar e fish. The other classes are amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Table below lists
some of the distinguishing traits of each class. Classes are liste d in order of evolution.

12.28.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1411Class Distinguishing Traits E
Hagfish They have a cranium but no backbone; they do not have jaws; th eir endoskeleton is made of cartilage; they are ectothermic.h
Lampreys They have a partial backbone; they do not have jaws; thei r endoskeleton is made of cartilage; they are ectothermic.l
Cartilaginous Fish They have a complete backbone; they have jaw s; their endoskeleton is made of cartilage; they are ectothermic.s
Ray-Finned Fish They have a backbone and jaws; their endoskeleton i s made of bones; they have thin, bony fins; they are ectothermic.p
Lobe-Finned Fish They have a backbone and jaws; their endoskeleton is made of bones; they have thick, fleshy fins; they are ectothermic.c
Amphibians They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws; they have gills as larvae and lungs as adults; they have four lim bs; they are ectothermicf
ReptilesThey have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws; they breat he only with lungs; they have four limbs; their skin is covered with sca les; they have amniotic eggs; they
are ectothermic.a
Birds They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone but no jaws; th ey breathe only with lungs; they have four limbs, with the two front lim bs modified as wings; their skin is
covered with feathers; they have amniotic eggs; they are endotherm ic.b

12.28.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1411Class Distinguishing Traits E
MammalsThey have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws; they breat he only with lungs; they have four limbs; their skin is covered with ha ir or fur; they have amniotic eggs;
they have mammary (milk-producing) glands; they are endothermi c.b
Summary
The 50,000 species of living vertebrates are placed in nine classes: h agfish, lampreys, cartilaginous fish, ray-finned fish, lobe-finned fish, amph ibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Review
1. Which was the first and last vertebrate classes to evolve?
2. What are the five fish vertebrate classes?
3. What are the defining characteristics of mammals?
4. What was the first class of vertebrates to live on land?

12.28.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14115. Sharks belong to what vertebrate class?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Top to bottom: Bryce McQuillan; Dr. James P. McVey,
NOAA Sea Grant Program; Scott Oves
Source: Top to bottom:
www.flickr.com/photos/spidermanbryce2006/1802722621/;
www.photolib.noaa.gov/htmls/reef0206.htm;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/silicon640c/5968047195/
License: Top to bottom CC BY 2.0; Public Domain; CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 4] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 5] License: CC BY-NC

12.28.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1411
[Figure 6] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 7] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 8] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 9] License: CC BY-NC

12.28.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1411
[Figure 10] License: CC BY-NC
This page titled 12.28: Vertebrate Classification is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts
platform.

12.29.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/141612.29: Vertebrate Evolution
What type of fish is a simple perch?
Does it have a partial of complete vertebral column? What about a jaw? Do you think the endoskeleton is m ade of cartilage or
bone? Why are these important evolutionary steps? A b ony skeletal could support a larger body. Early bon y fish evolved into
modern ray-finned and lobe-finned fish, which then evolv ed into species that could move out of the water.
Vertebrate Evolution
The earliest vertebrates were jawless fish, similar to liv ing hagfish. They lived between 500 and 600 million ye ars ago. They had a
cranium but no vertebral column. The phylogenetic tree in Figure below gives an overview of vertebrate evolution. As m ore data
become available, new ideas about vertebrate evolution em erge.
Phylogenetic Tree of Vertebrate Evolution. The earliest ver tebrates evolved almost 550 million years ago. Which class of
vertebrates evolved last?
Evolution of Fish
Not too long after hagfish first appeared, fish simila r to lampreys evolved a partial vertebral column. Th e first fish with a complete
vertebral column evolved about 450 million years ag o. These fish also had jaws and may have been simila r to living sharks. Up to
this point, all early vertebrates had an endoskeleto n made of cartilage rather than bone. About 400 milli on years ago, the first bony
fish appeared. A bony skeleton could support a larger bo dy. Early bony fish evolved into modern ray-finned and lo be-finned fish.

12.29.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1416Evolution of Other Vertebrate Classes
Amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds evolved after fi sh.
The first amphibians evolved from a lobe-finned fish anc estor about 365 million years ago. They were the first ver tebrates to
live on land, but they had to return to water to reproduce. This meant they had to live near bodies o f water.
The first reptiles evolved from an amphibian ancestor at least 300 million years ago. They laid amniotic eggs and had internal
fertilization. They were the first vertebrates that no l onger had to return to water to reproduce. They could live just about
anywhere.
Mammals and birds both evolved from reptile-like ancestors. The first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago an d the
earliest birds about 150 million years ago.
Evolution of Endothermy
Until mammals and birds evolved, all vertebrates were e ctothermic. Ectothermy means regulating body temperature from the
outside through behavioral changes. For example, an ec totherm might stay under a rock in the shade in ord er to keep cool on a hot,
sunny day. Almost all living fish, amphibians, and r eptiles are ectothermic. Their metabolic rate and lev el of activity depend mainly
on the outside temperature. They can raise or lower their o wn temperature only slightly through behavior alone.
Both mammals and birds evolved endothermy. Endothermy means regulating body temperature from the inside through metabolic
or other physical changes. On a cold day, for example, an endotherm may produce more heat by raising its m etabolic rate. On a hot
day, it may give off more heat by increasing blood f low to the surface of the body. Keeping body temperatur e stable allows cells to
function at peak efficiency at all times. The metabol ic rate and activity level can also remain high reg ardless of the outside
temperature. On the other hand, maintaining a stable body temperature requires more energy—and more food.
Summary
The earliest vertebrates resembled hagfish and lived mor e than 500 million years ago.
As other classes of fish appeared, they evolved traits such as a complete vertebral column, jaws, and a bony endoskeleton.
Amphibians were the first tetrapod vertebrates as well as t he first vertebrates to live on land.
Reptiles were the first amniotic vertebrates.
Mammals and birds, which both descended from reptile-like an cestors, evolved endothermy, or the ability to regulate body
temperature from the inside.
Review
1. In what order did vertebrates evolve?
2. Birds evolved from what other type of vertebrate?
e vicioso
Vertebrate Evolution
Vertebrate Evolution
Watch on

12.29.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/14163. What were the first vertebrates to lay amniotic eggs?
4. Compare and contrast ectothermy and endothermy, includ ing their pros and cons.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 12.29: Vertebrate Evolution is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.30.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/141412.30: Fish
What are these geometric shapes?
These are the scales - the skin - of a blue Siamese fi ghting fish, and they almost look like a piece of art. They also look like they
form a smooth, streamlined skin. Why is this important to a f ish?
Structure and Function in Fish
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than ha lf of all vertebrate species. They are especially imp ortant in the study of
vertebrate evolution because several important vert ebrate traits evolved in fish. Fish show great diversity in body size. They range
in length from about 8 millimeters (0.3 inches) to 1 6 meters (about 53 feet). Most are ectothermic and cov ered with scales. Scales
protect fish from predators and parasites and reduce friction with the water. Multiple, overlapping scales provide a flexible cover ing
that allows fish to move easily while swimming.
Adaptations for Water
Many structures in fish are adaptations for their aquatic li festyle. Several are described below and shown in Figure below.
Fish have gills that allow them to “breathe” oxygen in water. Water enters the mouth, passes over the gills, and ex its the body
through a special opening. Gills absorb oxygen from the water as it passes over them.
Fish have a stream-lined body. They are typically long and narrow, which reduces water resistance when they swim.
Most fish have several fins for swimming. They use some of their fins to propel themselves through the water and others to
steer the body as they swim.
Fish have a system of muscles for movement. Muscle contra ctions ripple through the body in waves from head to tail. T he
contractions whip the tail fin against the water to propel the fish through the water.
Most fish have a swim bladder. This is a balloon-like internal organ that contains gas. By changing the amount of gas in the
bladder, a fish can move up or down through the water colum n.

12.30.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1414
General Fish Body Plan. A fish has a stream-lined body with gills and fins.
Fish Organ Systems
Fish have a circulatory system with a two-chambered hea rt. Their digestive system is complete and includes sever al organs and
glands. Jawed fish use their jaws and teeth to grind up food before passing it to the rest of the digestiv e tract. This allows them to
consume larger prey.
Fish also have a centralized nervous system with a brai n. Fish brains are small compared with the brains of ot her vertebrates, but
they are large and complex compared with the brains of invertebrates. Fish also have highly developed sense organs that allow
them to see, hear, feel, smell, and taste. Sharks and some other fish can even sense the very low levels of e lectricity emitted by
other animals. This helps them locate prey.
Science Friday: No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Mantas
Effortlessly, manta rays glide through the ocean gul ping down plankton and fish eggs by the mouthful. In this video by Science
Friday, Dr. Misty Paig-Tran reveals the multiple methods of filt ration they use to sift a meal from the water.
Science Friday: Oarfish: The Ultimate Fish Tale
Thought to be the inspiration of "sea serpent" stori es, the monstrously-long Oarfish provokes wonder in near ly all that witness it. In
this video by Science Friday, Professor Misty Paig-Tran p rovides us with insights into this real-life "sea mon ster's" unusual
physiology.
Sc iF ri
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
No Strain, No Gain: Filter Feeding Ma
Watch on

12.30.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1414Summary
Fish are aquatic, ectothermic vertebrates.
Many structures in fish are adaptations for their aquatic li festyle. For example, fish have a stream-lined body that reduces water
resistance while swimming.
Fish have gills for “breathing” oxygen in water and fins f or propelling and steering their body through water.
Review
1. What are gills? What purpose do they serve in fish?
2. Describe the function of fish scales.
3. Describe how fish use their muscles to swim.
4. What is a swim bladder? How is it used?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson and Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats)
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 12.30: Fish is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.
Sc iF ri
Oar  sh: The Ultimate Fish T ale
Oar  sh: The Ultimate Fish T ale
Watch on

12.31.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1323512.31: Fish Reproduction
How do fish reproduce?
Wild male and female Sockeye salmon before spawning. So ckeye salmon are blue tinged with silver in color whil e living in the
ocean. Just prior to spawning, both sexes turn red with green heads. Sockeye spawn mostly in streams having lake s in their
watershed. The young fish spend up to three years in the freshwater lake before migrating to the ocean. Mi gratory fish spend from
one to four years in salt water, and thus are four to six years old when they retur n to spawn. Navigation to the home river is thought
to be done using the characteristic smell of the stream, an d possibly the sun.
Fish Reproduction and Development
Nearly all fish reproduce sexually, and most species have separate sexes. Those without separate sexes avoi d self-fertilization by
producing sperm and eggs at different times. Each fish typically prod uces a large number of gametes. In most fish species,
fertilization takes place externally. These fish are oviparous. Eggs are laid and embryos develop outside the mothe r’s body. In a
minority of fish, including sharks, eggs develop insid e the mother’s body but without nourishment from the mother. These fish are
ovoviviparous.
Spawning
In many species of fish, a large group of adults come t ogether to release their gametes into the water at the same time. This is called
spawning. It increases the chances that fertilization will take place. It also means that many embryos will form at onc e, which
helps ensure that at least some of them will be able to escap e predators.
With spawning, there is no way for fish parents to know whi ch embryos are their own. Therefore, fish generally d on’t provide any
care to their eggs or offspring. There are some exce ptions, however, including the fish described in Figure below, which is
performing mouth brooding.

12.31.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13235
Mouth Brooding. Some species of fish carry their fertilized eggs in the ir mouth until they hatch. This is called mouth
brooding. If you look closely, you can see the eggs inside the mouth of t he cardinalfish pictured here.
Fish Larvae
Fish eggs hatch into larvae that are different from t he adult form of the species (see Figure below). A larva swims attached to a
large yolk sac, which provides the larva with food. The larva eventually goes through metamorphosis and changes into the adult
form. However, it still needs to mature before it can repro duce.
Salmon Larva. This newly hatched salmon larva doesn’t look very fish-like. The structure hanging from the larva is the
yolk sac.
Summary
Nearly all fish reproduce sexually and have separate s exes.
Fertilization is generally external, and most fish are ov iparous. Many adults of the same species may come toget her in a group
and release gametes into the water at the same time, which is called spawning.
TED-Ed
The secret lives of baby   sh - Amy M
The secret lives of baby   sh - Amy M
Watch on

12.31.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13235Fish hatch into larvae that are different from the adult f orm of the species.
Review
1. Explain why the practice of spawning is adaptive.
2. What is mouth brooding?
3. How are fish larvae different from the adult fish?
Explore More
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
1. Describe the stages in the life of a salmon.
2. How does a salmon remember where to return to spawn?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sphinx Wang,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
Ore gon De pa rtm e n t of F ish a n d W ildlife
Life Cycle of Salmon
Life Cycle of Salmon
Watch on

12.31.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13235
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of E. Peter Steenstra/US
Fish and Wildlife Service
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/usfwsnorthea
st/5197995371/
License: CC BY 2.0
12.31: Fish Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.32.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1323612.32: Fish Classification
What type of animal is a sea horse? Is it actually a fish?
It is, and there are about 50 species of seahorses. Alth ough they are bony fish, they do not have scales, but ra ther a thin skin
stretched over a series of bony plates arranged in rings throughout their body. Each species has a dist inct number of rings.
Seahorses have a coronet on their head, which is dist inct to each individual, much like a human fingerpri nt. Seahorses also swim
upright, a characteristic not shared by other fish. Seahorses are poor swimmers, so they are most likely to be found resting, with
their prehensile tails wound around a stationary object. They have long snouts, which they use to suck up food, and eyes that can
move independently of each other. Seahorses eat small shr imp, tiny fish, crustaceans, and plankton.
Classification of Fish
There are about 28,000 existing species of fish, and the y are placed in five different classes. The classes a re commonly referred to
as hagfish, lampreys, cartilaginous fish, ray-finned fish, and lobe-finned fish (see the table in the previous les son).
Hagfish
Hagfish are very primitive fish. They retain their notochor d throughout life rather than developing a backbone, and they lack scales
and fins. They are classified as vertebrates mainly b ecause they have a cranium. Hagfish are noted for sec reting large amounts of
thick, slimy mucus. The mucus makes them slippery, so they ca n slip out of the jaws of predators.
Lampreys
Like hagfish, lampreys also lack scales, but they have fins and a partial b ackbone. The most striking feature of lampreys is a large
round sucker, lined with teeth, that surrounds the m outh (see Figure below). Lampreys use their sucker to feed on the bloo d of
other fish species.
Sucker Mouth of a Lamprey. The mouth of a lamprey is surrounded by a tooth-line d sucker.

12.32.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13236Cartilaginous Fish
Cartilaginous fish include sharks, rays, and ratfish (see Figure below). In addition to an endoskeleton composed of cartilage, these
fish have a complete backbone. They also have a rela tively large brain. They can solve problems and inte ract with other members
of their species. They are generally predators with k een senses. Cartilaginous fish lack a swim bladder. Instea d, they stay afloat by
using a pair of muscular fins to push down against the water and create lift.
Cartilaginous Fish. All of these fish belong to the class of cartila ginous fish with jaws. (a) Oceanic whitetip shark (b) Ray (c)
Ratfish
One of the most important traits of cartilaginous fis h is their jaws. Jaws allow them to bite food and break it into smaller pieces.
This is a big adaptive advantage because it greatly ex pands the range of food sources they can consume. Jaws a lso make
cartilaginous fish excellent predators. It you’ve e ver seen the film Jaws, then you know that jaws make sharks very fierce predato rs
(see also Figure below).
Jaws of a Shark. Sharks have powerful jaws with multiple rows of sharp, saw-like teet h. Most other fish are no match for
these powerful predators.
Ray-Finned Fish
Ray-finned fish include the majority of living fish species, including goldfish, tuna, salmon, perch, and cod. They have a bo ny
endoskeleton and a swim bladder. Their thin fins cons ist of webs of skin over flexible bony rays, or spines. The fins lack muscle, so
their movements are controlled by muscles in the body wall. You can compare their ray fins with the fleshy fins of lobe-finned fish
in Figure below.

12.32.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13236
Fins of Bony Fish. The fins of ray-finned and lobe-finned fish are quite dif ferent. How is the form of the fins related to their
different functions in the two classes of fish? Ray Fin (left), Lobe Fin (ri ght)
Lobe-Finned Fish
Lobe-finned fish are currently far fewer in number than ray-finned f ish. Their fins, like the one shown in Figure above, contain a
stump-like appendage of bone and muscle. There are two gr oups of lobe-finned fish still alive today: coelacanths and lungfish.
1. Coelacanths are ancient fish with just two living species. They are a t risk of extinction because of their very small numbers.
2. Lungfish have a lung-like organ for breathing air. The organ is an a daptation of the swim bladder. It allows them to survive for
long periods out of water.
Science Friday: Oarfish: The Ultimate Fish Tale
Thought to the be inspiration of "sea serpent" stori es, the monstrously-long Oarfish provokes wonder in near ly all that witness it. In
this video by Science Friday, Professor Misty Paig-Tran p rovides us with insights into this real-life "sea mon ster's" unusual
physiology.
Summary
There are about 28,000 existing species of fish, and they are p laced in five classes: hagfish, lampreys, cartilaginous fi sh, rayfinned bony fish, and lobe-finned bony fish.
Review
1. Assume that a new species of fish has been discovered deep i n the ocean. It has a complete vertebral column made of c artilage.
Which class should the new species be placed in? Name one other trait you would expect to find in the new species of fish.
Explain your answers.
2. Fish with jaws may be very large. Infer how their jaws may be re lated to their large body size.
3. The majority of living fish belong to what class?
Sc iF ri
Oar  sh: The Ultimate Fish T ale
Oar  sh: The Ultimate Fish T ale
Watch on

12.32.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132364. Describe the lungfish.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the US Fish and
Wildlife Service;By Nobu Tamura
email: nobu.tamura@yahoo.com
http://spinops.blogspot.com/ - Own work,
CC BY-SA 4.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=50
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/usfwspacific/71299
06737/; By Nobu Tamura
email:nobu.tamura@yahoo.com - Own
workhttp://spinops.blogspot.com/; CC BYSA 4.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=50429141
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3] Credit: (a) Image copyright Dray van
Beeck, 2014; (b) Barry Peters (petersbar);
(c) Linda Snook/MBNMS/US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration;By Nobu Tamura
email: nobu.tamura@yahoo.com
http://spinops.blogspot.com/ - Own work,
CC BY-SA 4.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=50
Source: (a) http://www.shutterstock.com;
(b)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Souther
n_stingrays_at_stingray_city.jpg; (c)
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrola
gus_colliei.jpg; By Nobu Tamura
email:nobu.tamura@yahoo.com - Own
workhttp://spinops.blogspot.com/; CC BYSA 4.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=50429141

12.32.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13236License: (A) License from Shutterstock;
(B) CC BY 2.0; (C) Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Grant Peters
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/grantpetersph
otography/7033043857/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: (left) Image copyright Zheltyshev,
2014; (right) David Jolivet;By Nobu
Tamura email: nobu.tamura@yahoo.com
http://spinops.blogspot.com/ - Own work,
CC BY-SA 4.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...cu
rid=50429141
Source: (left) http://www.shutterstock.com
; (right)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/sybarite48/52
46927772/; By Nobu Tamura
email:nobu.tamura@yahoo.com - Own
workhttp://spinops.blogspot.com/; CC BYSA 4.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=50429141
License: Left: License from Shutterstock;
Right: CC BY 2.0
12.32: Fish Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.33.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1323712.33: Fish Evolution and Ecology
Are there actually ecosystems in the ocean?
There are. Different types of fish live in different types of ecosystems. Shown above are tropical fish in a coral reef ecosystem.
Some fish are deep-ocean bottom dwellers, whereas others live in shallow waters. Other fish may not be able to survive in the
ocean, as they need freshwater.
Evolution of Fish
The evolution of fish from hagfish to finned fish is a long and involved process. One step in this evolu tion involves the change in
function of gills. Invertebrate chordates use their gills to filter food out of water, not to absorb oxygen. In the early evolution of
fish, there was a switch to using gills to absorb oxygen instead of to filter food. Gills consist of many th in, folded tissues that
provide a large surface area for oxygen uptake. Wit h more oxygen absorbed by the gills, fish could beco me much larger and more
active.
Fossilized fish shown in different sizes.
Timing of Fish Evolution
Ancestors of hagfish are thought to have been the ear liest vertebrates. Their fossils date back to about 550 million years ago.
Fossils of cartilaginous fish with jaws, resembling living sharks, first appeared in t he fossil record about 450 million years ago.
They were followed about 50 million years later by the b ony fish.

12.33.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13237The Bony Fish
At first, the lobe-finned bony fish were much more common than the ray-finned bony fish that dominate today. Lobe-finned fish
were also ancestral to amphibians. Their stump-like a ppendages and lung-like organs evolved into amphibia n legs and lungs. Rayfinned bony fish may have been the first fish to ev olve in freshwater. They eventually became the most di verse and dominant class
of fish.
Ecology of Fish
The habitats and diets of fish are varied. They live throughout the ocean and also in freshwater lakes, p onds, rivers, and streams.
However, there is one fish, the Mudskipper, that spends time on land.
Fish Food
Most fish are predators, but the nature of their prey and how they consume it differs from one class to another and even within
classes.
Hagfish are deep-ocean bottom dwellers. They feed on other f ish, either living or dead. They enter the body of their prey
through the mouth or anus. Then they literally eat thei r prey from the inside out.
Lampreys generally live in shallow ocean water or freshwater. They either consume small invertebrates or suck blood from
larger fish with their sucker mouth.
Cartilaginous fish such as sharks may live on the bottom o f the ocean. However, most live in the water column. They prey on
other fish and aquatic mammals or else consume plankton.
M in u te Ea rth
Which Fish Did We Evolve From?
Which Fish Did We Evolve From?
Watch on

12.33.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13237Bony fish may live in salt water or freshwater. They consume a wide range of foods. For example, they may eat algae, smal ler
fish, detritus, or dead organisms, depending on the species o f fish.
Fish at Risk
Today, more than 1,000 species of fish are at risk of extinction. This is mainly because of human actions. Specific causes include
over-fishing and habitat destruction caused by water po llution, dam building, and the introduction of non-native species.
Summary
The evolution of fish included a shift from using the gi lls for filtering food to using them to absorb oxygen from water.
The earliest fish, resembling living hagfish, evolved ab out 550 million years ago.
Adaptations that eventually evolved in fish include a co mplete vertebral column, jaws, and an endoskeleton made of bones
instead of cartilage.
Fish live throughout the ocean and in freshwater lakes and stre ams.
Most fish are predators, but the nature of their prey and ho w they consume it may vary.
Many species of fish are threatened by human actions, such as water pollution and overfishing.
Review
1. Which fish were the ancestors of amphibians?
2. Describe the eating habits of hagfish and lampreys.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright tonyz20, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
12.33: Fish Evolution and Ecology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: Human Biology
13.1: Muscle Contraction
13.2: Skin
13.3: Nails and Hair
13.4: Neuron
13.5: Nerve Impulse
13.6: Central Nervous System
13.7: Peripheral Nervous System
13.8: Senses
13.9: Drugs and the Nervous System
13.10: Nervous System Diseases
13.11: Human Body
13.12: Endocrine Glands
13.13: Hormone
13.14: Hormone Regulation
13.15: Endocrine System Diseases
13.16: Heart
13.17: Blood Vessels
13.18: Circulatory System
13.19: Cardiovascular Diseases
13.20: Blood
13.21: Respiratory System
13.22: Homeostasis
13.23: Respiratory System Organs
13.24: Breathing
13.25: Regulation of Breathing
13.26: Respiratory System Disorders
13.27: Digestive System Organs
13.28: Digestive System
13.29: Small Intestine
13.30: Large Intestine
13.31: Digestive System Diseases
13.32: Food and Nutrients
13.33: Skeletal System
13.34: Balanced Eating
13.35: Excretory System
13.36: Urinary System
13.37: Kidneys
13.38: Excretory System Diseases
13.39: Innate Immune System
13.40: Inflammatory Response

213.41: Lymphatic System
13.42: Humoral Response
13.43: Cell-Mediated Response
13.44: Bones
13.45: Immunity
13.46: Allergies
13.47: Autoimmune Disease
13.48: Immunodeficiency
13.49: HIV AIDS
13.50: Carcinogens and Cancer
13.51: Air Pollution and Illness
13.52: Bioterrorism
13.53: Male Reproductive Organs
13.54: Male Reproductive Development
13.55: Bone Growth
13.56: Sperm
13.57: Female Reproductive Organs
13.58: Female Reproductive Development
13.59: Egg Cells
13.60: Menstrual Cycle
13.61: Fertilization
13.62: Embryo Growth
13.63: Prenatal Development
13.64: The Placenta
13.65: Pregnancy
13.66: Joints
13.67: Birth to Adulthood
13.68: Adulthood
13.69: STIs
13.70: Bacterial STIs
13.71: Viral STIs
13.72: Skeletal Diseases
13.73: Muscles
13.74: Skeletal Muscles
This page titled 13: Human Biology is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.1.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327213.1: Muscle Contraction
What makes a muscle contract?
It starts with a signal from the nervous system. So it starts with a signal from your brain. The signal goe s through your nervous
system to your muscle. Your muscle contracts, and your bon es move. And all this happens incredibly fast.
Muscle Contraction
Muscle contraction occurs when muscle fibers get shorter. Literally, the muscle fibers get smaller in size. To understand how this
happens, you need to know more about the structure of muscle fibers.
Structure of Muscle Fibers
Each muscle fiber contains hundreds of organelles ca lled myofibrils. Each myofibril is made up of two types of protein fi laments:
actin filaments, which are thinner, and myosin filaments, which are thicker. Actin filaments are anc hored to structures called Z
lines (see Figure below). The region between two Z lines is called a sarcomere. Within a sarcomere, myosin filaments overlap the
actin filaments. The myosin filaments have tiny struct ures called cross bridges that can attach to actin filaments.
Sarcomere. A sarcomere contains actin and myosin filaments between two Z line s.
Sliding Filament Theory
The most widely accepted theory explaining how muscle fibers contract is called the sliding filament theory. According to this
theory, myosin filaments use energy from ATP to “walk ” along the actin filaments with their cross bridges. This pulls the actin

13.1.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13272filaments closer together. The movement of the actin f ilaments also pulls the Z lines closer together, thu s shortening the sarcomere.
When all of the sarcomeres in a muscle fiber shorten, the fiber contracts. A muscle fiber either contract s fully or it doesn’t contract
at all. The number of fibers that contract determine s the strength of the muscular force. When more fiber s contract at the same time,
the force is greater.
Muscles and Nerves
Muscles cannot contract on their own. They need a stim ulus from a nerve cell to “tell” them to contract. L et’s say you decide to
raise your hand in class. Your brain sends electrica l messages to nerve cells, called motor neurons, in your arm and shoulder. The
motor neurons, in turn, stimulate muscle fibers in you r arm and shoulder to contract, causing your arm to rise. Involuntary
contractions of cardiac and smooth muscles are also co ntrolled by nerves.
Summary
According to the sliding filament theory, a muscle fib er contracts when myosin filaments pull actin filaments closer together
and thus shorten sarcomeres within a fiber.
When all the sarcomeres in a muscle fiber shorten, the fib er contracts.
Review
1. What is a sarcomere and Z-line?
2. What are the two protein filaments of a myofibril?
3. Explain how muscles contract according to the sliding f ilament theory.
Da n ie l Izzo
Muscle Contraction
Muscle Contraction
Watch on

13.1.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132724. A serious neck injury may leave a person paralyzed fro m the neck down. Explain why.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Sam McCabe and Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Sam McCabe and Hana
Zavadska;Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.1: Muscle Contraction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.2.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327313.2: Skin
What is integumentary?
Because the organs of the integumentary system are e xternal to the body, you may think of them as littl e more than “accessories,”
like clothing or jewelry. But the organs of the integ umentary system serve important biological functions. They provide a protective
covering for the body and help the body maintain homeostas is.
The Skin
The skin is the major organ of the integumentary system, which also includes the nails and hair. In fact, the skin is the body’s
largest organ, and a remarkable one at that. Conside r these skin facts. The average square inch (6.5 cm) of skin has 20 blood
vessels, 650 sweat glands, and more than a thousand ne rve endings. It also has an incredible 60,000 pigment -producing cells. All of
these structures are packed into a stack of cells that is just 2 mm thick, or about as thick as the cover of a book.
Although the skin is thin, it consists of two distinc t layers, called the epidermis and the dermis. These l ayers are shown in Figure
below.
Layers of Human Skin. The outer layer of the skin is the epidermi s, and the inner layer is the dermis. Most skin structures
originate in the dermis.2
N a tion a l Ge ogra ph ic
What is Skin? | National Geographic
What is Skin? | National Geographic
Watch on

13.2.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13273Epidermis
The epidermis is the outer layer of skin, consisting of epithelia l cells and little else (see Figure below). For example, there are no
nerve endings or blood vessels in the epidermis. The innermost cells of the epidermis are continuously dividing through mitosis to
form new cells. The newly formed cells move up through the epidermis toward the skin surface, while producing a tough, fibrous
protein called keratin. The cells become filled with keratin and die by th e time they reach the surface, where they form a
protective, waterproof layer called the stratum corneum. The dead cells are gradually shed from the surfac e of the skin and
replaced by other cells.
Cell Layers of the Epidermis. The epidermis consists mainly o f epithelial cells.
The epidermis also contains melanocytes, which are cells that produce melanin. Melanin is the brownish pigment that gives skin
much of its color. Everyone has about the same number of melanocytes, but the melanocytes of people with da rker skin produce
more melanin. The amount of melanin produced is det ermined by heredity and exposure to UV light, which i ncreases melanin
output. Exposure to UV light also stimulates the skin t o produce vitamin D. Because melanin blocks UV light from penetrating th e
skin, people with darker skin may be at greater risk of vi tamin D deficiency.
Dermis
The dermis is the lower layer of the skin, located directly bene ath the epidermis (see Figure below). It is made of tough connective
tissue and attached to the epidermis by collagen fib ers. The dermis contains blood vessels and nerve endings. Because of the nerve
endings, skin can feel touch, pressure, heat, cold, and pain. The dermis also contains hair follicles and two types o f glands.
Hair follicles are the structures where hairs originate. Hairs grow out o f follicles, pass through the epidermis, and exit at the
surface of the skin.
Sebaceous glands produce an oily substance called sebum. Sebum is secreted into hair follicles and makes its way t o the skin
surface. It waterproofs the hair and skin and helps preven t them from drying out. Sebum also has antibacterial proper ties, so it
inhibits the growth of microorganisms on the skin.
Sweat glands produce the salty fluid called sweat, which contains exces s water, salts, and other waste products. The glands
have ducts that pass through the epidermis and open to the sur face through pores in the skin.

13.2.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13273
Structures of the Dermis. The dermis contains most of the structures found in skin.
Functions of the Skin
The skin has multiple roles in the body. Many of the se roles are related to homeostasis. The skin’s mai n functions are preventing
water loss from the body and serving as a barrier to the entry of microorganisms. In addition, melanin in th e skin blocks UV light
and protects deeper layers from its damaging effects.
The skin also helps regulate body temperature. When the body is too warm, sweat is released by the sweat glands and spreads over
the skin surface. As the sweat evaporates, it cools the b ody. Blood vessels in the skin also dilate, or widen, wh en the body is too
warm. This allows more blood to flow through the skin, br inging body heat to the surface, where it radiates in to the environment.
When the body is too cool, sweat glands stop producing sweat, and blood vessels in the skin constrict, or narr ow, thus conserving
body heat.
Skin Problems
In part because it is exposed to the environment, t he skin is prone to injury and other problems. Two co mmon problems of the skin
are acne and skin cancer (see Figure below).
Th e P h otoprote ction Ch a n n e l
What is skin? The layers of human sk
What is skin? The layers of human sk
Watch on

13.2.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13273Acne is a condition in which red bumps called pimples form on th e skin due to a bacterial infection. It affects more than 85
percent of teens and may continue into adulthood. The und erlying cause of acne is excessive secretion of sebum, whi ch plugs
hair follicles and makes them good breeding grounds f or bacteria.
Skin cancer is a disease in which skin cells grow out of control. It is c aused mainly by excessive exposure to UV light. People
with lighter skin are at greater risk of developing skin can cer because they have less melanin to block harmful UV radia tion.
The best way to prevent skin cancer is to avoid UV exposure b y using sunscreen and wearing protective clothing.
ABCDs of Skin Cancer. A brown spot on the skin is likely to be a harmless mole, but it could be a sign of skin cancer. Unlike
moles, skin cancers are generally asymmetrical, have irregula r borders, may be very dark in color, and may have a
relatively great diameter.
Further Reading
Nails and Hair
Summary
The skin consists of two layers: the epidermis, which con tains mainly epithelial cells, and the dermis, which contains most of
skin’s other structures, including blood vessels, nerv e endings, hair follicles, and glands.
Skin protects the body from injury, water loss, and microorganisms. It also plays a major role in main taining a stable body
temperature.
Common skin problems include acne and skin cancer.
Review
1. What organs make up the integumentary system?
2. Describe how new epidermal cells form, develop, and are shed from the body.
3. What is keratin?
4. What is the function of the stratum corneum?
5. What is acne? What causes acne?
R u fu s R a ja du ra i
Acne-Causes and T reatment
Acne-Causes and T reatment
Watch on

13.2.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132736. Assume that you get a paper cut, but it doesn’t bleed. Ho w deep is the cut? How do you know?
7. Skin cancer has been increasing over recent decades. Wha t could explain this? (Hint: What is the main cause of skin cancer?)
8. Explain how melanin is related to skin color, vitamin D p roduction, and skin cancer.
9. Explain how the skin helps the body maintain a stable temperature.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Wbensmith/Wikimedia
Commons, modified by Mikael Häggström
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Epiderm
al_layers.svg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Jodi So and Marianna Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats)
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4] Credit: Courtesy of Skin Cancer
Foundation/National Cancer Institute
Source: Left to right:
http://visualsonline.cancer.gov/details.cfm?

13.2.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13273imageid=2362;
http://visualsonline.cancer.gov/details.cfm?
imageid=2363;
http://visualsonline.cancer.gov/details.cfm?
imageid=2364;
http://visualsonline.cancer.gov/details.cfm?
imageid=2184
License: Public Domain
13.2: Skin is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.3.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327413.3: Nails and Hair
Would you believe this is a close-up of your hair and scalp?
Well maybe not yours. But some other person's. Hair is a n integral part of the integumentary system. And altho ugh many people
may lose some or all of the hair on top of their head, the y still have hair on their arms and legs that perform imp ortant functions.
Nails and Hair
In addition to the skin, the integumentary system inc ludes the nails and hair. Like the skin, these organs h elp the body maintain
homeostasis.
Nails
Fingernails and toenails consist of specialized epider mal cells that are filled with keratin. The keratin makes them tough and hard,
which is important for the functions they serve. Finger nails prevent injury by forming protective plates ov er the ends of the fingers.
They also enhance sensation by acting as a counterfo rce to the sensitive fingertips when objects are han dled. Nails are similar to
claws in other animals. They cover the tips of fingers and toes. Fingernails and toenails both grow from nail beds. As the nail
grows, more cells are added at the nail bed. Older cells get pushed awa y from the nail bed and the nail grows longer. There are no
nerve endings in the nail. Otherwise cutting your nails woul d hurt a lot!
Hair
Hair is one of the defining characteristics of mammals. Its main component is keratin. A hair shaft consist s of dead, keratin-filled
cells that overlap each other like the shingles on a roo f (see Figure below). Like roof shingles, the overlapping cells he lp shed
water from the hair.

13.3.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13274
Shaft of Human Hair. This shaft of hair is magnified to show its overlappi ng cells.
Hair helps to insulate and protect the body. Head hair is especially important in preventing heat loss from the body. Eyelashes and
eyebrows protect the eyes from water, dirt, and other irritants. Hairs in the nose trap dust particles and microorganisms in the air
and prevent them from reaching the lungs. Hair also provides se nsory input when objects brush against it or it sways in moving air.
Hair, hair follicle, and oil glands. The oil, called sebum, helps to preve nt water loss from the skin. The sebaceous gland
secretes sebum, which waterproofs the skin and hair.

13.3.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13274Summary
Nails and hair contain mostly keratin. They protect the body and enhance the sense of touch.
ch ich in 85
SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
SKIN, HAIR, AND NAILS
Watch on

13.3.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13274Review
1. A certain disease causes the loss of all body hair. How mig ht homeostasis of the body be disturbed by the absence of ha ir?
(Hint: What are the functions of hair?)
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Jan Homann
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mensch
enhaar_200_fach.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of the National Institutes
of Health, User:Tsaitgaist/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hair_fol
licle-en.svg
License: Public Domain
13.3: Nails and Hair is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.4.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327513.4: Neuron
A close-up view of a spider web? Some sort of exotic bacteria? What do you think this is?
This is actually a nerve cell, the cell of the nervou s system. This cell sends electrical “sparks” that tra nsmit signals throughout your
body.
The Nervous System
A small child darts in front of your bike as you rac e down the street. You see the child and immediately r eact. You put on the
brakes, steer away from the child, and yell out a warnin g, all in just a split second. How do you respond so q uickly? Such rapid
responses are controlled by your nervous system. The nervous system is a complex network of nervous tissue that carries el ectrical
messages throughout the body. It includes the brain a nd spinal cord, the central nervous system, and nerves that run throughout
the body, the peripheral nervous system (see Figure below). To understand how nervous messages can trave l so quickly, you
need to know more about nerve cells.
The human nervous system includes the brain and spinal cord (central nervo us system) and nerves that run throughout the
body (peripheral nervous system).
Nerve Cells
Although the nervous system is very complex, nervous ti ssue consists of just two basic types of nerve cells: neurons and glial cells.
Neurons are the structural and functional units of the nerv ous system. They transmit electrical signals, called nerve impulses.
Glial cells provide support for neurons. For example, they provide neur ons with nutrients and other materials.

13.4.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13275Neuron Structure
As shown in Figure below, a neuron consists of three basic parts: the cell bo dy, dendrites, and axon.
The cell body contains the nucleus and other cell organelles.
Dendrites extend from the cell body and receive nerve impulses f rom other neurons.
The axon is a long extension of the cell body that transmits nerve i mpulses to other cells. The axon branches at the end, formin g
axon terminals. These are the points where the neuron communicates with other cells.
The structure of a neuron allows it to rapidly transmit nerve impulses to other cells.
The axon of many neurons has an outer layer called a myelin sheath (see Figure above). Myelin is a lipid produced by a type of a
glial cell known as a Schwann cell. The myelin sheath acts like a layer of insulation, similar to the plastic that encases an electrical
cord. Regularly spaced nodes, or gaps, in the myelin she ath allow nerve impulses to skip along the axon very rapidly.
Types of Neurons
Neurons are classified based on the direction in which th ey carry nerve impulses.
Sensory neurons carry nerve impulses from tissues and organs to the spi nal cord and brain.
Motor neurons carry nerve impulses from the brain and spinal cord to muscles and glands (see Figure below).
Interneurons carry nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and mo tor neurons.
Cra sh Cou rse
The Nervous System, P art 1: Crash C
The Nervous System, P art 1: Crash C
Watch on

13.4.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13275
This axon is part of a motor neuron. It transmits nerve impulses to a skeletal muscle, causing the muscle to contract.
Summary
Neurons are the structural and functional units of the ne rvous system. They consist of a cell body, dendrites, and axon.
Neurons transmit nerve impulses to other cells.
Types of neurons include sensory neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons.
Review
1. What are the two main parts of the nervous system?
2. List and describe the parts of a neuron.
3. What do motor neurons do?

13.4.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132754. What is myelin and the myelin sheath?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: User:The Emirr/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TENervous_system_diagram.svg
License: CC BY 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson/CK-12
Foundation, based on image by Mariana
Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source: Original:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Complet
e_neuron_cell_diagram_en.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.4: Neuron is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.5.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327613.5: Nerve Impulse
How does a nervous system signal move from one cell to the next?
It literally jumps by way of a chemical transmitter. No tice the two cells are not connected, but separated by a small gap. The
synapse. The space between a neuron and the next cell.
Nerve Impulses
Nerve impulses are electrical in nature. They result from a difference in electrical charge across the pl asma membrane of a neuron.
How does this difference in electrical charge come ab out? The answer involves ions, which are electrically charged atoms or
molecules.
Resting Potential
When a neuron is not actively transmitting a nerve i mpulse, it is in a resting state, ready to transmit a n erve impulse. During the
resting state, the sodium-potassium pump maintains a difference in charge across the cell me mbrane (see Figure below). It uses
energy in ATP to pump positive sodium ions (Na) out of the cell and potassium ions (K) into the cell. As a re sult, the inside of the
neuron is negatively charged compared to the extrac ellular fluid surrounding the neuron. This is due t o many more positively
charged ions outside the cell compared to inside the ce ll. This difference in electrical charge is called the resting potential.
The sodium-potassium pump maintains the resting potential of a neuron.
Action Potential
A nerve impulse is a sudden reversal of the electrical charge acros s the membrane of a resting neuron. The reversal of ch arge is
called an action potential. It begins when the neuron receives a chemical signal from another cell. The signal causes gates in
sodium ion channels to open, allowing positive sodium ions to flow back into the cell. As a result, the inside o f the cell becomes
positively charged compared to the outside of the c ell. This reversal of charge ripples down the axon ve ry rapidly as an electric
current (see Figure below).+ +

13.5.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13276
An action potential speeds along an axon in milliseconds.
In neurons with myelin sheaths, ions flow across the memb rane only at the nodes between sections of myelin. As a result, the
action potential jumps along the axon membrane from node to node, rather than spreading smoothly along the entire membrane.
This increases the speed at which it travels.
The place where an axon terminal meets another cell is called a synapse. The axon terminal and other cell are separated by a
narrow space known as a synaptic cleft (see Figure below). When an action potential reaches the axon te rminal, the axon terminal
releases molecules of a chemical called a neurotransmitter. The neurotransmitter molecules travel across the synaptic cleft and
bind to receptors on the membrane of the other cell. If the other cell is a neuron, this starts an action potential in t he other cell.
At a synapse, neurotransmitters are released by the axon terminal. They bind with receptors on the other cell.
Summary
A nerve impulse begins when a neuron receives a chemical sti mulus.
The nerve impulse travels down the axon membrane as an ele ctrical action potential to the axon terminal.
The axon terminal releases neurotransmitters that carr y the nerve impulse to the next cell.
TED-Ed
The Cockroach Beatbox
The Cockroach Beatbox
Watch on

13.5.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13276Review
1. Define resting potential and action potential.
2. Explain how resting potential is maintained
3. Describe how an action potential occurs.

13.5.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132764. What is a synapse?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia
Commons);By BruceBlaus (Own work)
[CC BY 3.0
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0
)], via Wikimedia Commons;By
User:Primalchaos Image:Human_brain_NIH.jpg, Public
Domain,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...p?
curid=618419
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Scheme
_sodium-potassium_pump-en.svg; By
BruceBlaus (Own work) [CC BY 3.0
(creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)];
via Wikimedia Commons; By
User:Primalchaos Image:Human_brain_NIH.jpg; Public
Domain;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=618419
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3] Credit: Rupali Raju;By BruceBlaus (Own
work) [CC BY 3.0
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0
)], via Wikimedia Commons;By
User:Primalchaos Image:Human_brain_NIH.jpg, Public
Domain,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...p?
curid=618419
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By
BruceBlaus (Own work) [CC BY 3.0
(creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)];
via Wikimedia Commons; By
User:Primalchaos Image:Human_brain_NIH.jpg; Public

13.5.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13276Domain;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=618419
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.5: Nerve Impulse is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.6.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327913.6: Central Nervous System
The human brain. The "control center." What does it control?
Practically everything. From breathing and heartbeat to reasoning, memory, and language. And it is the main part of the central
nervous system.
Central Nervous System
The nervous system has two main divisions: the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system (s ee Figure below). The
central nervous system (CNS) includes the brain and spinal cord (see Figure below). You can see an overview of the central
nervous system at this link: vimeo.com/2024719.
The two main divisions of the human nervous system are the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system.
The peripheral nervous system has additional divisions.

13.6.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13279
This diagram shows the components of the central nervous system.
The Brain
The brain is the most complex organ of the human body and the control center of the nervous system. It contains an astonishing
100 billion neurons! The brain controls such mental processes as reasoning, imagination, memory, and langua ge. It also interprets
information from the senses. In addition, it controls basic physical processes such as breathing and heartbeat.
The brain has three major parts: the cerebrum, cerebe llum, and brain stem. These parts are shown in Figure below and described in
this section.
In this drawing, assume you are looking at the left side of the head. This is ho w the brain would appear if you could look
underneath the skull.
The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. It controls conscious functions such as reasoning, language, sight, touch, and
hearing. It is divided into two hemispheres, or halves. The hemispheres are very similar but not identical to one anoth er. They
are connected by a thick bundle of axons deep within the b rain. Each hemisphere is further divided into the four lob es shown in
Figure below.
The cerebellum is just below the cerebrum. It coordinates body movement s. Many nerve pathways link the cerebellum with
motor neurons throughout the body.
The brain stem is the lowest part of the brain. It connects the rest of the brain with the spinal cord and passes nerve impulses
between the brain and spinal cord. It also controls uncon scious functions such as heart rate and breathing.

13.6.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13279
Each hemisphere of the cerebrum consists of four parts, called lobes. Each lobe is associated with particular brain
functions. Just one function of each lobe is listed here.
Spinal Cord
The spinal cord is a thin, tubular bundle of nervous tissue that exte nds from the brainstem and continues down the center of the
back to the pelvis. It is protected by the vertebrae, which encase it. The spinal cord serves as an informati on superhighway, passing
messages from the body to the brain and from the brain to the b ody.
Humanoid Robot Brains
The smartest people in the world have spent millions of dollars on developing high-tech robots. But even though technology has
come a long way, these humanoid robots are nowhere clo se to having the "brain" and motor control of a huma n. Why is that? Learn
about the motor control processes in the human brain, and ho w cutting-edge research is trying to implement it in robots below.
UB C M e dicin e - Edu ca tion a l M e dia
Neuroanatomy S1 E1: Intro to the Ce
Neuroanatomy S1 E1: Intro to the Ce
Watch on
M ITK 12V ide os
Humanoid Robot Brains (Science Out
Humanoid Robot Brains (Science Out
Watch on

13.6.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13279Science Friday: Face Time: How quickly do you judge a face?
How fast do you judge somebody by their face? In this video by Science Friday, Dr. Jon Freeman discusses how the brain quickly
creates character assessments of people and the effects the se assessments may have.
Further Reading
Drugs and the Nervous System
Nervous System Diseases
Summary
The central nervous includes the brain and spinal cord.
The brain is the control center of the nervous system. It c ontrols virtually all mental and physical processes.
The spinal cord is a long, thin bundle of nervous tissue that passes messages from the body to the brain and from th e brain to
the body.
Review
1. Name the organs of the central nervous system.
2. Which part of the brain controls conscious functions such a s reasoning?
3. What are the roles of the brain stem?
Sc iF ri
Face Time: How Quickly Do Y ou Judg
Face Time: How Quickly Do Y ou Judg
Watch on

13.6.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132794. Sam’s dad was in a car accident in which his neck was broken. He survived the injury but is now paralyzed from the neck
down. Explain why.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Grm wnr/Wikimedia
Commons, modified by Sam
McCabe;Laura Guerin
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Central_
nervous_system.svg; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Laura Guerin;Flickr:FaceMePLS
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
http://www.flickr.com/photos/faceme/5448
327286/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.0
13.6: Central Nervous System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.7.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328113.7: Peripheral Nervous System
How does the signal get to your toes?
If the brain controls practically everything, how doe s the signal get to your toes? Or your legs? Or arms? By way of the peripheral
nervous system, or all the nerves shown here other than th e brain and spinal cord. Notice how they go everywhere.
Peripheral Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) consists of all the nervous tissue that lies outsid e the central nervous system. It is shown in
yellow in Figure below. It is connected to the central nervous system by nerves. A nerve is a cable-like bundle of axons. Some
nerves are very long. The longest human nerve is the sciatic nerve. It runs from the spinal cord in the lower back down the left leg
all the way to the toes of the left foot. Like the n ervous system as a whole, the peripheral nervous syste m also has two divisions: the
sensory division and the motor division.
The sensory division of the PNS carries sensory information from the body to th e central nervous system.
The motor division of the PNS carries nerve impulses from the central nervous sys tem to muscles and glands throughout the
body. The nerve impulses stimulate muscles to contract a nd glands to secrete hormones. The motor division of the pe ripheral
nervous system is further divided into the somatic and aut onomic nervous systems.
The nerves of the peripheral nervous system are shown in blue in this image. Can you identify the sciatic nerve?
Somatic Nervous System
The somatic nervous system (SNS) controls mainly voluntary activities that are under conscious control. It is made up of nerves
that are connected to skeletal muscles. Whenever yo u perform a conscious movement, from signing your name to riding your bike,
your somatic nervous system is responsible.
The somatic nervous system also controls some unconsc ious movements, called reflexes. A reflex is a very rapid motor response
that is not directed by the brain. In a reflex, nerv e impulses travel to and from the spinal cord in a reflex arc, like the one in Figure
below. In this example, the person jerks his hand away f rom the flame without any conscious thought. It happe ns unconsciously
because the nerve impulses bypass the brain.

13.7.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13281
A reflex arc like this one enables involuntary actions. How might ref lex responses be beneficial to the organism
Autonomic Nervous System
All other involuntary activities not under conscious control are the responsibility of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). Nerves
of the ANS are connected to glands and internal organs. They control basic physical functions such as heart r ate, breathing,
digestion, and sweat production. The autonomic nervous system also has two subdivisions: the sympathetic div ision and the
parasympathetic division.
The sympathetic division deals with emergency situations. It prepares the body for “fight or flight.” Do you get clammy palms
or a racing heart when you have to play a solo or give a speech? Nerves of the sympathetic division control these respon ses.
The parasympathetic division controls involuntary activities that are not emergenci es. For example, it controls the organs of
your digestive system so they can break down the food yo u eat.
Science Friday: The Agony and Ecstasy of Capsaicin
Have you ever tasted something spicy? In this video by Science Friday, Dr. Marco Tizzano discusses how capsaicin creates the
burning sensation that some people enjoy.
Summary
The peripheral nervous system consists of all the nervous tissue that lies outside the central nervous system. It i s connected to
the central nervous system by nerves.
The peripheral nervous system has several divisions and subd ivisions that transmit nerve impulses between the central nervous
system and the rest of the body.
Cra sh Cou rse
P eripheral Nervous System: Crash C
P eripheral Nervous System: Crash C
Watch on
Sc iF ri
The Agony and Ecstasy of Capsaicin
The Agony and Ecstasy of Capsaicin
Watch on

13.7.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13281Review
1. Identify the two major divisions of the peripheral nervous system.
2. What is the role of the sensory division?
3. Compare and contrast the somatic and autonomic nervo us systems.
4. What are the two divisions of the autonomic nervous syste m?
5. What is the role of the sympathetic division?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Persian Poet Gal/Wikipedia
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nervous
_system_diagram_%28dumb%29.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.7: Peripheral Nervous System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.8.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328513.8: Senses
Name the five senses.
Hearing, sight, taste, touch, and smell. But how do we hear, see, taste, touch and smell? It all has to do, obvio usly, with the nervous
system.
The Senses
The sensory division of the peripheral nervous syste m (PNS) includes several sense organs—the eyes, ears, m outh, nose, and skin.
Each sense organ has special cells, called sensory receptors, that respond to a particular type of stimulus. For e xample, the nose
has sensory receptors that respond to chemicals, which we perceive as odors. Sensory receptors send nerve impul ses to sensory
nerves, which carry the nerve impulses to the central nerv ous system. The brain then interprets the nerve impul ses to form a
response.
Sight
Sight is the ability to sense light, and the eye is the o rgan that senses light. Light first passes through t he cornea of the eye, which
is a clear outer layer that protects the eye (see Figure below). Light enters the eye through an opening call ed the pupil. The light
then passes through the lens, which focuses it on the retina at the back of the eye. The retina contains light r eceptor cells. These
cells send nerve impulses to the optic nerve, which carries the impulses to the brain. The brain in terprets the impulses and “tells”
us what we are seeing.
The eye is the organ that senses light and allows us to see.
Hearing
Hearing is the ability to sense sound waves, and the ear is the organ that senses sound. Sound waves enter the auditory canal and
travel to the eardrum (see Figure below). They strike the eardrum and make it vibrate. The vibrations then travel through several
other structures inside the ear and reach the cochl ea. The cochlea is a coiled tube filled with liquid. The liquid mov es in response to
the vibrations, causing tiny hair cells lining the cochlea to bend. In response, the hair cel ls send nerve impulses to the auditory
nerve, which carries the impulses to the brain. The brain interpre ts the impulses and “tells” us what we are hearing.

13.8.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13285
The ear is the organ that senses sound waves and allows us to hear. It also senses body position so we can keep our balance.
Balance
The ears are also responsible for the sense of balanc e. Balance is the ability to sense and maintain body position. The semicircular
canals inside the ear (see Figure above) contain fluid that moves when the head chang es position. Tiny hairs lining the
semicircular canals sense movement of the fluid. In re sponse, they send nerve impulses to the vestibular nerve, which carries the
impulses to the brain. The brain interprets the imp ulses and sends messages to the peripheral nervous s ystem. This system
maintains the body’s balance by triggering contractio ns of skeletal muscles as needed.
Taste and Smell
Taste and smell are both abilities to sense chemicals. Like other sens e receptors, both taste receptors and odor receptors send
nerve impulses to the brain, and the brain “tells” use what we are tasting or smelling.
Taste receptors are found in tiny bumps on the tongue called taste buds (see Figure below). There are separate taste receptors for
sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and meaty tastes. The meaty taste is called umami.
Taste buds on the tongue contain taste receptor cells.
Odor receptors line the passages of the nose (see Figure below). They sense chemicals in the air. In fact, o dor receptors can sense
hundreds of different chemicals. Did you ever notice that food seems to have less taste when you have a st uffy nose? This occurs
because the sense of smell contributes to the sense of ta ste, and a stuffy nose interferes with the ability to smel l.

13.8.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13285
Odor receptors. Odor receptors and their associated nerves (in yello w) line the top of the nasal passages.
Touch
Touch is the ability to sense pressure. Pressure receptors are found mainly in the skin. They are especially co ncentrated on the
tongue, lips, face, palms of the hands, and soles of t he feet. Some touch receptors sense differences in temperature or pain. How do
pain receptors help maintain homeostasis? (Hint: What migh t happen if we couldn’t feel pain?)
Why I do Science
If your kids don't like broccoli, it may not be their fault, it may just be their genes talking. Dr. Danielle Reed is a geneticist working
to understand the genetics of taste. Can all people de tect the same tastes? No. Why not? It has to do with a p erson's genes. People
may actually taste foods differently.
Science Friday: The Bouba-Kiki Effect
Given two shapes, which one is Bouba and which one is Kiki? In this video by Science Friday, psychologist Kelly McCor mick
discusses why over 90% of tested subjects associated t hese made-up words with a specific shape.
K QED
Why I Do Science: Danielle Reed - QU
Why I Do Science: Danielle Reed - QU
Watch on

13.8.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13285Science Friday: A Cure for The Colorblindness Blues
Colorblindness is the most common genetic disorder i n the world. In this video by Science Friday, researcher s Maureen and Jay
Neitz discuss how their research has created a potential cure for this disorder.
Summary
Human senses include sight, hearing, balance, taste, smel l, and touch.
Sensory organs such as the eyes contain cells called sensory rece ptors that respond to particular sensory stimuli.
Sensory nerves carry nerve impulses from sensory receptors to the central nervous system.
The brain interprets the nerve impulses to form a response.
Review
1. List the five human senses.
2. Describe how we see.
3. Describe how we hear.
4. Why does food taste different when you have a stuffy nos e?
Sc iF ri
The Bouba-Kiki Effect
The Bouba-Kiki Effect
Watch on
Sc iF ri
A Cure for The Colorblindness Blues
A Cure for The Colorblindness Blues
Watch on

13.8.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132855. What might happen if we couldn’t feel pain?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Patrick J Lynch
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Head_ol
factory_nerve.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Rhcastilhos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Schemat
ic_diagram_of_the_human_eye_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Dan Pickard
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HumanE
ar.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Bruce
Source:
www.flickr.com/photos/superfantastic/2247
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Patrick J Lynch
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Head_ol
factory_nerve.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
13.8: Senses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.9.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328613.9: Drugs and the Nervous System
Is coffee a drug?
Maybe. But that doesn't necessarily mean it is bad for you. Looks tasty, though. Other than taste, why do many people have a cup
of coffee in the morning? Does it help them wake up? For many people, it does. Why? The caffeine in the cof fee stimulates the
central nervous system. This drug is one of the milder drug s affecting the nervous system.
Drugs and the Nervous System
A drug is any chemical that affects the body’s structure o r function. Many drugs, including both legal and ille gal drugs, are
psychoactive drugs. This means that they affect the central nervous sys tem, generally by influencing the transmission of ne rve
impulses. For example, some psychoactive drugs mimic neurotransmitters. At the link below, you can watch an a nimation showing
how psychoactive drugs affect the brain.
Examples of Psychoactive Drugs
Caffeine is an example of a psychoactive drug. It is found in coffee and many other products (see Table below). Caffeine is a
central nervous system stimulant. Like other stimulant drugs, it makes you feel more awake and alert. Other psychoactive drugs
include alcohol, nicotine, and marijuana. Each has a different effect on the central nervous system. Alcoh ol, for example, is a
depressant. It has the opposite effects of a stimulant like caffeine.
Product Caffeine Content (mg)
Coffee (8 oz) 130
Tea (8 oz) 55
Cola (8 oz) 25
Coffee ice cream (8 oz) 60
Hot cocoa (8 oz) 10
Dark chocolate candy (1.5 oz) 30

13.9.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13286Drug Abuse and Addiction
Psychoactive drugs may bring about changes in mood th at users find desirable, so the drugs may be abused. Drug abuse is use of a
drug without the advice of a medical professional and for reasons not originally intended. Continued use o f a psychoactive drug
may lead to drug addiction, in which the drug user is unable to stop using the drug. Over time, a drug user may need more of the
drug to get the desired effect. This can lead to drug overdose and death.
Summary
Drugs are chemicals that affect the body’s structure or fun ction.
Psychoactive drugs, such as caffeine and alcohol, affect the central nervous system by influencing the transmission o f nerve
impulses in the brain.
Psychoactive drugs may be abused and lead to drug addicti on.
Review
1. What is a psychoactive drug? Give two examples.
2. Define drug abuse. When does drug addiction occur?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.9: Drugs and the Nervous System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
How Do P ain Relievers Work? - Georg
How Do P ain Relievers Work? - Georg
Watch on

13.10.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328713.10: Nervous System Diseases
Ever had a headache that just won't go away?
We all get headaches. Headaches are a relatively min or problem associated with the nervous system. But wha t about more serious
issues of the nervous system? As you can probably imagi ne, these can be extremely serious.
Disorders of the Nervous System
There are several different types of problems that can aff ect the nervous system.
Vascular disorders involve problems with blood flow. For example, a stroke oc curs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to
part of the brain. Brain cells die quickly if their oxygen supply is cut off. This may cause paralysis and loss of other normal
functions, depending on the part of the brain that is dam aged.
Nervous tissue may become infected by microorganisms. Meningitis, for example, is caused by a viral or bacterial infection o f
the tissues covering the brain. This may cause the brain to swell and lead to brain damage and death.
Encephalitis is a brain infection most often caused by viruses. The immune system tries to fight off a brain infection, ju st as it
tries to fight off other infections. But sometimes this can do more harm than good. The immune system’s response may cause
swelling in the brain. With no room to expand, the brain p ushes against the skull. This may injure the brain and ev en cause
death. Medicines can help fight some viral infections of the brain, but not all infections.
Brain or spinal cord injuries may cause paralysis and othe r disabilities. Injuries to peripheral nerves can cause localized pain or
numbness.
Abnormal brain functions can occur for a variety of reaso ns. Examples include headaches, such as migraine headaches, and
epilepsy, in which seizures occur.
Nervous tissue may degenerate, or break down. Alzheimer’s disease is an example of this type of disorder, as is Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis, or ALS. ALS is also known as Lou Gehrig's disease. It leads to a gradual loss of higher brain functions.

13.10.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13287In addition to ALS and Alzheimer's disease, other seriou s nervous system diseases include multiple sclerosis, Hunti ngton’s
disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These diseases rarely, if ever, occur in young people. Their causes and symptoms are listed
below (Table below). The diseases have no known cure, but med icines may help control their symptoms.
Disease Cause Symptoms
Multiple SclerosisThe immune system attacks and damages
the central nervous system so neurons
cannot function properly.muscle weakness, difficulty moving,
problems with coordination, difficulty
maintaining balance
Huntington's DiseaseAn inherited gene codes for an abnormal
protein that causes the death of neurons.uncontrolled jerky movements, loss of
muscle control, issues with memory and
learning
Parkinson's DiseaseAn abnormally low level of a
neurotransmitter affects the part of the
brain that controls movement.uncontrolled shaking, slowed movements,
issues associated with speaking
Alzheimer's DiseaseAbnormal changes in the brain cause the
gradual loss of most normal brain activity.memory loss, confusion, mood swings,
gradual loss of control over mental and
physical abilities
Alzheimer's Disease: Is the Cure in the Genes?
By 2050, as the U.S. population ages, 15 million Americans will suffer from Alzheimer's disease — triple today's n umber. But
genetic studies may provide information leading to a cu re.
In April 2011, an international analysis of the gene s of more than 50,000 people led to the discovery of f ive new genes that make
Alzheimer's disease more likely in the elderly and pro vide clues about what might start the Alzheimer's disea se process and fuel its
progress in a person’s brain.
Summary
Disorders of the nervous system include blood flow probl ems such as stroke, infections such as meningitis, brain in juries, and
degeneration of nervous tissue, as in Alzheimer’s disease.
K QED
Alzheimer' s: Is the Cure in the Genes
Alzheimer' s: Is the Cure in the Genes
Watch on

13.10.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13287Review
1. Identify three nervous system disorders.
2. Multiple sclerosis is a disease in which the myelin shea ths of neurons in the central nervous system break down. What
symptoms might this cause? Why?
Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.10: Nervous System Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.11.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139513.11: Human Body
How is the human body similar to a well-tuned machine?
Many people have compared the human body to a machin e. Think about some common machines, such as drills an d washing
machines. Each machine consists of many parts, and each part does a specific job, yet all the parts work toge ther to perform an
overall function. The human body is like a machine in al l these ways. In fact, it may be the most fantastic machine on Earth.
The human machine is organized at different levels, s tarting with the cell and ending with the entire orga nism (see Figure below).
At each higher level of organization, there is a greater de gree of complexity.
The human organism has several levels of organization.
Cells
The most basic parts of the human machine are cells— an amazing 100 trillion of them by the time the ave rage person reaches
adulthood! Cells are the basic units of structure and function in the human body, as they are in all living things. Each cell carries
out basic life processes that allow the body to survi ve. Many human cells are specialized in form and func tion, as shown in Figure
below. Each type of cell in the figure plays a specifi c role. For example, nerve cells have long projection s that help them carry
electrical messages to other cells. Muscle cells have ma ny mitochondria that provide the energy they need to move the body.

13.11.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395
Different types of cells in the human body are specialized for specific jobs. Do you know the functions of any of the cell
types shown here?
Tissues
After the cell, the tissue is the next level of organ ization in the human body. A tissue is a group of connected cells that have a
similar function. There are four basic types of huma n tissues: epithelial, muscle, nervous, and connecti ve tissues. These four tissue
types, which are shown in Figure below, make up all the organs of the human body.
m rspe re ira cla ss
Specialized Cells and Tissues
Specialized Cells and Tissues
Watch on

13.11.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395
The human body consists of these four tissue types.
Connective tissue is made up of cells that form the body’s structure. Exampl es include bone and cartilage.
Epithelial tissue is made up of cells that line inner and outer body sur faces, such as the skin and the lining of the digestive
tract. Epithelial tissue protects the body and its intern al organs, secretes substances such as hormones, and absorb s substances
such as nutrients.
Muscle tissue is made up of cells that have the unique ability to con tract, or become shorter. Muscles attached to bones enab le
the body to move.
Nervous tissue is made up of neurons, or nerve cells, that carry electrical messages. Nervous ti ssue makes up the brain and the
nerves that connect the brain to all parts of the body.
Organs and Organ Systems
After tissues, organs are the next level of organizatio n of the human body. An organ is a structure that consists of two or more
types of tissues that work together to do the same jo b. Examples of human organs include the brain, heart, lungs, skin, and kidneys.
Human organs are organized into organ systems, many of which are shown in Figure below. An organ system is a group of organs
that work together to carry out a complex overall functio n. Each organ of the system does part of the larger job.

13.11.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395
Many of the organ systems that make up the human body are represented here. W hat is the overall function of each organ
system?
Your body’s 12 organ systems are shown below (Table below). Your organ systems do not work alone in your body. They must all
be able to work together. For example, one of the most i mportant functions of organ systems is to provide ce lls with oxygen and
nutrients and to remove toxic waste products such as carbon dioxide. A number of organ systems, including the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems, all work together to do this.

13.11.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395Organ System Major Tissues and Organs Function
Cardiovascular Heart; blood vessels; bloodTransports oxygen, hormones, and nutrients
to the body cells. Moves wastes and carbon
dioxide away from cells.
Lymphatic Lymph nodes; lymph vesselsDefend against infection and disease,
moves lymph between tissues and the blood
stream.
DigestiveEsophagus; stomach; small intestine; large
intestineDigests foods and absorbs nutrients,
minerals, vitamins, and water.
EndocrinePituitary gland, hypothalamus; adrenal
glands; ovaries; testesProduces hormones that communicate
between cells.
Integumentary Skin, hair, nailsProvides protection from injury and water
loss, physical defense against infection by
microorganisms, and temperature control.
MuscularCardiac (heart) muscle; skeletal muscle;
smooth muscle; tendonsInvolved in movement and heat production.
Nervous Brain, spinal cord; nervesCollects, transfers, and processes
information.
ReproductiveFemale: uterus; vagina; fallopian tubes;
ovaries
Male: penis; testes; seminal vesiclesProduces gametes (sex cells) and sex
hormones.
Respiratory Trachea, larynx, pharynx, lungsBrings air to sites where gas exchange can
occur between the blood and cells (around
body) or blood and air (lungs).
Skeletal Bones, cartilage; ligamentsSupports and protects soft tissues of body;
produces blood cells; stores minerals.
Urinary Kidneys; urinary bladderRemoves extra water, salts, and waste
products from blood and body; controls pH;
controls water and salt balance.
Immune Bone marrow; spleen; white blood cells Defends a gainst diseases.
Further Reading
Carcinogens and Cancer
Air Pollution and Illness
Bioterrorism
Summary
The human body is organized at different levels, starti ng with the cell.
Cells are organized into tissues, and tissues form organs.
Organs are organized into organ systems such as the ske letal and muscular systems.
Review
1. What are the levels of organization of the human body?
2. Which type of tissue covers the surface of the body?
3. What are the functions of the skeletal system?

13.11.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13954. Which organ system supports the body and allows it to m ove?
5. Explain how form and function are related in human cells. Include examples.
6. Compare and contrast epithelial and muscle tissues.

13.11.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Alila Medical
Media, 2014;Image copyright Matthew
Cole, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
N oobFrom UA
Google Body Browser
Google Body Browser
Watch on

13.11.8 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1395
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Image copyright Matthew Cole,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
This page titled 13.11: Human Body is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

13.12.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328813.12: Endocrine Glands
What's a hormone?
This messenger pigeon is delivering a letter, making s ure it gets to where it needs to go. It could be said that hormones are
biological messengers, and they originate from the e ndocrine system. The nervous system isn’t the only m essage-relaying system
of the human body. The endocrine system also carries m essages. The endocrine system is a system of glands that release chemical
messenger molecules into the bloodstream. The messenge r molecules are hormones. Hormones act slowly compared with the rapid
transmission of electrical messages by the nervous syst em. They must travel through the bloodstream to the cells they affect, and
this takes time. On the other hand, because endocrine h ormones are released into the bloodstream, they trav el throughout the body.
As a result, endocrine hormones can affect many cells and have body-wide effects.
Glands of the Endocrine System
The major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure below. You can access a similar, animated endocrine system chart
at the link below.

13.12.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13288Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is actually part of the brain (see Figure below), but it also secretes hormones. Some of its hormones “tell” the
pituitary gland either to secrete or to stop secret ing its hormones. In this way, the hypothalamus provide s a link between the
nervous and endocrine systems. The hypothalamus also produces hormones that directly regulate body proce sses. These hormones
travel to the pituitary gland, which stores them until they are needed. The hormones include antidiuretic hormone an d oxytocin.
Antidiuretic hormone stimulates the kidneys to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine.
Oxytocin stimulates the contractions of childbirth, among other fu nctions.
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland are located close together at the base of the brain.
Pituitary Gland
The pea-sized pituitary gland is attached to the hypothalamus by a thin stalk (se e Figure above). It consists of two bulb-like lobes.
The posterior (back) lobe stores hormones from the hy pothalamus. The anterior (front) lobe secretes pitui tary hormones. Several
pituitary hormones and their effects are listed in Table below. Most pituitary hormones control other endocri ne glands. That’s why
the pituitary is often called the “master gland” of the en docrine system.
Hormone Target Effect(s)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Adrenal glandsStimulates the cortex of each adrenal gland
to secrete its hormones.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroid glandStimulates the thyroid gland to secrete
thyroid hormone.
Growth hormone (GH) Body cellsStimulates body cells to synthesize proteins
and grow.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) Ovaries, testesStimulates the ovaries to develop mature
eggs; stimulates the testes to produce
sperm.
Luteinizing hormone (LH) Ovaries, testesStimulates the ovaries and testes to secrete
sex hormones; stimulates the ovaries to
release eggs.
Prolactin (PRL) Mammary glandsStimulates the mammary glands to produce
milk.
Other Endocrine Glands
Other glands of the endocrine system are described belo w. You can refer to Figure above to see where they are located.

13.12.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13288The thyroid gland is a large gland in the neck. Thyroid hormones increase the rate of metabolism in cells throughout the body.
They control how quickly cells use energy and make protei ns.
The two parathyroid glands are located behind the thyroid gland. Parathyroid hormon e helps keep the level of calcium in the
blood within a narrow range. It stimulates bone cells to dissolve calcium in bone matrix and release it into th e blood.
The pineal gland is a tiny gland located at the base of the brain. It secr etes the hormone melatonin. This hormone controls
sleep-wake cycles and several other processes.
The pancreas is located near the stomach. Its hormones include ins ulin and glucagon. These two hormones work together to
control the level of glucose in the blood. Insulin causes excess blood glucose to be taken up by the liv er, which stores the
glucose as glycogen. Glucagon stimulates the liver to break down glycogen into glucose an d release it back into the blood. The
pancreas also secretes digestive enzymes into the digestiv e tract.
The two adrenal glands are located above the kidneys. Each gland has an inner a nd outer part. The outer part, called the cortex,
secretes hormones such as cortisol, which helps the body d eal with stress, and aldosterone, which helps regulate the b alance of
minerals in the body. The inner part of each adrenal gland, called the medulla, secretes fight-or-flight hormones su ch as
adrenaline, which prepare the body to respond to emergenc ies. For example, adrenaline increases the amount of oxygen and
glucose going to the muscles.
The gonads secrete sex hormones. The male gonads are called testes. They secrete the male sex hormone testosterone. The
female gonads are called ovaries. They secrete the female sex hormone estrogen. Sex hormo nes are involved in the changes of
puberty. They also control the production of gametes by t he gonads.
Further Reading
Endocrine System Diseases
Summary
The endocrine system consists of glands that secrete hormo nes into the bloodstream.
The endocrine system is regulated by a part of the brai n called the hypothalamus, which also secretes hormones.
The hypothalamus controls the pituitary gland, which is c alled the “master gland” of the endocrine system bec ause its hormones
regulate other endocrine glands.
Other endocrine glands include the thyroid gland and pancre as.
Review
1. Explain how the nervous system is linked with the endocrine system.
2. List five of the major glands of the endocrine system.
Cra sh Cou rse
Endocrine System, P art 1 - Glands &
Endocrine System, P art 1 - Glands &
Watch on

13.12.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132883. Name three pituitary hormones, and state how they affect their targets.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.12: Endocrine Glands is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.13.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1328913.13: Hormone
Steroid hormones. How do they work?
As hormones, they are the messengers of the endocrine system. Obviously they must change something in the cell.
How Hormones Work
Hormones are the messenger molecules of the endocrine system. Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in t he blood.
However, each hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. A target cell is the type of cell on which a hormone has an
effect. A target cell is affected by a particular ho rmone because it has receptor proteins that are specific to that hormone. A
hormone travels through the bloodstream until it fin ds a target cell with a matching receptor it can bind to. When the hormone
binds to a receptor, it causes a change within the ce ll. Exactly how this works depends on whether the hormon e is a steroid
hormone or a non-steroid hormone.
Steroid Hormones
Steroid hormones are made of lipids, such as phosphol ipids and cholesterol. They are fat soluble, so they can diffuse across the
plasma membrane of target cells and bind with receptors in the cytoplasm of the cell (see Figure below). The steroid hormone and
receptor form a complex that moves into the nucleus and influences the expression of genes, essentially acting as a transcription
factor. Examples of steroid hormones include cortisol and sex hormones.
En cy clopa e dia B rita n n ica
The Endocrine System
The Endocrine System
Watch on

13.13.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13289
A steroid hormone crosses the plasma membrane of a target cell a nd binds with a receptor inside the cell.
Non-Steroid Hormones
Non-steroid hormones are made of amino acids. They are not fat soluble, so they cannot diffuse across the plas ma membrane of
target cells. Instead, a non-steroid hormone binds to a receptor on the cell membrane (see Figure below). The binding of the
hormone triggers an enzyme inside the cell membrane. The enzyme activates another molecule, called the second messenger,
which influences processes inside the cell. Most endocrin e hormones are non-steroid hormones, including insulin and thyroid
hormones.
A non-steroid hormone binds with a receptor on the plasma membrane of a t arget cell. Then, a secondary messenger affects
cell processes.
Summary
Hormones work by binding to protein receptors either insi de target cells or on their plasma membranes.
The binding of a steroid hormone forms a hormone-receptor complex that affects gene expression in the nucleus of the target
cell.
The binding of a non-steroid hormone activates a second mes senger that affects processes within the target cell.
Review
1. Define hormone.

13.13.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132892. Compare and contrast how steroid and non-steroid hor mones affect target cells.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: LadyofHats
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: LadyofHats
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
13.13: Hormone is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.14.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329013.14: Hormone Regulation
On or off?
Hormones alter conditions inside the cell, usually i n response to a stimulus. That means they are activa ted at specific times. So they
must be turned on and then turned back off. What turns the se hormones and their responses on or off?
Hormone Regulation: Feedback Mechanisms
Hormones control many cell activities, so they are ver y important for homeostasis. But what controls the hormo nes themselves?
Most hormones are regulated by feedback mechanisms. A feedback mechanism is a loop in which a product feeds back to control
its own production. Most hormone feedback mechanisms invo lve negative feedback loops. Negative feedback keeps the
concentration of a hormone within a narrow range.
Negative Feedback
Negative feedback occurs when a product feeds back to decrease its own p roduction. This type of feedback brings things back t o
normal whenever they start to become too extreme. The thyroid gland is a good example of this type of re gulation. It is controlled
by the negative feedback loop shown in Figure below.

13.14.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13290
The thyroid gland is regulated by a negative feedback loop. The loop include s the hypothalamus and pituitary gland in
addition to the thyroid.
Here’s how thyroid regulation works. The hypothalamus secretes thyrotropin-releasing hormone, or TRH. TRH stim ulates the
pituitary gland to produce thyroid-stimulating hormo ne, or TSH. TSH, in turn, stimulates the thyroid gland to secrete its hormones.
When the level of thyroid hormones is high enough, the hormones feedback to stop the hypothalamus from secreting TRH and the
pituitary from secreting TSH. Without the stimulation of TSH, the thyroid gland stops secreting its hormones. Soo n, the level of
thyroid hormone starts to fall too low. What do you th ink happens next?
Negative feedback also controls insulin secretion by the pan creas.
Positive feedback
Positive feedback occurs when a product feeds back to increase its own production. This causes conditions to become increasin gly
extreme. An example of positive feedback is milk pro duction by a mother for her baby. As the baby suckles, nerve messages from
the nipple cause the pituitary gland to secrete pro lactin. Prolactin, in turn, stimulates the mammary gla nds to produce milk, so the
baby suckles more. This causes more prolactin to be secr eted and more milk to be produced. This example is o ne of the few
positive feedback mechanisms in the human body. What do you think would happen if milk production by the mammary glands
was controlled by negative feedback instead?
Summary
Most hormones are controlled by negative feedback, in whi ch the hormone feeds back to decrease its own production. This ty pe
of feedback brings things back to normal whenever they star t to become too extreme.
TED-Ed
Feedback loops: How nature gets its
Feedback loops: How nature gets its
Watch on

13.14.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13290Positive feedback is much less common because it causes condi tions to become increasingly extreme.
Review
1. What is negative feedback?
2. Why are negative feedback mechanisms more common th an positive feedback mechanisms in the human body?
3. What might happen if an endocrine hormone such as thy roid hormone was controlled by positive instead of negati ve feedback?
4. Tasha had a thyroid test. Her doctor gave her an injectio n of TSH and 15 minutes later measured the level of thyroid hormone in
her blood. What is TSH? Why do you think Tasha’s doctor gave h er an injection of TSH? How would this affect the level of
thyroid hormones in her blood if her thyroid is normal?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.14: Hormone Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.15.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329113.15: Endocrine System Diseases
How tall can a person become?
This may be an exaggeration, but the world's tallest p erson, Robert Pershing Wadlow, stood almost nine feet tall when he died at
the age of 22. Is growing that tall due to a problem with t he endocrine system?
Endocrine System Disorders
Diseases of the endocrine system are relatively commo n. An endocrine disease usually involves the secretion o f too much or not
enough hormone. When too much hormone is secreted, it is called hypersecretion. When not enough hormone is secreted, it is
called hyposecretion.
Hypersecretion
Hypersecretion by an endocrine gland is often caused by a tumor. For example, a tumor of the pituitary gla nd can cause
hypersecretion of growth hormone. If this occurs in ch ildhood, it results in very long arms and legs and ab normally tall stature by
adulthood. The condition is commonly known as gigantism (see Figure below).
Hypersecretion of growth hormone leads to abnormal growth, often cal led gigantism.
Hyposecretion
Destruction of hormone-secreting cells of a gland may result in not enough of a hormone b eing secreted. This occurs in type 1
diabetes. In this case, the body’s own immune system attacks an d destroys cells of the pancreas that secrete insulin, making type 1
diabetes an autoimmune disease. A person with type 1 d iabetes must frequently monitor the level of glucose in the blood (see
Figure below). If the level of blood glucose is too high, insulin is injected to bring it under control. If it is too low, a small amount
of sugar is consumed.

13.15.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13291
To measure the level of glucose in the blood, a drop of blood is placed on a test strip, which is read by a meter.
Hormone Resistance
In some cases, an endocrine gland secretes a normal amo unt of hormone, but target cells do not respond to the hormone. Often, this
is because target cells have become resistant to th e hormone. Type 2 diabetes is an example of this type of endocrine disorder. I n
type 2 diabetes, body cells do not respond to normal amounts of insulin. As a result, cells do not take up glucose and the amount of
glucose in the blood becomes too high. This type of dia betes is usually treated with medication and diet. Th e addition of extra
insulin to the treatment can help some patients.
Summary
Endocrine system disorders usually involve the secretio n of too much or not enough hormone. For example, a tumor of the
adrenal gland may lead to excessive secretion of growth h ormone, which causes gigantism.
In Type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not secrete enough ins ulin, which causes high levels of glucose in the blood.
Review
1. Define hypersecretion. Give an example of an endocrine d isorder that involves hypersecretion.

13.15.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132912. Explain why a person with type 2 diabetes is not affecte d by normal amounts of insulin. Will providing extra insul in help this
person?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:M
artinVanBurenBates.jpeg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.15: Endocrine System Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.16.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329213.16: Heart
What's the most active muscle in the body?
The human heart. An absolutely remarkable organ. Obvio usly, its main function is to pump blood throughout the body. And it does
this extremely well. On average, this muscular organ wil l beat about 100,000 times in one day and about 35 m illion times in a year.
During an average lifetime, the human heart will beat more than 2.5 billion times.
The Circulatory System
The circulatory system can be compared to a system of interconnected, one- way roads that range from superhighways to back
alleys. Like a network of roads, the job of the circul atory system is to allow the transport of materials from one place to another. As
described in Figure below, the materials carried by the circulatory syste m include hormones, oxygen, cellular wastes, and nutri ents
from digested food. Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body. Th e main components of the
circulatory system are the heart, blood vessels, and blood.
The function of the circulatory system is to move materials around the body.

13.16.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13292The Heart
The heart is a muscular organ in the chest. It consists mainly of cardiac muscle tissue and pumps blood throu gh blood vessels by
repeated, rhythmic contractions. The heart has four chambers, as shown in Figure below: two upper atria (singular, atrium) and
two lower ventricles. Valves between chambers keep blood flowing through the h eart in just one direction.
The chambers of the heart and the valves between them are shown here.
Blood Flow Through the Heart
Blood flows through the heart in two separate loops, wh ich are indicated by the arrows in Figure above. You can think of them as a
"left side loop" and a "right side loop." The right side of the heart collects oxygen-poor blood from t he body and pumps the blood
to the lungs. In the lungs, carbon dioxide is released a nd oxygen obtained by the blood. The left side of t he heart carries the
oxygen-rich blood back from the lungs and pumps it t o the rest of the body. The blood delivers oxygen to the body's cells, returning
the oxygen-poor blood back to the heart.
1. Blood from the body enters the right atrium of the heart. The right atrium pumps the blood to the right ventricle, which pumps it
to the lungs.
2. Blood from the lungs enters the left atrium of the heart. The left atrium pumps the blood to the left ventricle, which pumps it to
the body.
Heartbeat
Unlike skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle contracts with out stimulation by the nervous system. Instead, specia lized cardiac muscle
cells send out electrical impulses that stimulate the cont ractions. As a result, the atria and ventricles normall y contract with just the
right timing to keep blood pumping efficiently through the heart.

13.16.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13292Summary
The heart contracts rhythmically to pump blood to the lungs and the rest of the body.
Specialized cardiac muscle cells trigger the contractions.
Review
1. What are the main components of the circulatory system?
2. Describe how blood flows through the heart.
Ta lG o le swor t h y
H o w I re p a ire d m y o w n he a rt

13.16.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132923. What controls heartbeat?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(Wikimedia: LadyofHats), modified by CK12 Foundation;Julo (Wikimedia)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BloodPr
essure.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(Wikimedia: LadyofHats), modified by CK12 Foundation;Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Human_
healthy_pumping_heart_en.svg; CK-12
Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
13.16: Heart is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.17.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329313.17: Blood Vessels
How does blood travel around the body?
Through blood vessels, of course. This image of veins is from William Harvey's (1578-1657) Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu
Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus. Harvey was the first to describe in detail the system ic circulation and properties of blood being
pumped to the brain and body by the heart.
Blood Vessels
Blood vessels form a network throughout the body to transport blo od to all the body cells. There are three major typ es of blood
vessels: arteries, veins, and capillaries. All three are shown in Figure below and described below.
Blood vessels include arteries, veins, and capillaries.
Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. They have thick walls that can withstand the p ressure
of blood being pumped by the heart. Arteries generally ca rry oxygen-rich blood. The largest artery is the aorta, which receives
blood directly from the heart.
Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart. This blo od is no longer under much pressure, so many veins have
valves that prevent backflow of blood. Veins generally carry deoxygenated blood. The largest vein is the inferior vena cava,

13.17.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13293which carries blood from the lower body to the heart. The superior vena cava brings blood back to the heart from the upper
body.
Capillaries are the smallest type of blood vessels. They connect very s mall arteries and veins. The exchange of gases and other
substances between cells and the blood takes place across the extremely thin wal ls of capillaries.
Blood Vessels and Homeostasis
Blood vessels help regulate body processes by either co nstricting (becoming narrower) or dilating (becoming wider). These actions
occur in response to signals from the autonomic ner vous system or the endocrine system. Constriction occurs when the muscular
walls of blood vessels contract. This reduces the amount of blood that can flow through the vessels (see Figure below). Dilation
occurs when the walls relax. This increases blood flows thr ough the vessels.
When a blood vessel constricts, less blood can flow through it.
Constriction and dilation allow the circulatory syste m to change the amount of blood flowing to different organs. For example,
during a fight-or-flight response, dilation and const riction of blood vessels allow more blood to flow to skel etal muscles and less to
flow to digestive organs. Dilation of blood vessels in th e skin allows more blood to flow to the body surface s o the body can lose
heat. Constriction of these blood vessels has the opposite effect and helps conserve body heat.
Blood Vessels and Blood Pressure
The force exerted by circulating blood on the walls of blood vessels is called blood pressure. Blood pressure is highest in arteries
and lowest in veins. When you have your blood pressur e checked, it is the blood pressure in arteries that is measured. High blood
pressure, or hypertension, is a serious health risk but can often be controlled with lifestyle changes or medication.
Cra sh Cou rse
Blood Vessels, P art 1 - Form and Fun
Blood Vessels, P art 1 - Form and Fun
Watch on

13.17.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13293Summary
Arteries carry blood away from the heart, veins carry blood toward the heart, and capillaries connect arter ies and veins.
Review
1. How do arteries differ from veins?
2. What is blood pressure? What is hypertension?
3. To take your pulse, you press your fingers against an art ery near the surface of the body. What are you feeling and m easuring
when you take your pulse? Why can’t you take your pulse b y pressing your fingers against a vein?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.17: Blood Vessels is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Cra sh Cou rse
Blood Vessels, P art 2: Crash Course A
Blood Vessels, P art 2: Crash Course A
Watch on

13.18.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329413.18: Circulatory System
How does oxygen get into the blood?
The main function of the circulatory system is to pu mp blood carrying oxygen around the body. But how do es that oxygen get into
the blood in the first place? You may already know th at this occurs in the lungs. So the blood must also be pumped to the lungs, and
this happens separately from the rest of the body.
Pulmonary and Systemic Circulations
The circulatory system actually consists of two separate syste ms: pulmonary circulation and systemic circulation.
Pulmonary Circulation
Pulmonary circulation is the part of the circulatory system that carries blood between the heart and lungs (the term “pulmona ry”
means “of the lungs”). It is illustrated in Figure below. Deoxygenated blood leaves the right ventricle through pulmonary arteries,
which transport it to the lungs. In the lungs, the bl ood gives up carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen. The oxygenated blood then
returns to the left atrium of the heart through pulmonary veins.
The pulmonary circulation carries blood between the heart and lungs.
Systemic Circulation
Systemic circulation is the part of the circulatory system that carries b lood between the heart and body. It is illustrated in Figure
below. Oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle thro ugh the aorta. The aorta and other arteries transport the blood throughout the

13.18.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13294body, where it gives up oxygen and picks up carbon di oxide. The deoxygenated blood then returns to the r ight atrium through
veins.
The systemic circulation carries blood between the heart and body.
Summary
The pulmonary circulation carries blood between the hear t and lungs.
The systemic circulation carries blood between the heart and body.
From a
cha nne l w i t …Osm osis from Else vie r
Anatomy & physiology of the circulat
Anatomy & physiology of the circulat
Watch on

13.18.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13294Review
1. Compare and contrast pulmonary and systemic circulati ons.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Julo (Wikimedia);Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12
Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BloodPr
essure.jpg; CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.18: Circulatory System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.19.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329513.19: Cardiovascular Diseases
Eat healthy, exercise, and don't smoke. Why?
Normally blood needs to flow freely through our arter ies. Plaque in an artery can restrict the flow of blood. As you can probably
imagine, this is not an ideal situation. And eating right, e xercising, and not smoking can help keep your arteries he althy.
Cardiovascular Disease
Diseases of the heart and blood vessels, called cardiovascular diseases (CVD), are very common. The leading cause of CVD is
atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is the buildup of plaque inside arteries (see Figure below). Plaque consists of cell debris, cholesterol, and other
substances. Factors that contribute to plaque buildup in clude a high-fat diet and smoking. As plaque builds u p, it narrows the
arteries and reduces blood flow.
The fatty material inside the artery on the right is plaque. Notice how m uch narrower the artery has become. Less blood
can flow through it than the normal artery.
Atherosclerosis normally begins in late childhood an d is typically found in most major arteries. It does not usually have any early
symptoms. Causes of atherosclerosis include a high-fa t diet, high cholesterol, smoking, obesity, and dia betes. Atherosclerosis
becomes a threat to health when the plaque buildup p revents blood circulation in the heart or the brain. A blocked blood vessel in
the heart can cause a heart attack. Blockage of the circul ation in the brain can cause a stroke.
Ways to prevent atherosclerosis include eating healthy foods, getting plenty of exercise and not smoking. A diet high in saturated
fat and cholesterol can raise your body's cholesterol levels, which can lead to increased plaque in your art eries. Cholesterol and

13.19.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13295saturated fat are found mostly in animal products, such as meat, eggs, milk and other dairy products.
Coronary Heart Disease
Atherosclerosis of arteries that supply the heart mus cle is called coronary heart disease. This disease may or may not have
symptoms, such as chest pain. As the disease progresses, t here is an increased risk of heart attack. A heart attack occurs when the
blood supply to part of the heart muscle is blocked and cardiac muscle fibers die. Coronary heart disea se is the leading cause of
death of adults in the United States.
The image below shows the way in which a blocked coronar y artery can cause a heart attack. The loss of oxyge n to the heart
muscle cause that part of the tissue to die. Maybe on e day, stem cell therapy will allow for the replacemen t of the dead cells with
new cardiac muscle cells.
A blockage in a coronary artery stops oxygen from getting t o part of the heart muscle, so areas of the heart that depend o n
the blood flow from the blocked artery are starved of oxygen.
m ed u x
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis
Watch on

13.19.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13295Stroke
Atherosclerosis in the arteries of the brain can also lead to a stroke. A stroke is a loss of brain function due to a blockage of th e
blood supply to the brain. Risk factors for stroke in clude old age, high blood pressure, having a previous stroke, diabetes, high
cholesterol, and smoking. The best way to reduce the risk of stroke is to have low blood pressure.
Preventing Cardiovascular Disease
Many factors may increase the risk of developing cor onary heart disease and other CVDs. The risk of CVDs inc reases with age and
is greater in males than females at most ages. Having a close relative with CVD also increases the risk. These factors cannot be
controlled, but other risk factors can, including s moking, lack of exercise, and high-fat diet. By making healthy lifestyle choices,
you can reduce your risk of developing CVD.
Summary
A disease that affects the heart or blood vessels is called a cardiovascular disease (CVD).
The leading cause of CVD is atherosclerosis, or the build up of plaque inside arteries.
Healthy lifestyle choices can reduce the risk of developin g CVD.
Review
1. What is atherosclerosis? What is the result of athero sclerosis?
2. List controllable factors that increase the risk of c ardiovascular disease.
3. What is the leading cause of death of adults in the Inited States?
4. How can you reduce your risk of developing CVD?
M ITK 12V ide os
The Heart of the Matter: An Introduct
The Heart of the Matter: An Introduct
Watch on

13.19.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13295Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Rupali Raju
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA);Diagram:
Patrick J. Lynch, medical illustrator, C. Carl
Jaffe, MD, cardiologist; Plaque: Courtesy
of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Dr. Edwin P. Ewing, Jr
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_at
tack_diagram.png; Diagram:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_c
oronary_artery_lesion.jpg; Plaque:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Atheros
clerosis; _aorta;
_gross_pathology_PHIL_846_lores.jpg
License: Public Domain; Diagram CC BY
2.5; Plaque Public Domain
13.19: Cardiovascular Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
te ch n icom 3D
MEDICAL - How cholesterol clogs yo
MEDICAL - How cholesterol clogs yo
Watch on

13.20.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329613.20: Blood
What exactly is blood?
All your cells need oxygen, as oxygen is the final electron acceptor during cellular respiration. How do they get this oxygen? From
blood. Blood cells flow through the vessels of the human circulatory system. But what exactly is blood? It does transport oxygen,
but also has other functions.
Blood
Blood is a fluid connective tissue. It circulates through out the body through blood vessels by the pumping a ction of the heart.
Blood in arteries carries oxygen and nutrients to a ll the body’s cells. Blood in veins carries carbon dioxide and other wa stes away
from the cells to be excreted. Blood also defends th e body against infection, repairs body tissues, trans ports hormones, and controls
the body’s pH.
Composition of Blood
The fluid part of blood is called plasma. It is a watery golden-yellow liquid that contains m any dissolved substances and blood
cells. Types of blood cells in plasma include red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets (see Figure below).
Cells in blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.

13.20.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13296The trillions of red blood cells in blood plasma carry oxygen. Red blood cells contain hemoglobin, a protein with iron that
binds with oxygen. Red blood cells are made in the marrow of long bones, rib bones, the skull, and the vertebrae. Th ese cells
survive for about 120 days, and then they are destroyed. Mature red blood cells lack a nucleus and other organel les, allowing for
more hemoglobin, and therefore more oxygen to be carr ied by each cell.
White blood cells are generally larger than red blood cells but far fewer in num ber. They defend the body against foreign
bacteria, viruses and other pathogens. For example, white blood cells c alled phagocytes swallow and destroy microorganisms
and debris in the blood, neutrophils engulf bacteria and other parasites, and lymphocytes fight infections c aused by bacteria and
viruses.
Platelets are cell fragments involved in blood clotting. They sti ck to tears in blood vessels and to each other, forming a plug at
the site of injury. They also release chemicals that are n eeded for clotting to occur.
Blood type is a genetic characteristic associated with the pres ence or absence of certain molecules, called antigens, on the surface
of red blood cells. The most commonly known blood types are the ABO and Rhesus blood types.
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens, often referred to simply as antigens A and B. A person may have
blood type A (only antigen A), B (only antigen B), AB (bo th antigens), or O (no antigens).
Rhesus blood type is determined by one common antigen. A person may eith er have the antigen (Rh) or lack the antigen
(Rh).
Blood type is important for medical reasons. A person who needs a blood transfusion must receive blood that is the same type as
his or her own. Otherwise, the transfused blood may cause a potentially life-threatening reaction in the patient ’s bloodstream.
Science Friday: True BloodSuckers – Leeches
Leeches seem like disgusting creatures with little in telligence. But, in this video by Science Friday, Dr. Mark Siddall discusses his
research on leeches and some of their interesting prope rties.+
TED-Ed
Why do blood types matter? - Natalie
Why do blood types matter? - Natalie
Watch on
SciSh ow
What are Blood T ypes?
What are Blood T ypes?
Watch on

13.20.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13296Summary
Blood is a fluid connective tissue that contains a liqu id component called plasma.
Blood also contains dissolved substances and blood cells.
Red blood cells carry oxygen, white blood cells defend th e body, and platelets help blood clot.
Review
1. What type of tissue is blood?
2. Identify three types of blood cells and their functions.
3. People with type O blood are called “universal donors” be cause they can donate blood to anyone else, regardless of t heir ABO
blood type. Explain why.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.20: Blood is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.21.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329713.21: Respiratory System
Where does oxygen get into blood?
Red blood cells are like trucks that transport cargo on a highway sy stem. Their cargo is oxygen, and the highways are blood
vessels. Where do red blood cells pick up their carg o of oxygen? The answer is the lungs. The lungs are or gans of the respiratory
system. The respiratory system is the body system tha t brings air containing oxygen into the body and re leases carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere.
Respiration
The job of the respiratory system is the exchange of gases between the body and the out side air. This process, called respiration,
actually consists of two parts. In the first part, oxyg en in the air is drawn into the body and carbon diox ide is released from the
body through the respiratory tract. In the second pa rt, the circulatory system delivers the oxygen to bod y cells and picks up carbon
dioxide from the cells in return. The lungs are organs of the respiratory system. It is in the lu ngs where oxygen is transferred from
the respiratory system to the circulatory system.
The use of the word “respiration” in relation to gas exchange is different from its use in the term cellular respiration. Recall that
cellular respiration is the metabolic process by whic h cells obtain energy by “burning” glucose. Cellular respira tion uses oxygen
and releases carbon dioxide. Respiration by the respirat ory system supplies the oxygen and takes away the carbon dioxide.
Respiration is the process in which gases are exchanged be tween the body and the outside air.
The lungs and other organs of the respiratory system bring oxygen into the body and release carbon dioxide into th e
atmosphere.

13.21.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13297Review
1. What is respiration?
2. Describe the two parts of respiration.
3. How is respiration different from cellular respiration?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.21: Respiratory System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Arm a n do H a su du n ga n
Respiratory System - Overview
Respiratory System - Overview
Watch on

13.22.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139313.22: Homeostasis
What happens if stability is disrupted?
Remove one stone and the whole arch collapses. The sa me is true for the human body. All the systems work to gether to maintain
stability or homeostasis. Disrupt one system, and the whole body may be affected.
Homeostasis
All of the organs and organ systems of the human body work together like a well-oiled machine. This is becau se they are closely
regulated by the nervous and endocrine systems. The nervous system controls virtually all body activities, and the endocrine
system secretes hormones that regulate these activities. Functioning together, the organ systems supply body cells with all the
substances they need and eliminate their wastes. They a lso keep temperature, pH, and other conditions at just the right levels to
support life processes.
Maintaining Homeostasis
The process in which organ systems work to maintain a s table internal environment is called homeostasis. Keeping a stable
internal environment requires constant adjustments. Here are just three of the many ways that human organ systems help the body
maintain homeostasis:
Respiratory system: A high concentration of carbon dioxid e in the blood triggers faster breathing. The lungs ex hale more
frequently, which removes carbon dioxide from the body more quickly.
Excretory system: A low level of water in the blood triggers retention of water by the kidneys. The kidneys produce more
concentrated urine, so less water is lost from the body.
Endocrine system: A high concentration of sugar in the blood triggers secretion of insulin by an endocrine g land called the
pancreas. Insulin is a hormone that helps cells absorb sugar from the blood.
So how does your body maintain homeostasis? The regulat ion of your internal environment is done primarily through negative
feedback. Negative feedback is a response to a stimulus that keeps a variable c lose to a set value (Figure below). Essentially, it
"shuts off" or "turns on" a system when it varies from a se t value.
For example, your body has an internal thermostat. During a winter day, in your house a thermostat senses the temperature in a
room and responds by turning on or off the heater. Y our body acts in much the same way. When body temperat ure rises, receptors
in the skin and the brain sense the temperature cha nge. The temperature change triggers a command from t he brain. This command
can cause several responses. If you are too hot, the sk in makes sweat and blood vessels near the skin surface dilate. This response
helps decrease body temperature.
Another example of negative feedback has to do with bl ood glucose levels. When glucose (sugar) levels in the blood are too high,
the pancreas secretes insulin to stimulate the absorpti on of glucose and the conversion of glucose into glyc ogen, which is stored in
the liver. As blood glucose levels decrease, less insul in is produced. When glucose levels are too low, an other hormone called
glucagon is produced, which causes the liver to convert gl ycogen back to glucose.

13.22.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1393
Feedback Regulation. If a raise in body temperature (stimulus) is detect ed (receptor), a signal will cause the brain to
maintain homeostasis (response). Once the body temperature returns to normal, negative feedback will cause the response
to end. This sequence of stimulus-receptor-signal-response is used throug hout the body to maintain homeostasis.
Positive Feedback
Some processes in the body are regulated by positive f eedback. Positive feedback is when a response to an event increases the
likelihood of the event to continue. An example of po sitive feedback is milk production in nursing mothe rs. As the baby drinks her
mother's milk, the hormone prolactin, a chemical sig nal, is released. The more the baby suckles, the mor e prolactin is released,
which causes more milk to be produced. Other examples o f positive feedback include contractions during child birth. When
constrictions in the uterus push a baby into the birth canal, additional contractions occur.
Failure of Homeostasis
Many homeostatic mechanisms such as these work continu ously to maintain stable conditions in the human bo dy. Sometimes,
however, the mechanisms fail. When they do, cells may not get everything they need, or toxic wastes ma y accumulate in the body.
If homeostasis is not restored, the imbalance may lead to d isease or even death.
Science Friday: Diary of A Snakebite Death
What does it feel like to be bitten by a venomous s nake? In this video by Science Friday, learn about how Dr. Karl P. Schmidt wrote
about the effects of snake bite venom while he was dying.
Ja m Ja rM M X
New GCSE BBC Bitesize - Homeostas
New GCSE BBC Bitesize - Homeostas
Watch on

13.22.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1393Summary
All of the organ systems of the body work together to mai ntain homeostasis of the organism.
If homeostasis fails, death or disease may result.
Review
1. What is homeostasis?
2. Describe how one of the human organ systems helps mainta in homeostasis.
3. A house has several systems, such as the electrical syste m, plumbing system, and heating and cooling system. In what ways are
the systems of a house similar to human body systems?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Megan Totah;Patrick J. Lynch,
medical illustrator; C. Carl Jaffe, MD,
cardiologist
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_m
yocardium_diagram.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; CC BY 2.5
[Figure 2]Credit: Megan Totah
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 13.22: Homeostasis is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
Sc iF ri
Diary of A Snakebite Death
Diary of A Snakebite Death
Watch on

13.23.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329813.23: Respiratory System Organs
Are all noses alike?
It all starts with the nose. OK, in humans maybe not t he nose pictured above, but one similar to the nose below. Though the passage
of air is probably similar in cows and humans. Air com es in and then where does it go?
Organs of the Respiratory System
The organs of the respiratory system that bring air i nto the body are divided among the upper respiratory tract and lower
respiratory tract. These organs are shown in Figure below. In addition to the lungs, these organs include the pharynx, larynx,
trachea and bronchi. The nasal cavity is also part of the respiratory system. The nose and nasal cavity filter, warm, and moisten the
air we inhale. Hairs and mucus produced in the nose trap part icles in the air and prevent them from reaching the lungs.

13.23.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13298
The organs of the respiratory system move air into and out of the bo dy.
The pharynx is a long tube that is shared with the digestive system. Both f ood and air travel through the pharynx.
The larynx, or voice box, contains vocal cords, which allow us to pr oduce vocal sounds. Air passes through thin tissues in t he
larynx, producing sound.
The trachea, or windpipe, is a long tube that leads down to the chest.
The trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi, which branch into smaller bronchioles within each
lung. The bronchioles lead to alveoli, the sites of gas e xchange.
Further Reading
Respiratory System Disorders
Summary
The organs of the respiratory system include the lungs, ph arynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchi.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
The Respiratory System
The Respiratory System
Watch on

13.23.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13298Review
1. Describe the main organs of the respiratory system.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Respirat
ory_system_complete_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 3]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Respirat
ory_system_complete_en.svg
License: Public Domain
13.23: Respiratory System Organs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.24.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1329913.24: Breathing
Grapes. Why? What do these have in common with a breath of air?
Below are the parts of the lungs where oxygen moves f rom the lungs into the blood. If the alveoli below wer e purple, they could
resemble a bunch of grapes. Of course, as the alveoli are in the lungs, they must be very small to provide enough area for the
exchange of gases. In fact, there are about 300 million alveo li in the adult lung.
Journey of a Breath of Air
Take in a big breath of air through your nose. As you inhale, you may feel the air pass down your throat an d notice your chest
expand. Now exhale and observe the opposite events occu rring. Inhaling and exhaling may seem like simple act ions, but they are
just part of the complex process of respiration, which inc ludes these four steps:
1. Ventilation
2. Pulmonary gas exchange
3. Gas transport
4. Peripheral gas exchange

13.24.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13299Ventilation
Respiration begins with ventilation. This is the proce ss of moving air in and out of the lungs. The lungs are the organs in which gas
exchange takes place between blood and air.
Air enters the respiratory system through the nose. As the air passes through the nasal cavity, mucus and hairs trap a ny particles
in the air. The air is also warmed and moistened so it won’t ha rm delicate tissues of the lungs.
Next, the air passes through the pharynx, a long tube that is shared with the digestive system. A flap of connective tissue called
the epiglottis closes when food is swallowed to prevent choking.
From the pharynx, air next passes through the larynx, or voice box. The larynx contains vocal cords, which al low us to produce
vocal sounds.
After the larynx, air moves into the trachea, or windpipe. This is a long tube that leads down to the c hest.
In the chest, the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi. The bronchi contain cartilage, which
prevents them from collapsing. Mucus in the bronchi trap s any remaining particles in air. Tiny, hair-like structur es called cilia
line the bronchi and sweep the particles and mucus toward the th roat so they can be expelled from the body.
Finally, air passes from the bronchi into smaller passages called bronchioles. The bronchioles end in tiny air sacs called alveoli.
Pulmonary Gas Exchange
Pulmonary gas exchange is the exchange of gases between inhaled air and the blood. It occurs in the alveoli of the lungs. Alveoli
(singular, alveolus) are grape-like clusters surroun ded by networks of thin-walled pulmonary capillaries. After you inhale, there is a
greater concentration of oxygen in the alveoli than in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries, so oxygen diffuses from the alveoli
into the blood across the capillaries (see Figure below). Carbon dioxide, in contrast, is more concentra ted in the blood of the
pulmonary capillaries than in the alveoli, so it diffuses in the opposite direction.
Alila M e dica l M e dia
Mechanism of Breathing, Animation
Mechanism of Breathing, Animation
Watch on

13.24.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13299
Alveoli are tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place.
Gas Transport
After the blood in the pulmonary capillaries becomes saturated with oxygen, it leaves the lungs and travel s to the heart. The heart
pumps the oxygen-rich blood into arteries, which carry it throughout the body. Eventually, the blood trave ls into capillaries that
supply body tissues. These capillaries are called peripheral capillaries.
Peripheral Gas Exchange
The cells of the body have a much lower concentration of oxyg en than does the oxygenated blood in the peripheral capillaries.
Therefore, oxygen diffuses from the peripheral capil laries into body cells. Carbon dioxide is produced b y cells as a byproduct of
cellular respiration, so it is more concentrated in t he cells than in the blood of the peripheral capilla ries. As a result, carbon dioxide
diffuses in the opposite direction.
Back to the Lungs
The carbon dioxide from body cells travels in the bl ood from the peripheral capillaries to veins and the n to the heart. The heart
pumps the blood to the lungs, where the carbon dioxi de diffuses into the alveoli. Then, the carbon dioxide passes out of the body
through the other structures of the respiratory system, br inging the process of respiration full circle.
Gas Exchange and Homeostasis
Gas exchange is needed to provide cells with the oxygen they need for cellular respiration. Cells cannot survive for long without
oxygen. Gas exchange is also needed to carry away carb on dioxide waste. Some of the carbon dioxide in the bl ood dissolves to
form carbonic acid, which keeps blood pH within a normal range.
Blood pH may become unbalanced if the rate of breath ing is too fast or too slow. When breathing is too fas t, blood contains too
little carbon dioxide and becomes too basic. When bre athing is too slow, blood contains too much carbon d ioxide and becomes too
acidic. Clearly, to maintain proper blood pH, the rate of breathing must be regulated.
Further Reading
Regulation of Breathing
Summary
Respiration begins with ventilation, the process of moving a ir into and out of the lungs.
Gas exchange in the lungs takes place across the thin walls of pulmonary arteries in tiny air sacs called alveoli.
Oxygenated blood is transported by the circulatory system fr om lungs to tissues throughout the body.
Gas exchange between blood and body cells occurs across th e walls of peripheral capillaries.

13.24.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13299Gas exchange helps maintain homeostasis by supplying cells with oxygen, carrying away carbon dioxide waste, and
maintaining proper pH of the blood.
Review
1. Outline the pathway of a breath of air from the nose to th e alveoli.
2. Describe how pulmonary gas exchange occurs.
3. What is peripheral gas exchange.
4. Sometimes people who are feeling anxious breathe too fast a nd become lightheaded. This is called hyperventilation.
Hyperventilation can upset the pH balance of the blood, resulting in blood that is too basic. Explain why.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Patrick J. Lynch, medical illustrator
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
search=lungs&title=Special:Search&go=G
o&ns0=1&ns6=1&ns12=1&ns14=1&ns100
=1&ns106=1&searchToken=6v9palshd46v
gv5fahu29uwfc#%2Fmedia%2FFile%3ABr
onchial_anatomy.jpg
License: CC BY 2.5
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.24: Breathing is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.25.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330013.25: Regulation of Breathing
What allows you to take a deep breath?
Deep breath in…now blow out those candles. We've all d one that. Taking that deep breath in is an active p rocess. You can usually
feel your chest move. Why? Obviously, muscles in your chest are doing the work.
Regulation of Breathing
To understand how breathing is regulated, you first need to understand how breathing occurs.
How Breathing Occurs
Inhaling is an active movement that results from the contrac tion of a muscle called the diaphragm. The diaphragm is large, sheetlike muscle below the lungs (see Figure below). When the diaphragm contracts, the ribcage e xpands and the contents of the
abdomen move downward. This results in a larger chest volume, which decreases air pressure inside the lungs. With lower air
pressure inside than outside the lungs, air rushes i nto the lungs. When the diaphragm relaxes, the opposit e events occur. The
volume of the chest cavity decreases, air pressure insid e the lungs increases, and air flows out of the lungs, l ike air rushing out of a
balloon.

13.25.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13300
Breathing depends on contractions of the diaphragm.
Control of Breathing
The regular, rhythmic contractions of the diaphragm are controlled by the brain stem. It sends nerve im pulses to the diaphragm
through the autonomic nervous system. The brain stem monitors the level of carbon dioxide in the blood. If the level becomes too
high, it “tells” the diaphragm to contract more ofte n. Breathing speeds up, and the excess carbon dioxide is released into the air.
The opposite events occur when the level of carbon di oxide in the blood becomes too low. In this way, brea thing keeps blood pH
within a narrow range.
Summary
Breathing occurs due to repeated contractions of a large m uscle called the diaphragm.
The rate of breathing is regulated by the brain stem. It monitors the level of carbon dioxide in the blood and tri ggers faster or
slower breathing as needed to keep the level within a narrow ra nge.
Review
1. Explain why contraction of the diaphragm causes the lungs to fill with air.
soh a m bliss
3D view of diaphragm
3D view of diaphragm
Watch on

13.25.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133002. Explain how the rate of breathing is controlled.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson;Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.25: Regulation of Breathing is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.26.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330113.26: Respiratory System Disorders
Does making ATP start with the lungs?
The importance of a nice pair of healthy lungs is ob vious. We all need oxygen to get into our lungs, so t he oxygen can be
transferred to the blood, so it can be transported ar ound our body, so each cell can receive its fair shar e of oxygen, allowing oxygen
to serve as the final electron acceptor during the electron transport chain of ce llular respiration, allowing the cell to produce lots of
ATP. And it all starts with the lungs.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
When you have a cold, your nasal passages may become so congested that it’s hard to breathe through you r nose. Many other
diseases also affect the respiratory system, most of t hem more serious than the common cold. Some lung dise ases, such as lung
cancer, can be especially dangerous. The following list incl udes just a sample of respiratory system diseases.
Asthma is a disease in which the air passages of the lungs periodi cally become too narrow, often with excessive mucus
production. This causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and chest tightness. An asthma attack may be triggered by all ergens,
strenuous exercise, stress, or other factors.

13.26.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13301Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so gas exchange cannot occur. Symptoms
usually include coughing, chest pain, and difficulty bre athing. Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or injury of the lungs.
Emphysema is a lung disease in which walls of the alveoli break down so less gas can be exchanged in the lungs (see Figure
below). This causes shortness of breath. The damage to t he alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is irreversibl e.
Pneumonia and emphysema are caused by damage to the alveoli of the lungs.
Causes of Respiratory Diseases
Many respiratory diseases are caused by pathogens. C ertain bacteria, viruses, and fungi are pathogens of the respirator y system.
The common cold and flu are caused by viruses. Tubercul osis, whooping cough, and acute bronchitis are caused by bacteria. The
pathogens that cause colds, flu, and TB can be passed fro m person to person by coughing and sneezing.
Air pollution is another significant cause of respirat ory disease. The quality of the air you breathe can affect the health of your
lungs. Asthma, heart and lung diseases, allergies, and sev eral types of cancers are all linked to air quality. Air pollution is not just
found outdoors; indoor air pollution can also be resp onsible for health problems.
Smoking is the most significant cause of respiratory disease as well as cardiovascular disease and cancer. Exposure to tobacco
smoke by smoking or by breathing air that contains t obacco smoke is the leading cause of preventable dea th in the United States.
Regular smokers die about 10 years earlier than nons mokers. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) describes
tobacco use as "the single most important preventabl e risk to human health in developed countries and an important cause of
[early] death worldwide."
tom s we ision g
Understanding Asthma - 360p [Anim
Understanding Asthma - 360p [Anim
Watch on

13.26.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13301Summary
Diseases of the respiratory system include asthma, pneumoni a, and emphysema.
Review
1. Identify and describe three diseases of the respiratory system, and state what triggers or causes each disease.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Courtesy of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_at
tack_diagram.png
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Alila Medical
Media, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.26: Respiratory System Disorders is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.27.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330213.27: Digestive System Organs
Specifically, our energy comes from what?
The respiratory and circulatory systems work together to provide cells with the oxygen they need for cellular respiration. Cells also
need glucose for cellular respiration. Glucose is a simple sugar that comes from the food we eat. To get glucose from food,
digestion must occur. This process is carried out by the d igestive system.
Overview of the Digestive System
The digestive system consists of organs that break down food and absorb n utrients such as glucose. Organs of the digestive system
are shown in Figure below. Most of the organs make up the gastrointestinal tract. The rest of the organs are called accessory
organs.
The digestive system includes organs from the mouth to the anus.
The Gastrointestinal Tract
The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a long tube that connects the mouth with the anus. It is more than 9 meters (30 feet) long in adults
and includes the esophagus, stomach, and small and la rge intestines. Food enters the mouth, passes through t he other organs of the
GI tract, and then leaves the body through the anus.

13.27.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13302The organs of the GI tract are lined with mucous membranes that secrete digestive enzymes and absorb nutrients. The organs are
also covered by layers of muscle that enable peristal sis. Peristalsis is an involuntary muscle contraction that moves rap idly along
an organ like a wave (see Figure below).
Peristalsis pushes food through the GI tract.
Accessory Organs of Digestion
Other organs involved in digestion include the liver, gall bladder, and pancreas. They are called accessory organs because food does
not pass through them. Instead, they secrete or store sub stances needed for digestion.
Functions of the Digestive System
The digestive system has three main functions: digest ion of food, absorption of nutrients, and elimination of solid food waste.
Digestion is the process of breaking down food into component s the body can absorb. It consists of two types of pro cesses:
mechanical digestion and chemical digestion.
Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of chunks of food into smaller pieces. This type of digestion takes place
mainly in the mouth and stomach.
Chemical digestion is the chemical breakdown of large, complex food molecu les into smaller, simpler nutrient molecules that
can be absorbed by the blood. This type of digestion beg ins in the mouth and stomach but occurs mainly in the sm all intestine.
After food is digested, the resulting nutrients are abs orbed. Absorption is the process in which substances pass into the
bloodstream, where they can circulate throughout the body. Absorption of nutrients occurs mainly in the smal l intestine. Any
remaining matter from food that cannot be digested a nd absorbed passes into the large intestine as waste. The waste later passes out
of the body through the anus in the process of elimination.
Summary
The digestive system consists of organs that break down food, absorb nutrients, and eliminate waste.
The breakdown of food occurs in the process of digestion.
From a n
a ccre di t e d U…M ich iga n M e dicin e
The Digestive P rocess - University of
The Digestive P rocess - University of
Watch on

13.27.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13302Review
1. What organs make up the gastrointestinal tract? What are the accessory organs of digestion?
2. Describe peristalsis and its role in digestion.
3. Define mechanical and chemical digestion.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Digestiv
e_system_simplified.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.27: Digestive System Organs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.28.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330313.28: Digestive System
What's the first step in the digestion process?
It all starts with the mouth. Food goes in, you chew it up, swallow it, then what happens? The process of turni ng that food into
energy and proteins and other things necessary for l ife begins. But it all starts with the mouth.
The Start of Digestion: Mouth to Stomach
Does the sight or aroma of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion.
Mouth
The mouth is the first digestive organ that food ent ers. The sight, smell, or taste of food stimulates the release of digestive enzymes
by salivary glands inside the mouth. The major salivary enzyme is amylase. It begins the chemical digestion of carbohydrates by
breaking down starch into sugar.
The mouth also begins the process of mechanical digestion. Sharp teeth in the front of the mouth cut or tear food when you bite
into it (see Figure below). Broad teeth in the back of the mouth grind food when you chew. Food is easier to chew because it i s
moistened by saliva from the salivary glands. The ton gue helps mix the food with saliva and also helps yo u swallow. After you
swallow, the chewed food passes into the pharynx.
Teeth are important for mechanical digestion.

13.28.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13303Esophagus
From the pharynx, the food moves into the esophagus. T he esophagus is a long, narrow tube that passes food from the phar ynx to
the stomach by peristalsis. The esophagus has no other digestive functions. At the end of the esophagus, a m uscle called a sphincter
controls the entrance to the stomach. The sphincter o pens to let food into the stomach and then closes ag ain to prevent food from
passing back into the esophagus.
Stomach
The stomach is a sac-like organ in which food is further digeste d both mechanically and chemically. (To see an animat ion of how
the stomach digests food, go to the link below.) Chur ning movements of the stomach’s thick, muscular walls com plete the
mechanical breakdown of food. The churning movements also mix food with digestive fluids secreted by the st omach. One of these
fluids is hydrochloric acid. It kills bacteria in food and gives the stomach the low (acidic) pH nee ded by digestive enzymes that
work in the stomach. The main enzyme is pepsin, which chemically digests protein.
The stomach stores the partly digested food until th e small intestine is ready to receive it. When the s mall intestine is empty, a
sphincter opens to allow the partially digested food to en ter the small intestine.
Further Reading
Digestive System Diseases
Summary
Digestion consists of mechanical and chemical digestion.
Mechanical digestion occurs in the mouth and stomach.
Chemical digestion occurs mainly in the small intestine.
The pancreas and liver secrete fluids that aid in digestion.
Review
1. What is amylase and what is its role?
2. Describe functions of the stomach.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Stomach Digestion
Stomach Digestion
Watch on

13.28.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133033. What is pepsin?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Stefan Andrej Shambora
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/st_a_sh/349
731799/in/photolist-wUt5B-a3S5mm98T9zJ-dyjViV-7BPdda-dhdYRR-opKZi3jWhDf-9i3P5v-77ddxN-fbtPbH-8oaMtD5wL9UY-6PBnzM-2pwkNL-c6oBTj99ipEm-99ipz7-EVB3i-3a91i-6LBtAc7bcPXT-3Zx5Sa-7hFgbo-4wfp32-jkNKS6PWGqZ-8G6K7f-bCSoet-fvAYPsckorRS-6eeEri-V7j5-5DiJVM-bpGRmV4J1dV3-7Sk2ix-7G9VJS-5fkSm7-aA1qnk4rrZjF-99ir5L-7BGJrz-7BGJfa==63x4ipbtHDt8-nho2bN-6QNYdL-5jmtT7
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Stefan Andrej Shambora
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/st_a_sh/349
731799/in/photolist-wUt5B-a3S5mm98T9zJ-dyjViV-7BPdda-dhdYRR-opKZi3jWhDf-9i3P5v-77ddxN-fbtPbH-8oaMtD5wL9UY-6PBnzM-2pwkNL-c6oBTj99ipEm-99ipz7-EVB3i-3a91i-6LBtAc7bcPXT-3Zx5Sa-7hFgbo-4wfp32-jkNKS6PWGqZ-8G6K7f-bCSoet-fvAYPsckorRS-6eeEri-V7j5-5DiJVM-bpGRmV4J1dV3-7Sk2ix-7G9VJS-5fkSm7-aA1qnk4rrZjF-99ir5L-7BGJrz-7BGJfa==63x4ipbtHDt8-nho2bN-6QNYdL-5jmtT7
License: CC BY 2.0
13.28: Digestive System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.29.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330413.29: Small Intestine
These projections absorb. Absorb what?
Imagine the inside walls of the 23 feet of your smal l intestine covered with these finger-like projection s. Why? What's their
purpose, and why is the small intestine so long? These p rojections absorb. Absorb what? Minerals and nutrients fr om food. And the
length of the small intestine allows as much of these impo rtant substances to be absorbed as possible.
Digestion and Absorption: The Small Intestine
The small intestine is a narrow tube about 7 meters (23 feet) long in a dults. It is the site of most chemical digestion and vi rtually
all absorption. The small intestine consists of three part s: the duodenum, jejunum and ileum.
Digestion in the Small Intestine
The duodenum is the first and shortest part of the small intest ine. Most chemical digestion takes place here, and m any digestive
enzymes are active in the duodenum (see Table below). Some are produced by the duodenum itself. Others are produced by the
pancreas and secreted into the duodenum.
Enzyme What It Digests Where It Is Made
Amylase carbohydrates pancreas
Trypsin proteins pancreas
Lipase lipids pancreas, duodenum
Maltase carbohydrates duodenum
Peptidase proteins duodenum

13.29.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13304The liver is an organ of both digestion and excretion. It pro duces a fluid called bile, which is secreted into the duodenum. Some
bile also goes to the gall bladder, a sac-like organ that stores and concentrates bile and then secretes it into the small intestine. In
the duodenum, bile breaks up large globules of lipids into smaller globules that are easier for enzymes t o break down. Bile also
reduces the acidity of food entering from the highl y acidic stomach. This is important because digestive enzymes that work in the
duodenum need a neutral environment. The pancreas con tributes to the neutral environment by secreting bi carbonate, a basic
substance that neutralizes acid.
Absorption in the Small Intestine
The jejunum is the second part of the small intestine, where most nutrients are absorbed into the blood. As shown in Figure below,
the mucous membrane lining the jejunum is covered wit h millions of microscopic, fingerlike projections ca lled villi (singular,
villus). Villi contain many capillaries, and nutrie nts pass from the villi into the bloodstream throug h the capillaries. Because there
are so many villi, they greatly increase the surface area for absorption. In fact, they make the inner su rface of the small intestine as
large as a tennis court!
e n zym e dica
Enzymes and Digestion
Enzymes and Digestion
Watch on
e n zym e dica
Digestion 2
Digestion 2
Watch on

13.29.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13304
This image shows intestinal villi greatly magnified. They are ac tually microscopic.
The ileum is the third part of the small intestine. A few remai ning nutrients are absorbed here. Like the jejunum, the inner surface
of the ileum is covered with villi that increase the surfa ce area for absorption.
Summary
Virtually all absorption of nutrients takes place in the smal l intestine, which has a very large inner surface area bec ause it is
covered with millions of microscopic villi.
Review
1. Name the parts of the small intestine.
2. Where are most nutrients absorbed?
3. What is digested by trypsin, by lipase, and by maltase?
4. Describe the functions of the three parts of the small intestine.
Ca rpe N octu m
Small Intestine
Small Intestine
Watch on

13.29.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133045. What role do villi play in absorption?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Auawise
Source:
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/17/health
/research/17appe.html?_r=0
License: CC BY-NC-SA
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.29: Small Intestine is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.30.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330513.30: Large Intestine
Liquid to solid. What does this mean?
Well, that's exactly what the large intestine does. It takes the remains of digested food — that is, food in which all the nutrients and
minerals have been removed, and prepares it for elimina tion.
The Large Intestine and Its Functions
From the small intestine, any remaining food wastes pa ss into the large intestine. The large intestine is a relatively wide tube that
connects the small intestine with the anus. Like the sm all intestine, the large intestine also consists of thr ee parts: the cecum (or
caecum), colon, and rectum.
Absorption of Water and Elimination of Wastes
The cecum is the first part of the large intestine, where wastes enter from the small intestine. The wastes are in a li quid state. As
they pass through the colon, which is the second part of the large intestine, excess water is absorbed. The remaining solid wastes
are called feces. Feces accumulate in the rectum, which is the third part of the large intestine. As the rectum fills, the feces become
compacted. After a certain amount of feces accumulate, they are eliminated from the body. A sphincter con trols the anus and opens
to let feces pass through.
Bacteria in the Large Intestine
Trillions of bacteria normally live in the large intestine. Most of them are helpful. In fact, we wouldn’t be able to survive withou t
them. Some of the bacteria produce vitamins, which are absorbed by the large intestine. Other functions of in testinal bacteria
Th e L ordofSh e ll
Inside the female body
Inside the female body
Watch on

13.30.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13305include:
controlling the growth of harmful bacteria.
breaking down indigestible food components.
producing substances that help prevent colon cancer.
breaking down toxins before they can poison the body.
Summary
The absorption of water from digestive wastes and the elimination of the remainin g solid wastes occur in the large intestine.
The large intestine also contains helpful bacteria.
Review
1. Describe the functions of the three parts of the large intestine.
2. How do bacteria in the large intestine help keep us healt hy?
Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray105
8.png
License: CC BY-NC
13.30: Large Intestine is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
P it Silva
Where Will I Go?
Where Will I Go?
Watch on

13.31.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330613.31: Digestive System Diseases
What's worse than an upset stomach?
You've probably had an upset stomach. Most likely it was due to something you ate. But imagine bleeding fr om your stomach.
That's a little different than your stomach just being up set. Stomach ulcers can be very serious.
Diseases of the Digestive System
Many diseases can affect the digestive system. Three o f the most common diseases that affect the digestive s ystem are food
allergies, ulcers, and heartburn. Foodborne illnesses and food intolerance are also serious issues associated with the digestive
system.
Food allergies occur when the immune system reacts to substances in food as though they were harmful “foreign invaders.”
Foods that are most likely to cause allergies are pictured in Figure below, and include nuts, eggs, grains and milk. Symptoms of
food allergies often include vomiting and diarrhea. Symptom s of food allergies include itching and swelling of the lips and
mouth. More serious symptoms include trouble breathing. In some instances, a food allergy can trigger anaphylaxi s, which is an
extremely severe reaction. Emergency medical treatment i s critical for this condition, which left untreated, can l ead to death.
These foods are the most common causes of food allergies.
Ulcers are sores in the lining of the stomach or duodenum that ar e usually caused by bacterial infections. They may als o be
caused by the acidic environment of the stomach. Stomach a cids may damage the lining of the stomach. Symptoms typical ly
include abdominal pain and bleeding.

13.31.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13306Heartburn is a painful burning sensation in the chest caused by st omach acid backing up into the esophagus. The stomach acid
may eventually cause serious damage to the esophagus u nless the problem is corrected.
Summary
Digestive system diseases include food allergies, ulcers, a nd heartburn.
Review
1. Describe two diseases of the digestive system.
M ich a e l Da vis
Do I have a stomach ulcer?
Do I have a stomach ulcer?
Watch on
From a n
a ccre di t e d U…M a y o Clin ic
Heartburn, Acid Re ux, GERD-Mayo C
Heartburn, Acid Re ux, GERD-Mayo C
Watch on

13.31.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133062. List three foods that cause common food allergies.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Milk: Hobvias Sudoneighm;
Shellfish: Frank C. Müller; Nuts: Courtesy
of Alice Welch/US Department of
Agriculture; Grains: Courtesy of Peggy
Greb/Agricultural Research Service; Egg:
David Benbennick
Source: Milk:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/striatic/13101
2552/; Shellfish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Garnele
n_im_Verkauf_fcm.jpg; Nuts:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Peanuts.
jpg; Grains:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Various_
grains.jpg; Egg:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fried_eg
g; _sunny_side_up.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Milk: Hobvias Sudoneighm;
Shellfish: Frank C. Müller; Nuts: Courtesy
of Alice Welch/US Department of
Agriculture; Grains: Courtesy of Peggy
Greb/Agricultural Research Service; Egg:
David Benbennick
Source: Milk:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/striatic/13101
2552/; Shellfish:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Garnele
n_im_Verkauf_fcm.jpg; Nuts:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Peanuts.
jpg; Grains:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Various_
grains.jpg; Egg:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fried_eg
g; _sunny_side_up.jpg
License: Milk CC BY 2.0; Shellfish Public
Domain; Nuts Public Domain; Grains
Public Domain; Egg Public Domain
13.31: Digestive System Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.32.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330713.32: Food and Nutrients
Are these really good for you?
Fresh fruit and vegetables. Every child's favorite. E specially those vegetables. When your mother tells y ou to "eat your vegetables,"
there is a reason for that. Yes, they are actually good fo r you.
Food and Nutrients
Did you ever hear the saying, “You are what you eat”? I t’s not just a saying. It’s actually true. What you ea t plays an important role
in your health. Eating a variety of the right types of foods promotes good health and provides energy fo r growth and activity. This
is because healthful foods are rich in nutrients. Nutrients are substances the body needs for energy, building m aterials, and control
of body processes. There are six main classes of nut rients: carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, water, vitamins, and minerals. These six
classes are categorized as macronutrients or micronutrie nts depending on how much of them the body needs.
Macronutrients
Nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts are called macronutrients. They include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and
water. All macronutrients except water can be used by the b ody for energy. (The energy in food is measured in a unit called a
Calorie.) The exact amount of each macronutrient that an i ndividual needs depends on many factors, including gen der and age.
Recommended daily intakes by teens of three macronut rients are shown in Table below. Based on your gender and age, how many
grams of proteins should you eat each day?
Gender/Age Carbohydrates (g/day) Proteins (g/day)Water (L/day) (includes water in
food)
Males 9–13 years 130 34 2.4
Males 14-18 years 130 52 3.3
Females 9-13 years 130 34 2.1
Females 14-18 years 130 46 2.3
Carbohydrates include sugars, starches, and fiber. Sugars and starches a re used by the body for energy. One gram of
carbohydrates provides 4 Calories of energy. Fiber, which is fo und in plant foods, cannot be digested but is needed for goo d
health. Simple carbohydrates are small carbohydrates found in foods such as fruits and milk. These carbohydrates include

13.32.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13307lactose, fructose and glucose. Complex carbohydrates are mu ch larger molecules. Starch, which is a complex carbohydrate
found in vegetables and grains, is made of thousands of glucose units bonded together.
Dietary proteins are broken down during digestion to provide the amino aci ds needed for protein synthesis. Any extra proteins
in the diet not needed for this purpose are used for ene rgy or stored as fat. One gram of proteins provides 4 Calo ries of energy.
Eating protein provides the amino acids for your cells to produce your own antibodies, muscle fibers and enz ymes (as well as
many other types of proteins).
Lipids provide the body with energy and serve other vital fun ctions, such as protecting neurons and providing the memb ranes
that surround all cells. One gram of lipids provides 9 Calories of energy. You ne ed to eat small amounts of lipids for good
health. However, large amounts can be harmful, especially if they contain saturated fatty acids from animal foods.
Water is essential to life because biochemical reaction s take place in water. Most people can survive only a few da ys without
water.
Micronutrients
Nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts are called micronutrients. They include vitamins and minerals. Vitamins are
organic compounds that are needed by the body to fun ction properly. Several vitamins are described in Table below. Vitamins play
many roles in good health, ranging from maintaining good vision to helping blood clot. Vitamin B12 is pro duced by bacteria in the
large intestine. Vitamin D is synthesized by the ski n when it is exposed to UV light. Most other vitamins must be obtained from
foods like those listed in Table below.
Vitamin Function Good Food Sources
A good vision carrots, spinach
B12 normal nerve function meat, milk
C making connective tissue oranges, red peppers
D healthy bones and teeth salmon, eggs
E normal cell membranes vegetable oils, nuts
K blood clotting spinach, soybeans
Minerals are chemical elements that are essential for body pr ocesses. They include calcium, which helps form stron g bones and
teeth, and potassium, which is needed for normal nerve and muscle function. Good sources of minerals include leafy, green
vegetables, whole grains, milk, and meats.
Vitamins and minerals do not provide energy, but the y are still essential for good health. The necessary amounts can usually be met
with balanced eating. However, people who do not eat enough of the right foods may need vitamin or mineral supplements.
Cra sh Cou rse
Biological Molecules - Y ou Are What
Biological Molecules - Y ou Are What
Watch on

13.32.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13307Summary
Nutrients are substances that the body needs for energy, building materials, and control of body processes.
Carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water are nutrients needed in relatively large amounts.
Vitamins and minerals are nutrients needed in much smalle r amounts.
Review
1. Based on your gender and age, how many grams of proteins sh ould you eat each day?
2. Compare and contrast macronutrients and micronutrien ts. Give examples of each.
3. What are minerals? Give two examples.
4. What is a good source of vitamin A?
5. Why do you need vitamin D?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Milk: Mark Skipper; Chicken:
Flickr:TheCulinaryGeek; Beans: U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Source: Milk:
www.flickr.com/photos/bitterjug/38946417
9/; Chicken:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/preppybyday/
4944774499/; Beans:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DarkRe
dKidney.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
13.32: Food and Nutrients is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.33.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139613.33: Skeletal System
The skeletal system consists of all the bones of the body. How important are your bones?
Try to imagine what you would look like without them. You would be a soft, wobbly pile of skin, muscles, and internal organs, so
you might look something like a very large slug. Not that you would be able to see yourself—folds of skin wo uld droop down over
your eyes and block your vision because of your lack of skull bones. You could push the skin out of the wa y, if you could only
move your arms, but you need bones for that as well!
The Skeleton
The human skeleton is an internal framework that, in adul ts, consists of 206 bones, most of which are shown in Figure below.
In addition to bones, the skeleton also consists of cart ilage and ligaments:
Cartilage is a type of dense connective tissue, made of tough pro tein fibers, that provides a smooth surface for the movement o f
bones at joints.
A ligament is a band of fibrous connective tissue that holds bones to gether and keeps them in place.

13.33.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1396
The human skeleton consists of bones, cartilage, and ligaments.
The skeleton supports the body and gives it shape. It has sev eral other functions as well, including:
1. protecting internal organs
2. providing attachment surfaces for muscles
3. producing blood cells
4. storing minerals
5. maintaining mineral homeostasis.
Maintaining mineral homeostasis is a very important function of the skeleton, becau se just the right levels of calcium and other
minerals are needed in the blood for normal function ing of the body. When mineral levels in the blood are too high, bones absorb
some of the minerals and store them as mineral salts, wh ich is why bones are so hard. When blood levels of m inerals are too low,
bones release some of the minerals back into the blood, t hus restoring homeostasis.

13.33.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1396Science Friday: Jump in Jerboas
Jerboas are adorable creatures that are capable of jumping up to three feet. In this video by Science Fr iday, Dr. Kim Cooper reveals
how the extremely springy leg bones of jerboas make this p ossible, and the implications it might have for human bone growth.
Further Reading
Bones
Bone Growth
Joints
Skeletal Diseases
Summary
The adult human skeleton includes 206 bones and other t issues.
The skeleton supports the body, protects internal organs, pr oduces blood cells, and maintains mineral homeostasis.0:00
Sc iF ri
Jump In Jerboas
Jump In Jerboas
Watch on

13.33.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1396Review
1. What is cartilage? What is its role in the skeletal syst em?
2. List three functions of the human skeleton.
3. Explain how bones maintain mineral homeostasis in the bod y.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Human_
skeleton_front_en.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Human_
skeleton_front_en.svg
License: Public Domain
This page titled 13.33: Skeletal System is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

13.34.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330813.34: Balanced Eating
Why is the good stuff in the smallest segment of this diagram?
If you're like most high school kids, one of the first things you do after school is search for something to eat. And you look for the
chips or candy. As this diagram shows, you can eat those. Just not a lot.
Balanced Eating
Balanced eating is a way of eating that promotes good health. It mean s eating the right balance of different foods to pro vide the
body with all the nutrients it needs. Fortunately, yo u don’t need to measure and record the amounts of di fferent nutrients you each
day in order to balance your eating. Instead, you can use MyPl ate, MyPyramid, and food labels.
MyPyramid and MyPlate
MyPyramid shows the relative amounts of foods in different food gro ups you should eat each day (see Figure below).
MyPyramid is a visual guideline for balanced eating.

13.34.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13308Each food group represented by a colored band in MyPy ramid is a good source of nutrients. The key in Figure above shows the
food group each band represents. The wider the band, t he more you should eat from that food group. The white tip of MyPyramid
represents foods that should be eaten only once in a while, such as ice cream and potato chips. They conta in few nutrients and may
contribute excess Calories to the diet.
The figure “walking” up the side of MyPyramid represen ts the role of physical activity in balanced eating. Regular exercise helps
you burn any extra energy that you consume in foods and provides many other health benefits. You should be active for about an
hour a day most days of the week. The more active you ar e, the more energy you will use.
In June 2011, the United States Department of Agriculture replaced My Pyramid with MyPlate. MyPlate depicts the relative daily
portions of various food groups. See http://www.choosemyplate.gov/ for further information.
MyPlate is a visual guideline for balanced eating, replacing MyPyra mid in 2011.
The following guidelines accompany MyPlate:
Balancing Calories
Enjoy your food, but eat less.
Avoid oversized portions.
Foods to Increase
Make half your plate fruits and vegetables.
Make at least half your grains whole grains.
Switch to fat-free or low-fat (1%) milk.
Foods to Reduce
Compare sodium in foods like soup, bread, and frozen mea ls - and choose the foods with lower numbers.
Drink water instead of sugary drinks.
Food Labels
Packaged foods are required by law to carry a nutritio n facts label, like the one in Figure below. The labels show the nutrient
content and ingredients of foods. Reading labels can help you choose foods that are high in nutrients y ou need more of (such as

13.34.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13308proteins) and low in nutrients you need less of (such as fa ts).
Nutrition facts labels like this one can help you make good food choic es.
You should also look for ingredients such as whole gr ains, vegetables, and fruits. Avoid foods that contain processed ingredients,
such as white flour or white rice. Processing removes nutr ients. As a result, processed foods generally supply fewe r nutrients than
whole foods, even when they have been enriched or fortified with added nutrients.
Weight Gain and Obesity
Any unused energy in food, whether it comes from carb ohydrates, proteins, or lipids, is stored in the body as fat. An extra 3,500
Calories of energy results in the storage of almost ha lf a kilogram (1 pound) of stored body fat. People who consistently consume
more food energy then they need may become obese. Obesity occurs when the body mass index is 30.0 kg/m or greate r. Body
mass index (BMI) is an estimate of the fat content of the body. It is calculated by dividing a person’s weight (in kilogra ms) by the
square of the person’s height (in meters). Obesity increase s the risk of health problems such as type 2 diabetes and hyp ertension.
Eating Disorders
Some people who are obese have an eating disorder, cal led binge eating disorder, in which they compulsively overeat. An eating
disorder is a mental illness in which people feel compelled to eat in a way that causes physical, mental, and emotio nal health
problems. Other eating disorders include anorexia ner vosa and bulimia nervosa. Treatments for eating disord ers include counseling
and medication.
Summary
Balanced eating promotes good health.
MyPlate, MyPyramid, and food labels are tools that can hel p you choose the right foods for balanced eating.
Eating too much and exercising too little can lead to weight gain and obesity.
Some people who are obese have an eating disorder. Eating diso rders are mental illnesses that require treatment by hea lth
professionals.
Review
1. Explain how to use MyPyramid and food labels to choose f oods for balanced eating.
2. What is an eating disorder? Give an example.2

13.34.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133083. Aleesha weighs 80 kg and is 1.6 m tall. What is her body mass index? Is she obese?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] [Figure 1]
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of MyPyramid.gov
Source: www.mypyramid.gov/
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture
Source: http://www.choosemyplate.gov/
License: Public Domian
[Figure 4]Credit: CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.34: Balanced Eating is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.35.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1330913.35: Excretory System
What do you do with your waste?
Toxic waste must be disposed of properly or there can be serious consequences. Now, your waste should not be as colorful or toxic
as shown here (if it is, get yourself to a doctor as s oon as possible), but it still needs to be removed fro m you. And that is the role of
the excretory system. The excretory system gets rid of was te and excess water.
Excretion
If you exercise on a hot day, you are likely to lose a lot of water in sweat. Then, for the next several hours, you may noti ce that you
do not pass urine as often as normal and that your urine is darker th an usual. Do you know why this happens? Your body is low o n
water and trying to reduce the amount of water lost in ur ine. The amount of water lost in urine is controlled b y the kidneys, the
main organs of the excretory system.
Excretion is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body. It is one of the major ways the body mainta ins
homeostasis. Although the kidneys are the main organs of excretion, several other organs also excrete wastes. They include the
large intestine, liver, skin, and lungs. All of these organs of excretion, along with the kidneys, make up th e excretory system. The
roles of the excretory organs other than the kidney are summarized below:
The large intestine eliminates solid wastes that remain af ter the digestion of food.
The liver breaks down excess amino acids and toxins in the blood.
The skin eliminates excess water and salts in sweat.
The lungs exhale water vapor and carbon dioxide.

13.35.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13309Further Reading
Excretory System Diseases
Summary
Excretion is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body. It is one of the major ways the body maint ains
homeostasis.
Organs of excretion make up the excretory system. They inc lude the kidneys, large intestine, liver, skin, and lungs.
Review
1. What is excretion?
2. List organs of the excretory system and their functio ns.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Patrick J. Lynch, modified by CK12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Skull_an
d_brain_sagittal.svg
License: CC BY-NC
13.35: Excretory System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
7a ctive stu dio
Excretion in human
Excretion in human
Watch on

13.36.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331013.36: Urinary System
How is it determined what's waste and what's not?
Shown above is a major process of maintaining homeostasi s. Getting rid of waste and excess water. Such a basic process is actually
very complex. It involves an intricate exchange of mat erial through the kidney.
Urinary System
The kidneys are part of the urinary system, which is shown in Figure below. The main function of the urinary system is t o filter
waste products and excess water from the blood and excrete them from the body.
The kidneys are the chief organs of the urinary system.
Kidneys and Nephrons
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs just abo ve the waist. A cross-section of a kidney is shown in Figure below. The
function of the kidney is to filter blood and form u rine. Urine is the liquid waste product of the body that is excre ted by the urinary
system. Nephrons are the structural and functional units of the kidneys. A single kidney may have more than a million nephrons!

13.36.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13310
Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery and renal vein.
As shown in Figure below, each nephron acts as a tiny filtering plant. It filters blood and forms urine in the following steps:
1. Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery, which branches into capillaries. When blood passes thr ough capillaries of the
glomerulus of a nephron, blood pressure forces some of the water and dissolved substances in the blood to cross the c apillary
walls into Bowman’s capsule.
2. The filtered substances pass to the renal tubule of the nephron. In the renal tubule, some of the filter ed substances are
reabsorbed and returned to the bloodstream. Other substan ces are secreted into the fluid.
3. The fluid passes to a collecting duct, which reabsorbs some of the water and returns it to the bloodstream. The fl uid that remains
in the collecting duct is urine.
The parts of a nephron and their functions are shown in this diagram.
Excretion of Urine
From the collecting ducts of the kidneys, urine enters the ureters, two muscular tubes that move the urine by peristalsi s to the
bladder (see Figure above). The bladder is a hollow, sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, it sends a
nerve impulse to a sphincter to relax and let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that
carries urine out of the body. Urine leaves the body t hrough another sphincter in the process of urination. This sphincter and the
process of urination are normally under conscious control.

13.36.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13310Summary
The kidneys filter blood and form urine. They are part of the urinary system, which also includes the ureters, bladder, and
urethra.
Each kidney has more than a million nephrons, which are the structural and functional units of the kidney.
Each nephron is like a tiny filtering plant.
Review
1. Describe how nephrons filter blood and form urine.
Cra sh Cou rse
Urinary System, P art 1: Crash Course
Urinary System, P art 1: Crash Course
Watch on
Cra sh Cou rse
Urinary System, P art 2: Crash Course
Urinary System, P art 2: Crash Course
Watch on

13.36.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133102. State the functions of the ureters, bladder, and urethra.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of National Cancer
Institute/SEER Training Modules;Hana
Zavadska
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Illu_urin
ary_system.svg; CK-12 Foundation
License: Public Domain; CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin;Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.36: Urinary System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.37.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331113.37: Kidneys
Why is a bean-shaped organ so important?
Shown above are the isolated kidneys from many little mice. OK, they're really just kidney beans. But this i s what the important
kidney looks like. Why is it so important? Your kidneys filter and remove wastes from your blood.
The Kidneys
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs just abov e the waist. They are important organs with many funct ions in the body,
including producing hormones, absorbing minerals, and fil tering blood and producing urine.
A cross-section of a kidney is shown in Figure below. The function of the kidney is to filter bloo d and form urine. Urine is the
liquid waste product of the body that is excreted by the urinary system. Wastes in the blood come from t he normal breakdown of
tissues, such as muscles, and from food. The body use s food for energy. After the body has taken the nutri ents it needs from food,
some of the wastes are absorbed into the blood. If the kidneys did not remove them, these wastes would build up in the blood and
damage the body.
Kidneys and Nephrons
The actual removal of wastes from the blood occurs i n tiny units inside the kidneys called nephrons. Nephrons are the structural
and functional units of the kidneys. A single kidne y may have more than a million nephrons! This is fur ther discussed in the
Urinary System concept.

13.37.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13311
Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery and renal vein.
Kidneys and Homeostasis
The kidneys play many vital roles in homeostasis. They work with many other organ systems to do this. For example, they work
with the circulatory system to filter blood, and with the ur inary system to remove wastes.
The kidneys filter all the blood in the body many t imes each day and produce a total of about 1.5 liter s of urine. The kidneys
control the amount of water, ions, and other substances in the blood by excreti ng more or less of them in urine. The kidneys also
secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis. Erythropoietin, for example, is a kidney hormone that stimulates bo ne marrow
to produce red blood cells when more are needed. They also secrete renin, which re gulates blood pressure, and calcitriol, the active
form of vitamin D, which helps maintain calcium for b ones. The kidneys themselves are also regulated by ho rmones. For example,
antidiuretic hormone from the hypothalamus stimulates the kidneys to prod uce more concentrated urine when the body is low on
water.
Other Functions
In addition to filtering blood and producing urine, the kidneys are also involved in maintaining the water level in the body, and
regulating red blood cell levels and blood pressure.
As the kidneys are mainly involved in the production of uri ne, they react to changes in the body’s water level throughou t the
day. As water intake decreases, the kidneys adjust according ly and leave water in the body instead of helping remove it t hrough
the urine, maintaining the water level in the body.
The kidneys also need constant pressure to filter the bl ood. When the blood pressure drops too low, the kidneys incr ease the
pressure. One way is by producing angiotensin, a blood vesse l-constricting protein. This protein also signals the body to retain
sodium and water. Together, the constriction of blood vesse ls and retention of sodium and water help restore normal b lood
pressure.
When the kidneys don’t get enough oxygen, they send ou t a signal in the form of the hormone erythropoietin, whi ch stimulates
the bone marrow to produce more oxygen-carrying red bloo d cells.

13.37.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13311Summary
The kidneys maintain homeostasis by controlling the amoun t of water, ions, and other substances in the blood.
Kidneys also secrete hormones that have other homeosta tic functions.
Review
1. What is the nephron? How many nephrons are in each kid ney?
2. Explain how the kidneys maintain homeostasis.
3. What is the role of antidiuretic hormone?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Patrick J. Lynch, modified by CK12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Skull_an
d_brain_sagittal.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.37: Kidneys is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
How do your kidneys work? - Emma B
How do your kidneys work? - Emma B
Watch on

13.38.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331213.38: Excretory System Diseases
How do you block the flow of urine?
Kidney stones. Imagine having that travel through yo ur excretory system. OK, that's not a kidney stone, but yo u get the idea.
Kidney stones can be more than a few millimeters in di ameter. Painful? Sometimes extremely uncomfortable. And how does a
stone leave the kidney? The same way urine does.
Kidney Disease and Dialysis
A person can live a normal, healthy life with just one kidney. However, at least one kidney must function pr operly to maintain life.
Diseases that threaten the health and functioning of the kidneys include kidney stones, infections, and diabetes.
Kidney stones are mineral crystals that form in urine inside the kidne y. Kidney stones can form when substances in the urine,
such as calcium, oxalate, and phosphorus, become highly c oncentrated. They may be extremely painful. If they blo ck a ureter,
they must be removed so urine can leave the kidney and b e excreted. A kidney stone may not cause symptoms unti l it moves
around within your kidney or passes into your ureter. A sto ne may stay in the kidney or travel down the urinary tra ct. Kidney
stones vary in size. A small stone may pass on its own, cau sing little or no pain. A larger stone may get stuck along t he urinary
tract and can block the flow of urine, causing severe pain o r bleeding.
Bacterial infections of the urinary tract, especially the bl adder, are very common. Bladder infections can be treated with
antibiotics prescribed by a doctor. If untreated, they may lead to kidney damage.
Uncontrolled diabetes may damage capillaries of nephrons. As a result, the kidneys l ose much of their ability to filter blood.
This is called kidney failure. The only cure for kidney failure is a kidney transpl ant, but it can be treated with dialysis. Dialysis
is a medical procedure in which blood is filtered through a machine (see Figure below).
Scie n ce Art
How Do Kidney Stones Form? How C
How Do Kidney Stones Form? How C
Watch on

13.38.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13312
A dialysis machine filters a patient’s blood.
Summary
Kidney diseases include kidney stones, infections, and kidney failure due to diabetes.
Kidney failure may be treated with dialysis.
Review
1. Tom was seriously injured in a car crash. As a result, he had to have one of his kidneys removed. Does Tom need dial ysis? Why
or why not?
H e a lth N u tsM e dia
What Is Diabetes
What Is Diabetes
Watch on

13.38.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133122. What are kidney stones? How do they form?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Jodi So
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.38: Excretory System Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.39.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331313.39: Innate Immune System
How does your body keep most enemies out?
Many would consider the moat around this castle, toge ther with the thick stone castle walls, as the first li ne of defense. Their role is
to keep the enemy out, and protect what's inside.
The First Line of Defense
Does this organism look like a space alien? A scary cr eature from a nightmare? In fact, it’s a 1-cm long wo rm that lives in the
human body and causes serious harm. It enters the body through a hair follicle of the skin when it’s in a much smaller stage of its
life cycle. Like this worm, many other organisms can ma ke us sick if they manage to enter our body. Fortunate ly for us, our
immune system is able to keep out most such invaders.
The immune system protects the body from worms, germs, and other agents of harm. The immune system is like a medieval
castle. The outside of the castle was protected by a moa t and high stone walls. Inside the castle, soldiers were ready to fight off any
invaders that managed to get through the outer defe nses. Like a medieval castle, the immune system has a ser ies of defenses. In
fact, it has three lines of defense. Only pathogens that ar e able to get through all three lines of defense can harm th e body.

13.39.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13313The body’s first line of defense consists of different types of barriers that keep most pathogens out of t he body. Pathogens are
disease-causing agents, such as bacteria and viruses. These and other types of pathogens ar e described in Figure below. Regardless
of the type of pathogen, however, the first line of defense is always the same.
Types of pathogens that commonly cause human diseases include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. Which type of
pathogen causes the common cold? Which type causes athlete’s foot?
Mechanical Barriers
Mechanical barriers physically block pathogens from entering the body. T he skin is the most important mechanical barrier. In
fact, it is the single most important defense the body has. The outer layer of the skin is tough and very d ifficult for pathogens to
penetrate.
Mucous membranes provide a mechanical barrier at body openings. The y also line the respiratory, GI, urinary, and reprodu ctive
tracts. Mucous membranes secrete mucus, a slimy substance that traps pathogens. The membranes also have hair-like cilia. The
cilia sweep mucus and pathogens toward body openings where the y can be removed from the body. When you sneeze or co ugh,
pathogens are removed from the nose and throat (see Figure below). Tears wash pathogens from the eyes, and urine f lushes
pathogens out of the urinary tract.

13.39.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13313
A sneeze can expel many pathogens from the respiratory tract. That ’s why you should always cover your mouth and nose
when you sneeze.
Chemical Barriers
Chemical barriers destroy pathogens on the outer body surface, at bod y openings, and on inner body linings. Sweat, mucus, t ears,
and saliva all contain enzymes that kill pathogens. Urine is too acidic for many pathogens, and semen con tains zinc, which most
pathogens cannot tolerate. In addition, stomach acid kil ls pathogens that enter the GI tract in food or water.
Biological Barriers
Biological barriers are living organisms that help protect the body. Mi llions of harmless bacteria live on the human skin. Many
more live in the GI tract. The harmless bacteria use up food a nd space so harmful bacteria cannot grow.
Summary
Barriers that keep out pathogens are the body’s first l ine of defense.
The first line of defense includes mechanical, chemical, and biological barriers.
Review
1. What is the role of the body’s first line of defense?
2. Identify three types of barriers in the body’s first line o f defense. Give an example of each type of barrier.
Cra sh Cou rse
Immune System, P art 1: Crash Cours
Immune System, P art 1: Crash Cours
Watch on

13.39.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133133. Which type of pathogen causes the common cold? Which ty pe causes athlete’s foot?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: James Gathany/Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sneeze.J
PG
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Bruce Wetzel/Harry
Schaefer/National Cancer Institute,
colorized by Sam McCabe
Source:
http://visualsonline.cancer.gov/details.cfm?
imageid=1762
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Rocky Mountain Laboratories
Source:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:EscherichiaC
oli_NIAID.jpg;
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Herpes_simplex
_virus_TEM_B82-0474_lores.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Red_dea
th_cap_mushroom.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Giardia_
lamblia_SEM_8698_lores.jpg
License: CC0 / Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: James Gathany/Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sneeze.J
PG
License: CC0 / Public Domain
13.39: Innate Immune System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.40.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331513.40: Inflammatory Response
What happens when an enemy gets past the first line of defense?
For this running back to make it past the first line o f defense, there usually has to be a hole or break in the line. He then runs into
the secondary, or the second line of defense. Wheneve r the skin is broken, it is possible for pathogens to easily enter your body.
They get past the first line of defense, and run into th e second line of defense.
The Second Line of Defense
If you have a cut on your hand, the break in the sk in provides a way for pathogens to enter your body. Assume bacteria enter
through the cut and infect the wound. These bacteria woul d then encounter the body’s second line of defense.
Inflammatory Response
The cut on your hand may become red, warm, and swollen. These are signs of an inflammatory response. This is the first reaction
of the body to tissue damage or infection. As explained in Figure below, the response is triggered by chemicals call ed cytokines
and histamines, which are released when tissue is injured or infecte d. The chemicals communicate with other cells and coordinate
the inflammatory response. You can see an animation o f the inflammatory response at this link:
http://www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content /inflammatory.html.
This drawing shows what happens during the inflammatory response. Why are changes in ca pillaries important for this
response?
Leukocytes
The chemicals that trigger an inflammatory response a ttract leukocytes to the site of injury or infection. Leukocytes are white
blood cells. Their role is to fight infections and get rid of d ebris. Leukocytes may respond with either a nonspeci fic or a specific

13.40.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13315defense.
A nonspecific defense is the same no matter what type of pathogen is involved. An example of a nonspecific defense is
phagocytosis. This is the process in which leukocytes engulf and break d own pathogens and debris. It is illustrated in Figure
below. The immune system's first line of defense is also a n onspecific defense.
A specific defense is tailored to a particular pathogen. Leukocytes invol ved in this type of defense are part of the immune
response and are described in other concepts.
In this image, leukocytes (white) are attacking pathogens (star-shaped).
Further Reading
Allergies
Summary
The second line of defense attacks pathogens that ma nage to enter the body.
The second line of defense includes the inflammatory r esponse and phagocytosis by nonspecific leukocytes.
Review
1. What is a nonspecific defense?
2. What is the body’s second life of defense? When doe s it take effect?
3. Identify the roles of nonspecific leukocytes in the bod y’s second line of defense.
TED-Ed
How a wound heals itself - Sarthak S
How a wound heals itself - Sarthak S
Watch on

13.40.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133154. Jera cut her finger. The next day, the skin around the c ut became red and warm. Why are these signs of infection?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Athanasia
Nomikou, 2014, modified by CK-12
Foundation
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.40: Inflammatory Response is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.41.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331713.41: Lymphatic System
What happens when your tonsils cause more problems than they solve?
Almost all of us have had a sore throat at some time. Maybe you had your tonsils out when you were younger? Why? Your tonsils
are two lumps of tissue that work as germ fighters for your body. But sometimes germs like to hang out ther e, where they cause
infections. In other words, your tonsils can cause more proble ms than they solve. So, you have them taken out.
Lymphatic System
Like the immune systems of other vertebrates, the hu man immune system is adaptive. If pathogens manage to get through the
body’s first two lines of defense, the third line of d efense takes over. The third line of defense is ref erred to as the immune
response. This defense is specific to a particular pathogen, and it allows the immune system to “remember” the pat hogen after the
infection is over. If the pathogen tries to invade t he body again, the immune response against that pat hogen will be much faster and
stronger.
The immune response mainly involves the lymphatic sy stem. The lymphatic system is a major part of the immune system. It
produces leukocytes called lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are the key cells involved in the immune response. They recognize and
help destroy particular pathogens in body fluids and cell s. They also destroy certain cancer cells.
Structures of the Lymphatic System
Figure below shows the structures of the lymphatic system. The y include organs, lymph vessels, lymph, and lymph nodes. Organs
of the lymphatic system are the bone marrow, thymus, spl een, and tonsils.
Bone marrow is found inside many bones. It produces lymphocytes.
The thymus is located in the upper chest behind the breast bone. It stores and matures lymphocytes.
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
The L ymphatic System | Health | Biol
The L ymphatic System | Health | Biol
Watch on

13.41.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13317The spleen is in the upper abdomen. It filters pathogens and worn ou t red blood cells from the blood, and then lymphocytes in
the spleen destroy them.
The tonsils are located on either side of the pharynx in the throat. They trap pathogens, which are destroyed by lymphocytes i n
the tonsils.
The lymphatic system consists of organs, vessels, and lymph.
Lymphatic Vessels and Lymph
Lymphatic vessels make up a body-wide circulatory syste m. The fluid they circulate is lymph. Lymph is a fluid that leaks out of
capillaries into spaces between cells. As the lymph accumu lates between cells, it diffuses into tiny lymphatic v essels. The lymph
then moves through the lymphatic system from smaller to larger vessels. It finally drains back into the bloodstream in the chest. As
lymph passes through the lymphatic vessels, pathogens are filtered out at small structures called lymph nodes (see Figure above).
The filtered pathogens are destroyed by lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes
The human body has as many as two trillion lymphocytes, and lymphocytes make up about 25% of all leukocytes. The majority of
lymphocytes are found in the lymphatic system, where th ey are most likely to encounter pathogens. The rest a re found in the blood.
There are two major types of lymphocytes, called B cells and T cells. These cells get their names from the organs in which they
mature. B cells mature in bone marrow, and T cells ma ture in the thymus. Both B and T cells recognize and respond to particular
pathogens.
Antigen Recognition
B cells and T cells actually recognize and respond to antigens on pathogens. Antigens are molecules that the immune system
recognizes as foreign to the body. Antigens are also fou nd on cancer cells and the cells of transplanted orga ns. They trigger the
immune system to react against the cells that carry th em. This is why a transplanted organ may be rejected by the recipient’s
immune system.
How do B and T cells recognize specific antigens? They have receptor molecules on their surface that bind only with particular
antigens.
As shown in Figure below, the fit between an antigen and a matching recepto r molecule is like a key in a lock.

13.41.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13317
An antigen fits the matching receptor molecule like a key in a lock.
Summary
The body’s third line of defense is the immune response. This involves the lymphatic system. This system filter s pathogens
from lymph and produces lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes are the key cells in the immune response. They are leukocytes that become activated by a particular ant igen.
There are two major type of lymphocytes: B cells and T cells.
Review
1. What is the lymphatic system?
2. List three organs of the lymphatic system and their func tions.
3. What are lymph nodes? What is their function?
4. What are the two major types of lymphocytes?
5. What are antigens, and how do lymphocytes “recognize” t hem?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
(LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0

13.41.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331713.41: Lymphatic System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.42.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1331813.42: Humoral Response
What are those Y-shaped things floating around the cell?
They are antibodies, which are large proteins. And they signal specific antigens for destruction. It does help that the antigens are
usually attached to pathogens.
Humoral Immune Response
There are actually two types of immune responses: humo ral and cell-mediated. The humoral immune response involves mainly B
cells and takes place in blood and lymph.
B Cell Activation
B cells must be activated by an antigen before they can fig ht pathogens. This happens in the sequence of events shown in Figure
below. First, a B cell encounters its matching antigen and engulfs it. The B cell then displays fragments of the antigen on its
surface. This attracts a helper T cell. The helper T cell binds to the B cell at the anti gen site and releases cytokines that “tell” or
signal the B cell to develop into a plasma cell.
Activation of a B cell must occur before it can respond to pathogens. W hat role do T cells play in the activation process?

13.42.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13318Plasma Cells and Antibody Production
Plasma cells are activated B cells that secrete antib odies. Antibodies are large, Y-shaped proteins that recognize and bind to
antigens. Plasma cells are like antibody factories, pr oducing many copies of a single type of antibody. Th e antibodies travel
throughout the body in blood and lymph. Each antibo dy binds to just one kind of antigen. When it does, it forms an antigenantibody complex (see Figure below). The complex flags the antigen-bearing cell for destruction by phagocytosis.
An antibody matches only one type of antigen.
Memory Cells
Most plasma cells live for just a few days, but some of them live much longer. They may even survive for the lifetime of the
individual. Long-living plasma cells are called memory cells. They retain a “memory” of a specific pathogen long after an
infection is over. They help launch a rapid response agai nst the pathogen if it invades the body again in the futu re.
Summary
Activated B cells produce antibodies to a particular an tigen.
Memory B cells remain in the body after the immune response is over and provide immunity to pathogens bearing the antigen.
Review
1. How do plasma cells help fight pathogens? Include the ro le of antibodies in your response.
2. If a disease destroyed a person’s helper T cells, how might this affect the ability to launch an immune response?
F e licity K e a r
B-cell, P lasma and Memory cell Anim
B-cell, P lasma and Memory cell Anim
Watch on

13.42.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133183. What are memory cells? What is their role?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibod
y.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the National Institutes
of Health and User:DO11.10/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:B_cell_a
ctivation.png
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibod
y.svg
License: Public Domain
13.42: Humoral Response is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.43.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332013.43: Cell-Mediated Response
Do cells really attack other cells?
They sure do. Depicted here is a group of T cells att acking a cancer cell. When they can, the T cells sea rch out and destroy “bad”
cells.
Cell-Mediated Immune Response
In addition to the humoral response, the other type of immune response is the cell-mediated immune response, which involves
mainly T cells. It leads to the destruction of cells that are infe cted with viruses. Some cancer cells are also destroyed in this way.
There are several different types of T cells involve d in a cell-mediated immune response, including help er, cytotoxic, and
regulatory T cells.
T Cell Activation
All three types of T cells must be activated by an an tigen before they can fight an infection or cancer. T cell activation is illustrated
in Figure below. It begins when a B cell or nonspecific leukocy te engulfs a virus and displays its antigens. When t he T cell
encounters the matching antigen on a leukocyte, it beco mes activated. What happens next depends on which type of T cell it is.
T cell activation requires another leukocyte to engulf a virus and display its antigen.
Helper T Cells
Helper T cells are like the “managers” of the immune response. They secrete cytokines, which activate or control the activities of
other lymphocytes. Most helper T cells die out once a pathogen has been cleared from the body, but a few remain as memory cells.

13.43.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13320These memory cells are ready to produce large numbers of antigen-specific helper T cells like themselves i f they are exposed to the
same antigen in the future.
Cytotoxic T Cells
Cytotoxic T cells destroy virus-infected cells and some cancer cells. Once activated, a cytotoxic T cell divides rapidly an d
produces an “army” of cells identical to itself. These cells travel throughout the body “searching” for mor e cells to destroy. Figure
below shows how a cytotoxic T cell destroys a body cell infected with viruses. This T cell releases toxins that form pores in the
membrane of the infected cell. This causes the cell to burst, destroying both the cell and the viruses inside it.
A cytotoxic T cell releases toxins that destroy an infected body ce ll and the viruses it contains.
After an infection has been brought under control, mo st cytotoxic T cells die off. However, a few remain as me mory cells. If the
same pathogen enters the body again, the memory cel ls mount a rapid immune response. They quickly produ ce many copies of
cytotoxic T cells specific to the antigen of that pathogen.
Regulatory T Cells
Regulatory T cells are responsible for ending the cell-mediated immun e response after an infection has been curbed. They also
suppress T cells that mistakenly react against self antige ns. What might happen if these T cells were not suppresse d?
Summary
Activated T cells destroy certain cancer cells and cells in fected by viruses.
Memory T cells remain in the body after the immune resp onse and provide antigen-specific immunity to the virus.
TED-Ed
Cell vs. virus: A battle for health - Sha
Cell vs. virus: A battle for health - Sha
Watch on

13.43.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13320Review
1. Describe one way that cytotoxic T cells destroy cells i nfected with viruses.
2. What are regulatory T cells?
Resources
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura
Guerin;User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibod
y.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of the National Institutes
of Health and User:DO11.10/Wikimedia
Commons;User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antigen
_presentation.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibod
y.svg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura
Guerin;User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antibod
y.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
13.43: Cell-Mediated Response is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
H a n dwritte n T u toria ls
T Cell Development
T Cell Development
Watch on

13.44.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/139713.44: Bones
Are bones living?
It's common to think of bones as not living. But bon es are very much living. In fact, you are constantly making new bone tissue.
That means that you are also constantly getting rid of bone. Bone is full of blood and nerves and all sor ts of cells and proteins,
making it an extremely complex living tissue.
Structure of Bones
Many people think of bones as being dead, dry, and br ittle. These adjectives correctly describe the bones o f a preserved skeleton,
but the bones in a living human being are very much alive. As shown in Figure below, the basic structure of bones is bone matrix,
which makes up the underlying rigid framework of bones, composed of both compact bone and spongy bone. The b one matrix
consists of tough protein fibers, mainly collagen, that become hard and rigid due to mineralization with calcium crystals. Bone
matrix is crisscrossed by blood vessels and nerves and a lso contains specialized bone cells that are actively involved in metabolic
processes.
Da n ie l Izzo
The Structure of Bone
The Structure of Bone
Watch on

13.44.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1397
Bone matrix provides bones with their basic structure. Notice the spong y bone in the middle, and the compact bone towards
the outer region. The osteon is the functional unit of compact bone.
Bone Cells
There are three types of specialized cells in human bones: osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts. These cells are responsible for
bone growth and mineral homeostasis.
Osteoblasts make new bone cells and secrete collagen that mineralizes to become bone matrix. They are responsible for bone
growth and the uptake of minerals from the blood.
Osteocytes regulate mineral homeostasis. They direct the uptake of minerals from the blood and the release of minerals back
into the blood as needed.
Osteoclasts dissolve minerals in bone matrix and release them back into the blood.
Bones are far from static, or unchanging. Instead, th ey are dynamic, living tissues that are constantly b eing reshaped. Under the
direction of osteocytes, osteoblasts continuously build up bone, while osteoclasts continuously break it down.
Bone Tissues
Bones consist of different types of tissue, including co mpact bone, spongy bone, bone marrow, and periosteum. All of these tissue
types are shown in Figure below.
Compact bone makes up the dense outer layer of bone. Its functional uni t is the osteon. Compact bone is very hard and strong.
Spongy bone is found inside bones and is lighter and less dense than compact bone. This is because spongy bone is porous.
Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue that produces blood cells. It is found inside the pores of spongy bone.
Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone.
e ric l
Bone Remodeling
Bone Remodeling
Watch on

13.44.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1397
This bone contains different types of bone tissue. How does each type of tissue contribute to the functions of bone?
Summary
Under the direction of osteocytes, osteoblasts continuously build up bone, while osteoclasts continuously break down b one.
These processes help maintain mineral homeostasis.
Bone tissues include compact bone, spongy bone, bone mar row, and periosteum.
Review
1. Describe bone matrix.
2. Identify the three types of specialized bone cells and wh at they do.
3. Compare and contrast the structure and function of com pact bone and spongy bone.

13.44.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13974. What is bone marrow? Where is it found?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of U.S. National Cancer
Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology and
End Results (SEER) Program, modified by
Marianna Ruiz Villarreal
(User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)
for CK-12 Foundation
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Illu_co
mpact_spongy_bone.jpg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Christopher Auyeung
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
This page titled 13.44: Bones is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.45.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332113.45: Immunity
Is giving shots to young children a good thing?
Many, if not most, children hated going to the doctor, as it often meant getting a shot. Why? The shot ac tually contained a
weakened or dead pathogen. And putting some of that dead p athogen into you was a good thing.
Immunity
Memory B and T cells help protect the body from re-infection by pathoge ns that infected the body in the past. Being able to resist a
pathogen in this way is called immunity. Immunity can be active or passive.
Active Immunity
Active immunity results when an immune response to a pathogen produc es memory cells. As long as the memory cells survive,
the pathogen will be unable to cause a serious infect ion in the body. Some memory cells last for a lifetime and confer permanent
immunity.
Active immunity can also result from immunization. Immunization is the deliberate exposure of a person to a pathogen in order
to provoke an immune response and the formation of m emory cells specific to that pathogen. The pathogen is often in jected.
However, only part of a pathogen, a weakened form of th e pathogen, or a dead pathogen is typically used. Thi s causes an immune
response without making the immunized person sick. Th is is how you most likely became immune to measles, mu mps, and chicken
pox.
Passive Immunity
Passive immunity results when antibodies are transferred to a person who has never been expos ed to the pathogen. Passive
immunity lasts only as long as the antibodies surviv e in body fluids. This is usually between a few days and a few months. Passive
immunity may be acquired by a fetus through its mot her’s blood. It may also be acquired by an infant th ough the mother’s breast
milk. Older children and adults can acquire passive immunit y through the injection of antibodies.

13.45.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13321Further Reading
Autoimmune Disease
Summary
Immunity is the ability to resist infection by a pathogen.
Active immunity results from an immune response to a pathogen and the formation of memory cells.
Passive immunity results from the transfer of antibodies to a person who has not been exposed to the pathogen.
Review
1. What is immunity? What role do memory cells play in immunity?
2. How is active immunity different from passive immunity? Wh y does active immunity last longer?
3. Explain how immunization prevents a disease such as measl es, which is caused by a virus.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.45: Immunity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
bra in ge n ie
8.11.3 T ypes of Immunity --P assive v
8.11.3 T ypes of Immunity --P assive v
Watch on

13.46.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332213.46: Allergies
Have you ever started to sneeze and not known why?
A beautiful sea of flowers. A nice sight, unless you have an allergic reaction. It is not uncommon to have reactio ns to pollen.
Allergies
Your immune system usually protects you from pathogen s and keeps you well. However, like any other body system, the immune
system itself can develop problems. Sometimes it respond s to harmless foreign substances as though they were p athogens.
Sometimes it attacks the body’s own cells. Certain diseases can also attack and damage the immu ne system and interfere with its
ability to defend the body.
An allergy is a disease in which the immune system makes an infl ammatory response to a harmless antigen. Any antigen that
causes an allergy is called an allergen. Allergens may be inhaled or ingested, or they may com e into contact with the skin. Two
common causes of allergies are shown in Figure below. Inhaling ragweed pollen may cause coughing an d sneezing. Skin contact
with oils in poison ivy may cause an itchy rash. Other c ommon causes of allergies include dust mites, mold, ani mal dander, insect
stings, latex, and certain food and medications. Sympt oms of a common allergy such as pollen can include sne ezing, a runny nose,
nasal congestion and itchy, watery eyes.
Ragweed and poison ivy are common causes of allergies. Are you allergi c to these plants?
The symptoms of allergies can range from mild to sev ere. Mild allergy symptoms are often treated with antihistamines. These are
drugs that reduce or eliminate the effects of the hi stamines that cause allergy symptoms. Recall that his tamines trigger the
inflammatory response. The most severe allergic react ion is called anaphylaxis. This is a life-threatening response caused by a
massive release of histamines. It requires emergency medi cal treatment.

13.46.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13322Summary
Allergies occur when the immune system makes an inflammat ory response to a harmless antigen.
An antigen that causes an allergy is called an allergen.
Review
1. What is an allergen? Give two examples.
2. Define anaphylaxis. What causes the symptoms of ana phylaxis?
3. Sometimes people with an allergy get allergy shots. T hey are injected with tiny amounts of the allergen that t riggers the allergic
reaction. The shots are repeated at regular intervals, and the amount of allergen that is injected each time gra dually increases.
B e Sm a rt
%$?# Allergies!
%$?# Allergies!
Watch on

13.46.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13322How do you think this might help an allergy? Do you think this approach just treats allergy symptoms or might it cure the
allergy?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Ragweed: Homer Edward Price;
Poison ivy: John J. Mosesso/National
Biological Information Infrastructure
Source: Ragweed:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/28340342@
N08/2976017730/; Poison ivy:
life.nbii.gov/dml/mediadetail.do?
id=703&#38; pt=l2Search&#38;
navbar=page1_view1_title_asc_15
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Ragweed: Homer Edward Price;
Poison ivy: John J. Mosesso/National
Biological Information Infrastructure
Source: Ragweed:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/28340342@
N08/2976017730/; Poison ivy:
life.nbii.gov/dml/mediadetail.do?
id=703&#38; pt=l2Search&#38;
navbar=page1_view1_title_asc_15
License: (Ragweed) CC BY 2.0; (Poison
ivy) Public Domain
13.46: Allergies is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.47.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332313.47: Autoimmune Disease
Joint pain. Not an uncommon problem as you grow older. I s it due to normal wear and tear on the joints? Possibl y. But rheumatoid
arthritis is an autoimmune disease, which means the body's im mune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.
Autoimmune Diseases
Autoimmune diseases occur when the immune system fails to recognize the body’s own molecules as “self,” or belonging to the
person. Instead, it attacks body cells as though they we re dangerous pathogens. There are more than 80 known a utoimmune
diseases. Recall that regulatory T cells help regulate the immune system. When autoimmune di sorders occur, these regulatory T
cells fail in their function. This results in damage to various organs and tissues. The type of autoimmune disorder depends on the
type of body tissue that is affected.
Some relatively common autoimmune diseases are listed in Table below. These diseases cannot be cured, although they can be
treated to relieve symptoms and prevent some of the lo ng-term damage they cause.
Name of Disease Tissues Attacked by Immune System Results of Im mune System Attack
Rheumatoid arthritis tissues inside joints joint damage a nd pain
Type 1 diabetes insulin-producing cells of the pancreasinability to produce insulin, high blood
sugar
Multiple sclerosismyelin sheaths of central nervous system
neuronsmuscle weakness, pain, fatigue
Systemic lupus erythematosus joints, heart, other organs j oint and organ damage and pain
Why does the immune system attack body cells? In some cases, it’s because of exposure to pathogens that have antigens similar to
the body’s own molecules. When this happens, the immun e system not only attacks the pathogens, it also attac ks body cells with
the similar molecules.

13.47.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13323Summary
Autoimmune diseases occur when the immune system fails to disting uish self from non-self. As a result, the immune system
attacks the body’s own cells.
Review
1. What is an autoimmune disease? Name an example.
2. Rheumatic fever is caused by a bacteria that has antigens similar to molecules in human hear t tissues. When the immune system
attacks the bacteria, it may also attack the heart. What type of immune syste m disease is rheumatic fever? Explain your answer.
3. Can autoimmune disease be cured?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.47: Autoimmune Disease is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Au toim m u n e Associa tion
What Are Autoimmune Diseases?
What Are Autoimmune Diseases?
Watch on

13.48.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332413.48: Immunodeficiency
Which is stronger?
You or little tiny pathogens? Usually you are. Normall y your body can put up a strong defense against enemy pathogens. But what
if it can't? What happens if your immune system is "sick"?
Immunodeficiency
Immunodeficiency occurs when the immune system is not working properly. As a result, it cannot fight off pathogens that a
normal immune system would be able to resist. Most com monly, immunodeficiency diseases occur when T or B cells (or both) do
not work as well as they should, or when your body doesn't pro duce enough antibodies.
Rarely, the problem is caused by a defective gene. In herited immunodeficiency disorders that affect B cells include
hypogammaglobulinemia, which usually leads to respira tory and gastrointestinal infections, and agammaglob ulinemia, which
results in severe infections early in life, and is often deadl y.
More often, immunodeficiency is acquired during a person ’s lifetime. Immunodeficiency may occur for a variety of reasons:
The immune system naturally becomes less effective as peo ple get older. This is why older people are generally more
susceptible to disease.
The immune system may be damaged by other disorders, such as obesity or drug abuse.
Certain medications can suppress the immune system. This is an intended effect of drugs given to people with transplant ed
organs. In many cases, however, it is an unwanted side effe ct of drugs used to treat other diseases.
Some pathogens attack and destroy cells of the immune system. An example is the virus known as HIV. It is the most common
cause of immunodeficiency in the world today.

13.48.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13324Summary
In an immunodeficiency disease, the immune system does not work normally. As a consequence, it cannot defend the bod y.
Review
1. What is immunodeficiency?
2. List three possible reasons for acquired immunodeficien cy.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.48: Immunodeficiency is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.49.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332513.49: HIV AIDS
How long can a person live with HIV?
Years ago, a diagnosis of an HIV infection was a death sentence. Not today. With the proper medical treatmen t, an individual can
live well over 10 or 20 or more productive years with an AIDS diagnosis. One of the most famous individuals with HIV is Earvin
“Magic” Johnson, a retired professional basketball player. He was diagnosed in 1991. Over 20 years later, he is still d oing well.
HIV and AIDS
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a virus that attacks the immune system. An example of HIV is shown in Figure below.
Many people infected with HIV eventually develop acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). This may not occur until
many years after the virus first enters the body.
HIV is a virus that attacks cells of the immune system.
HIV Transmission
HIV is transmitted, or spread, through direct contact of mucous membranes or body fluids such as blood, semen, or breast milk.
As shown in Figure below, transmission of the virus can occur through se xual contact or the use of contaminated hypodermic
needles. It can also be transmitted through an infect ed mother’s blood to her baby during late pregnancy or birth or through breast
milk after birth. In the past, HIV was also transmitted through blood transfusions. Because donated blood is no w screened for HIV,
the virus is no longer transmitted this way. HIV is not spread th rough saliva, touching or in swimming pools.

13.49.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13325
HIV may be transmitted in all of the ways shown here. Based on how HIV is transmitted, what can people do to protect
themselves from becoming infected? What choices can they make to pre vent infection?
HIV and the Immune System
HIV infects and destroys helper T cells. As shown in Figure below, the virus injects its own DNA into a helper T cell and uses the
T cell’s “machinery” to make copies of itself. In the process the T cell is destroyed, and the virus copies go on to infect other helper
T cells.
This diagram shows how HIV infects and destroys T cells.
HIV is able to evade the immune system and keep destroyin g T cells. This occurs in two ways:
The virus frequently mutates and changes its surface antigens. This prevents antigen-specific lymphocytes from develo ping that
could destroy cells infected with the virus.
The virus uses the plasma membranes of host cells to hide i ts own antigens. This prevents the host’s immune system from
detecting the antigens and destroying infected cells.
As time passes, the number of HIV copies keeps increasing, while the number of helper T cells keeps decreasing. Th e graph in
Figure below shows how the number of T cells typically declin es over a period of many years following the initial HIV infection.
As the number of T cells decreases, so does the abili ty of the immune system to defend the body. As a resu lt, an HIV-infected

13.49.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13325person develops frequent infections. Medicines can sl ow down the virus but not get rid of it, so there is no cure at present for HIV
infections or AIDS. There also is no vaccine to immunize peop le against HIV infection, but scientists are working to devel op one.
It typically takes several years after infection with HIV for t he drop in T cells to cripple the immune system. What do you
think explains the brief spike in T cells that occurs early in the HI V infection shown here?
AIDS
AIDS is not a single disease but a set of diseases. It res ults from years of damage to the immune system by HIV. It occurs when
helper T cells fall to a very low level and opportun istic diseases occur (see Figure above). Opportunistic diseases are infections
and tumors that are rare except in people with immun odeficiency. The diseases take advantage of the oppo rtunity presented by
people whose immune systems can’t fight back. Opportunistic diseases are usually the direct cause of death of people wi th AIDS.
AIDS and HIV were first identified in 1981. Scientists thi nk that the virus originally infected monkeys but t hen jumped to human
populations, probably sometime during the early to m id-1900s. This most likely occurred in West Africa, but the virus soon spread
around the world (see Figure below). Since then, HIV has killed more than 25 milli on people worldwide. The hardest hit countries
are in Africa, where medicines to slow down the virus are least available. The worldwide economic toll of HIV a nd AIDS has also
been enormous.
H e a lth gu ru
When HIV Becomes AIDS (HIV #2)
When HIV Becomes AIDS (HIV #2)
Watch on

13.49.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13325
This map shows the number of people in different countries with HIV infectio ns and AIDS in 2008. The rate of spread of
the infection is higher Africa than in the U.S., yet the U.S. has a relativel y large number of people with HIV infections and
AIDS. Why might there be more survivors with HIV infections and AIDS in the U.S. than in Africa?
HIV Research: Beyond the Vaccine
Over the past 15 years, the number of people who die of AIDS each year in the United States has dropped by 70 pe rcent. But AIDS
remains a serious public health crisis among low-inco me African-Americans, particularly women. And in sub-Sahar an Africa, the
virus killed more than 1.6 million people in 2007 a lone. Innovative research approaches could lead to n ew treatments and possibly
a cure for AIDS. HIV/AIDS has been described as a disease of poverty. Individuals with poor access to health care are less likely to
see a doctor early on in their HIV infection, and th us they may be more likely to transmit the infection. HIV is now the leading
cause of death for African American women between 24 and 35 y ears old.
For patients who have access to drugs, infection with the virus has ceased to be a death sentence. In 1995, co mbinations of drugs
called highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) were developed. For some patients, drugs can reduce the amount of virus
to undetectable levels. But some amount of virus al ways hides in the body's immune cells and attacks aga in if the patient stops
taking his or her medication. Researchers are workin g on developing a drug to wipe out this hidden virus, which could mean the
end of AIDS.
K QED
HIV Research: Beyond the Vaccine | K
HIV Research: Beyond the Vaccine | K
Watch on

13.49.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13325Further Reading
Immunodeficiency
Summary
HIV is a virus that attacks cells of the immune system and eventually causes AIDS.
AIDS is the chief cause of immunodeficiency in the world tod ay.
Review
1. What is the relationship between HIV and AIDS?
2. Identify two ways that HIV can be transmitted.
3. What cells are affected by HIV?
4. What happens to the number of HIV copies and the hel per T cells over time in an infected individual?
5. Draw a graph to show the progression of an untreated HIV infe ction. Include a line that shows how the number of HIV copies
changes over time. Include another line that shows how th e number of helper T cells changes over time.

13.49.6 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133256. What are opportunistic diseases?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Diagram: Courtesy of the NIAID;
SEM image: Courtesy of CDC/C.
Goldsmith, P. Feorino, E. L. Palmer, W. R.
McManus
Source: Diagram:
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIV AIDS/
Understanding/Biology/pages/hivreplicatio
ncycle.aspx; SEM image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HIVbudding.jpg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright Sebastian
Kaulitzki, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Hana Zavadska and Laura
Guerin;Hana Zavadska, based on data from
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention;User:Metju12/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Herpes_
labialis.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Rupali
Raju;User:Metju12/Wikimedia Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Herpes_
labialis.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 5]Credit: Hana Zavadska;Diagram: Courtesy
of the NIAID; SEM image: Courtesy of
CDC/C. Goldsmith, P. Feorino, E. L.
Palmer, W. R.
McManus;User:Metju12/Wikimedia
Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation; Diagram:
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIV AIDS/
Understanding/Biology/pages/hivreplicatio
ncycle.aspx; SEM image:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HIVbudding.jpg;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Herpes_
labialis.jpg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain

13.49.7 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13325
[Figure 6]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, based on map
created by User:Canuckguy/Wikipedia and
data from the UNAIDS Global Report on
the Global Aids Epidemic 2012
Source: Map:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BlankM
ap-World6.svg; Data:
www.unaids.org/globalreport/
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.49: HIV AIDS is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.50.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332613.50: Carcinogens and Cancer
What's the worst thing you can do to hurt your health?
Besides pathogens, many other dangers in the environment may negatively affect human health. For example, air po llution can cause lung cancer. It can also make asthma a nd other diseases worse.
Bioterrorism is another potential threat in the environm ent. It may poison large numbers of people or cause epi demics of deadly diseases. But the worst thing you can d o to yourself is smoke
cigarettes.
Carcinogens and Cancer
A carcinogen is anything that can cause cancer. Cancer is a disease in which cells divide out of control. Most carcinogens cause cancer by producing mut ations in DNA.
Types of Carcinogens
There are several different types of carcinogens. They include path ogens, radiation, and chemicals. Some carcinogens occur naturally. Oth ers are produced by human actions.
Viruses cause about 15 percent of all human cancers. For example, the viru s called hepatitis B causes liver cancer.
UV radiation is the leading cause of skin cancer. The radioactive ga s known as radon causes lung cancer.
Tobacco smoke contains dozens of carcinogens, including nicoti ne and formaldehyde. Exposure to tobacco smoke is the leading cause of lung cancer.
Some chemicals that were previously added to foods, such as certain dy es, are now known to cause cancer. Cooking foods at very high temperatur es also causes carcinogens to form (see Figure
below).
Barbecued foods are cooked at very high temperatures. This may cause carcinogens to for m.
How Cancer Occurs
Mutations that lead to cancer usually occur in genes that control the cell cycle. These include tumor-suppressor genes and proto-onc ogenes.
Tumor-suppressor genes normally prevent cells with damaged DNA from dividing. Mutations in these genes prevent them from functioning normally. As a result, cells with damaged DNA are
allowed to divide.
Proto-oncogenes normally help control cell division. Mutations in these genes turn them into oncogenes. Oncogenes promote the division of cells with damaged DNA.
Cells that divide uncontrollably may form a tumor, or abnormal mass of cells. Tumors may be benign or malign ant. Benign tumors remain localized and generally do not harm health. Malignant
tumors are cancerous. There are no limits to their growth, so they can invade and damage neighboring tissues. Cells from ma lignant tumors may also break away from the tumor and ente r the
bloodstream. They are carried to other parts of the body, where new tumors ma y form. The most common and the most deadly cancers for U.S. adults are list ed in Table below.
Gender Most Common Types of Cancer after Skin Cancer (% of all cancers) Most Common Causes of Cancer Deaths (% of all cancer dea
Males prostate cancer (33%), lung cancer (13%) lung cancer (31%), prostate cancer (10%)
Females breast cancer (32%), lung cancer (12%) lung cancer (27%), breast cancer (15%)
More cancer deaths in adult males and females are due to lung cancer than any other type of cancer. Lung cance r is most often caused by exposure to tobacco smoke. What might explain why lung
cancer causes the most cancer deaths when it isn’t the most common type of cancer?

13.50.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13326Cancer Treatment and Prevention
Most cancers can be treated, and some can be cured. Th e general goal of treatment is to remove the tumor witho ut damaging other cells. A cancer patient is typically treated in more than one way.
Possible treatments include surgery, drugs (chemotherapy), and radiation. Early diagnosis and treatment of cancer l ead to the best chance for survival. That’s why it’s impor tant to know the following
warning signs of cancer:
change in bowel or bladder habits
sore that does not heal
unusual bleeding or discharge
lump in the breast or elsewhere
chronic indigestion or difficulty swallowing
obvious changes in a wart or mole
persistent coughing or hoarseness
Having one or more warning signs does not mean you have cancer, but you should see a doctor to be sure. Getting ro utine tests for particular cancers can also help detect cancers early, when chances
of a cure are greatest. For example, getting the skin checked regularly b y a dermatologist is important for early detection of skin cancer (s ee Figure below).
Regular checkups with a dermatologist can detect skin cancers early. Why is early de tection important?
You can take steps to reduce your own risk of cancer. For example, you can avoid exposure to carcinogens such a s tobacco smoke and UV light. You can also follow a healt hy lifestyle. Being active,
eating a low-fat diet, and maintaining a normal weight can help redu ce your risk of cancer.
Summary
A carcinogen is anything that causes cancer.
Most carcinogens produce mutations in genes that control the cel l cycle.
Review
1. What is a carcinogen? What is cancer?
2. How do most carcinogens cause cancer? Give two examples of carcinog ens.
3. Describe tumor-suppressor genes and describe how they cause cancer.
4. Identify three ways cancer can be treated.
5. List four warning signs of cancer.
vc u life sc ie n c e s
Deadly Patterns -- T oxicogenomics
Deadly Patterns -- T oxicogenomics
Watch on

13.50.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133266. What might explain why lung cancer causes the most cancer deaths wh en it isn’t the most common type of cancer?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Blaj Gabriel, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: Basheer Tome
Source: http://www.flickr.com/photos/basheertome/7918773636/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Blaj Gabriel, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from Shutterstock.com
13.50: Carcinogens and Cancer is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.51.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332713.51: Air Pollution and Illness
Is some air actually bad for you?
This question shouldn't even need an answer. Yes, some air can be harmful.
Air Pollution and Illness
Almost 5 million people die each year because of air pollution. In fact, polluted air causes more deaths than traffic accidents. Air
pollution harms the respiratory and circulatory systems. B oth outdoor and indoor air can be polluted.
Outdoor Air Pollution
The Air Quality Index (AQI) is an assessment of the pollutants in the outdoor a ir based on their human health effects. The health
risks associated with different values of AQI are shown i n Figure below. When AQI is high, you should limit the time you spend
outdoors. Avoiding exposure to air pollution can hel p limit its impact on your health. People with certai n health problems,
including asthma, are very sensitive to the effects of a ir pollution. They need to be especially careful to avoid i t.
Air quality is especially important for sensitive people. They inc lude people with asthma, other respiratory illnesses, and
cardiovascular diseases.
AQI generally refers to the levels of ground-level oz one and particulates. Ozone is a gas that forms close to the ground when air
pollutants are heated by sunlight. It is one of the ma in components of smog (see Figure below). Smog also contains particulates.
Particulates are tiny particles of solids or liquids suspended in the air. They are produced mainly by the burning of fossil fuels. The
particles settle in airways and the lungs, where they cause damage.

13.51.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13327
Smog clouds the city of Los Angeles, California. Visible air pollutio n in the form of smog is a sign that the air is unhealthy.
Indoor Air Pollution
Indoor air may be even more polluted than outdoor a ir. It may contain harmful substances such as mold, bacteria, and radon. It may
also contain carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a gas produced by furnaces and other devices tha t burn fuel. If it is inhaled, it
replaces oxygen in the blood and quickly leads to de ath. Carbon monoxide is colorless and odorless, but it can be detected with a
carbon monoxide detector like the one in Figure below.
A carbon monoxide detector warns you if the level of the gas is too hig h.
N ASA Godda rd
NASA | Human Fingerprint on Global
NASA | Human Fingerprint on Global
Watch on

13.51.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13327Summary
Both outdoor and indoor air may contain pollutants that ca n cause human illness and death.
Review
1. How can you use the Air Quality Index to protect your healt h?
2. Explain why ground-level ozone is usually a worse problem in the summer than in the winter in North America.
3. Compare and contrast pollutants in outdoor and indoor a ir, including their effects on human health.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of EPA
Source:
http://www.epa.gov/oar/airtrends/2007/grap
hics/AQI_textbox.gif
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Flickr:TravelingOtter
Source:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/travelingotter
/1552289685/
License: CC BY 2.0
[Figure 4]Credit: User:SineWave/Wikipedia
Source:
en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:CO_DETECTO
R.JPG
License: Public Domain
13.51: Air Pollution and Illness is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
B oze m a n Scie n ce
Air P ollution
Air P ollution
Watch on

13.52.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332813.52: Bioterrorism
"The world has definitely changed." This statement is common at times. What might it refer to?
Bioterrorism is a threat against civilized people wo rldwide. To be prepared, all levels of government have developed and conducted
terrorism drills. These include protecting responders fr om harmful biological substances.
Bioterrorism
Bioterrorism is the intentional release or spread of agents of di sease. The agents may be viruses, bacteria, or toxins produced by
bacteria. The agents may spread through the air, food, or water; or they may come into direct contact with the skin. Two of the best
known bioterrorism incidents in the U.S. occurred early i n this century:
1. In 2001, letters containing anthrax spores were mailed to several news offices and two U.S. Senate offi ces. A total of 22 people
were infected, and 5 of them died of anthrax.
2. In 2003, a deadly toxin called ricin was detected in a letter addressed to the White House. The letter was intercepted at a mailhandling facility off White House grounds. Fortunately, the ricin toxin did not cause any illnesses or deaths.
Summary
Bioterrorism is the intentional release or spread of age nts of disease.
From a n
a ccre di t e d U…N orth we ll H e a lth
Bioterrorism
Bioterrorism
Watch on

13.52.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13328Review
1. Define bioterrorism.
2. Research additional recent acts of bioterrorism.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.52: Bioterrorism is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.53.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1332913.53: Male Reproductive Organs
Would you believe the male reproductive structures are over 100 feet long?
The male reproductive system has two goals: to produce and deliver sperm and to secrete testosterone. Might seem simple. But
there are a number of complicated processes and structur es - including over 100 feet of tubules - that go into th ese simple goals.
The male reproductive system has two main functions: (1) to produce sperm, the male gamete, and (2) to release the male sex
hormone, testosterone, into the body.
Male Reproductive Structures
The reproductive system in both males and females c onsists of structures that produce reproductive cells, or gametes, and secrete
sex hormones. A gamete is a haploid cell that combines with another haploid gamete during fertilization. R ecall that haploid cells
have one complete set of chromosomes; in humans that would be 22 autosomes and one sex chromosome.
Sex hormones are chemical messengers that control sex ual development and reproduction. The male reproduc tive system consists
of structures that produce male gametes called sperm and secrete the male sex hormone testosterone.
The main structures of the male reproductive system are shown in Figure below. Locate them in the figure as you read about them
below.
Male Reproductive Structures. Organs of the male reproductive system include the penis, testes, and epididymis. Several
ducts and glands are also part of the system. Do you know the reproductive functio ns of any of these structures?
Penis
The penis is an external genital organ with a long shaft and enlarged tip called the glans penis. The shaft of the penis contains
erectile tissues that can fill with blood and cause a n erection. When this occurs, the penis gets bigger and stiffer. The urethra
passes through the penis. Sperm pass out of the body through the urethra. (During u rination, the urethra carries urine from the
bladder.)

13.53.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13329Testes
The two testes (singular, testis) are located below the penis. The y hang between the thighs in a sac of skin called the scrotum. Each
testis contains more than 30 meters (over 90 feet) of tiny, tightly packed tubules called seminiferous tubules. These tubules are the
functional units of the testes. They produce sperm and secr ete testosterone.
Epididymis
The seminiferous tubules within each testis join to fo rm the epididymis. The epididymis (plural, epididymis) is a coiled tube about
6 meters (20 feet) long lying atop the testis inside the scrotum. The functions of the epididymis are t o mature and store sperm until
they leave the body.
Ducts and Glands
In addition to these organs, the male reproductive sys tem consists of a series of ducts and glands. Ducts inc lude the vas deferens
and ejaculatory ducts. They transport sperm from th e epididymis to the urethra in the penis. Glands inclu de the seminal vesicles
and prostate gland. They secrete substances that become part of semen.
Semen
Semen is the fluid that carries sperm through the urethra and out of the body. In addition to sperm, it contain s secretions from the
glands. The secretions control pH and provide sperm with nutrie nts for energy.
Summary
The male reproductive system consists of structures that produce sperm and secrete testosterone.
Male reproductive structures include the penis, testes, and epididymis.
Review
1. What is a gamete?
2. What are sex hormones?
3. What are the two major roles of the male reproductive syste m?
Cra sh Cou rse
Reproductive System, P art 2 - Male R
Reproductive System, P art 2 - Male R
Watch on

13.53.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133294. Name two male reproductive organs and identify their fu nctions.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.53: Male Reproductive Organs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.54.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1333013.54: Male Reproductive Development
What changes happen during puberty?
A lot changes during this time. A boy has to start shavin g, his voice deepens, he gets taller, as well as a few other chan ges.
Sexual Development in Males
The only obvious difference between boys and girls a t birth is their reproductive organs. However, even the reproductive organs
start out the same in both sexes.
Development Before Birth
In the first several weeks after fertilization, male s and females are essentially the same except for the ir chromosomes. Females have
two X chromosomes (XX), and males have an X and a Y chromosome (XY). Then, during the second month after fertilizati on,
genes on the Y chromosome of males cause the secretion of testosterone. Testosterone stimulates the reproductive organs to
develop into male organs. (Without testosterone, the reproductive organs always develop into female organ s.) Although boys have
male reproductive organs at birth, the organs are immature and not yet able to produce sperm or secrete testosterone.
Puberty and Its Changes
The reproductive organs grow very slowly during child hood and do not mature until puberty. Puberty is the period during which
humans become sexually mature. In the U.S., boys generally begi n puberty at about age 12 and complete it at about age 18.
What causes puberty to begin? The hypothalamus in t he brain “tells” the pituitary gland to secrete horm ones that target the testes.
The main pituitary hormone involved is luteinizing hormone (LH). It stimulates the testes to secrete testosterone. Te stosterone, in
turn, promotes protein synthesis and growth. It brings about most of the physical changes of puberty, some of which are shown in
Figure below. In addition to the changes shown below, durin g puberty male facial hair begins to grow, the shou lders broaden, and
the male voice deepens.
Some of the changes that occur in boys during puberty are shown in this figure. P ubic hair grows, and the penis and testes
both become larger.
Adolescent Growth Spurt
Another obvious change that occurs during puberty is rapid growth. This is called the adolescent growth spurt. In boys, it is
controlled by testosterone. The rate of growth usual ly starts to increase relatively early in puberty. At its peak rate, growth in height

13.54.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13330is about 10 centimeters (almost 4 inches) per year in the average male. Growth generally remains rapid fo r several years. Growth
and development of muscles occur toward the end of the growth spurt in height. Muscles may continue to deve lop and gain
strength after growth in height is finished.
Summary
The male reproductive system forms before birth but doe s not become capable of reproduction until it matures du ring puberty.
Puberty lasts from about ages 12 to 18 years and is controlled by hormones.
Review
1. What happens to a developing baby that lacks testost erone?
2. List three physical changes that occur in males during p uberty.
3. Explain how and why boys change so much during puberty.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.54: Male Reproductive Development is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
Sex Determination: More Complicate
Sex Determination: More Complicate
Watch on

13.55.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/140013.55: Bone Growth
How do bones grow?
Bones are hard structures. So how do they grow? Well, bo nes are a living tissue. They have a blood supply. You are consistently
making new bone. In fact, the human skeleton is replac ed every 7-10 years. But how do bones grow? From their en ds, where they
have cartilage.
Growth and Development of Bones
Early in the development of a human fetus, the skele ton is made entirely of cartilage. The relatively soft cartilage gradually turns
into hard bone through ossification. This is a process in which mineral deposits replace cartilage. As shown in Figure below,
ossification of long bones, which are found in the arms and legs, begins at the center of the bones and con tinues toward the ends.
By birth, several areas of cartilage remain in the sk eleton, including growth plates at the ends of the long bones. This cartilage
grows as the long bones grow, so the bones can keep increasing i n length during childhood.
Long bones ossify and get longer as they grow and develop. These bones grow from their ends, known as the epiphysis, and
the presence of a growth plate, or epiphyseal line, signifies that the bone is still growing.
In the late teens or early twenties, a person reaches skeletal maturity. By then, all of the cartilage ha s been replaced by bone, so no
further growth in bone length is possible. However, bone s can still increase in thickness. This may occur in response to increased
muscle activity, such as weight training.

13.55.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1400Summary
Bones become increasingly ossified and grow larger during fetal development, childhood, and adolescence.
When skeletal maturity is reached at about age 20, no a dditional growth in bone length can occur.
Review
1. Define ossification.
2. A newborn baby has a soft spot on the top of its head. Over the next few months, the soft spot gradually hardens. What e xplains
this?
3. Jana is 17 years old and 172 cm tall. She plays basketball and hopes to grow at least 4 cm more before she turns 18 an d goes to
college. Jana recently injured her leg, and her doctor took an X-ray of it. Based on the X-ray, the doctor determined th at Jana
had reached skeletal maturity. How much taller is Jana likely to grow? Explain your answer.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Christopher Auyeung;Mariana
Ruiz Villarreal (Wikimedia: LadyofHats)
Source: CK-12 Foundation;
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Huma
n_skeleton_front.svg
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Public Domain
[Figure 2]Credit: LadyofHats
License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
This page titled 13.55: Bone Growth is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
TED-Ed
How to grow a bone - Nina T andon
How to grow a bone - Nina T andon
Watch on

13.56.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1333113.56: Sperm
How many sperm does it take to fertilize an egg?
85 million sperm per day are produced...per testicle. That's 170,000,000 every day. This means that a single male may produce
more than a quadrillion (1,000,000,000,000) sperm cells in his lifetime! But it only takes one to fertilize an egg.
Production and Delivery of Sperm
A sexually mature male produces an astounding number of sperm —typically, hundreds of millions each day! Sperm produ ction
usually continues uninterrupted until death, although t he number and quality of sperm decline during later adulth ood.
Spermatogenesis
The process of producing mature sperm is called spermatogenesis. Sperm are produced in the seminiferous tubules of the testes
and become mature in the epididymis. The entire process takes about 9 to 10 weeks.
If you look inside the seminiferous tubule shown in Figure below, you can see cells in various stages of spermatogenesis. The
tubule is lined with spermatogonia, which are diploid, sperm-producing cells. Surrounding the spermatogonia are other cells.
Some of these other cells secrete substances to nouri sh sperm, and some secrete testosterone, which is neede d for sperm
production.
Seminiferous Tubule. Cross section of a testis and seminiferous tubules.
Spermatogonia lining the seminiferous tubule undergo mitosis to form primary spermatocytes, which are also diploid. The
primary spermatocytes undergo the first meiotic div ision to form secondary spermatocytes, which are haploid. Spermatocytes

13.56.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13331make up the next layer of cells inside the seminifer ous tubule. Finally, the secondary spermatocytes comple te meiosis to form
spermatids. Spermatids make up a third layer of cells in the tubule.
Sperm Maturation
After spermatids form, they move into the epididymis to mature into sperm, like the one shown in Figure below. The spermatids
grow a tail and lose excess cytoplasm from the head. Wh en a sperm is mature, the tail can rotate like a pro peller, so the sperm can
propel itself forward. Mitochondria in the connecting piece produce the energy (ATP) needed for movement. The head of the
mature sperm consists mainly of the nucleus, which c arries copies of the father’s chromosomes. The part of the head called the
acrosome produces enzymes that help the sperm head penetrate an eg g.
Mature Sperm Cell. A mature sperm cell has several structures that hel p it reach and penetrate an egg. These structures
include the tail, mitochondria, and acrosome. How does each structure contribut e to the sperm’s function?
Ejaculation
Sperm are released from the body during ejaculation. Ejaculation occurs when muscle contractions propel s perm from the
epididymis. The sperm are forced through the ducts and out of the body through the urethra. As sperm travel through the ducts,
they mix with fluids from the glands to form semen. Hundre ds of millions of sperm are released with each ejaculation.
Summary
Sperm are produced in the testes in the process of sperma togenesis.
Sperm mature in the epididymis before being ejaculated from the body through the penis.
Review
1. Outline the process of spermatogenesis. Name the cells invo lved in the process?
2. Where do sperm mature and how do they leave the body?
3. If a man did not have functioning epididymis, predi ct how his sperm would be affected. How would this influence his ability to
reproduce?
TED-Ed
Human sperm vs. the sperm whale Human sperm vs. the sperm whale Watch on

13.56.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133314. How does each mature sperm structure contribute to the sper m’s function?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright Scivit, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright Scivit, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.56: Sperm is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.57.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1333213.57: Female Reproductive Organs
Think producing millions of sperm each day is complicated?
If producing millions of sperm each day, as in the male reproductive system, is comp licated, that is nothing compared to what must
occur in the female reproductive system. This system is controlled by an intricate dance of hormones, cycles, a nd events.
Female Reproductive Structures
The female reproductive system consists of structures that produce female gametes called eggs and secrete the female sex hormone
estrogen. The female reproductive system has several other funct ions as well:
1. It receives sperm during sexual intercourse.
2. It supports the development of a fetus.
3. It delivers a baby during birth.
4. It breast feeds a baby after birth.
The main structures of the female reproductive syste m are shown in Figure below. Most of the structures are inside the pelvic
region of the body. Locate the structures in the figure a s you read about them below.
Female Reproductive Structures. Organs of the female reproductive syste m include the vagina, uterus, ovaries, and
fallopian tubes.
External Structures
The external female reproductive structures are refe rred to collectively as the vulva. They include the labia (singular, labium),
which are the “lips” of the vulva. The labia protect the vagina and urethra, both of which have openings in the vulva.
Vagina
The vagina is a tube-like structure about 9 centimeters (3.5 inches) long. It begins at the vulva and extends up ward to the uterus. It
has muscular walls lined with mucous membranes. The vag ina has two major reproductive functions. It receives s perm during
sexual intercourse, and it provides a passageway for a baby t o leave the mother’s body during birth.

13.57.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13332Uterus
The uterus is a muscular organ shaped like an upside-down pear. It has a thick lining of tissues called the endometrium. The
lower, narrower end of the uterus is known as the cervix. The uterus is where a fetus grows and develops until birth. During
pregnancy, the uterus can expand greatly to make roo m for the baby as it grows. During birth, contractions o f the muscular walls of
the uterus push the baby through the cervix and out of the body.
Ovaries
The two ovaries are small, egg-shaped organs that lie on either sid e of the uterus. They produce eggs and secrete estrog en. Each
egg is located inside a structure called a follicle. Cells in the follicle protect the egg and help it mature.
Fallopian Tubes
Extending from the upper corners of the uterus are the two fallopian tubes. Each tube reaches (but is not attached to) one of the
ovaries. The ovary end of the tube has a fringelike structure that moves in waves. The motion sweeps eggs f rom the ovary into the
tube.
Breasts
The breasts are not directly involved in reproduction, but the y nourish a baby after birth. Each breast contains mammary glands,
which secrete milk. The milk drains into ducts leading to the nipple. A suckling baby squeezes the milk o ut of the ducts and
through the nipple.
Summary
The female reproductive system consists of structures that produce eggs and secrete female sex hormones. They als o provide a
site for fertilization and enable the development and birth of a fetus.
Female reproductive structures include the vagina, uter us, ovaries, and fallopian tubes.
Review
1. List three general functions of the female reproductive system.
2. Describe the uterus, and state its role in reproducti on.
3. What are the roles of the ovaries and the follicles?
H a n dwritte n T u toria ls
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Watch on

13.57.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133324. What are the fallopian tubes?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.57: Female Reproductive Organs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.58.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1333313.58: Female Reproductive Development
What changes happen during puberty?
A lot changes during this time, including changes to repr oductive organs and other physical changes.
Sexual Development in Females
Female reproductive organs form before birth. However, as in m ales, the organs do not mature until puberty.
Development Before Birth
Unlike males, females are not influenced by the male sex hormone testosterone during embryonic developm ent. This is because
they lack a Y chromosome. As a result, females do not develop male reproductive organs. By the third month of fetal development,
most of the internal female organs have formed. Imma ture eggs also form in the ovary before birth. Where as a mature male
produces sperm throughout his life, a female produces all the eggs she will ever make before birth.
Changes of Puberty
Like baby boys, baby girls are born with all their r eproductive organs present but immature and unable to function. Female
reproductive organs also grow very little until pube rty. Girls begin puberty a year or two earlier than boy s, at an average age of 10
years. Girls also complete puberty sooner than boys, in about 4 years instead of 6.
Puberty in girls starts when the hypothalamus “tells” t he pituitary gland to secrete hormones that target t he ovaries. Two pituitary
hormones are involved: luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These hormones stimulate the ovary
to produce estrogen. Estrogen, in turn, promotes growth and other physica l changes of puberty. It stimulates growth and
development of the internal reproductive organs, breasts, and pubic hair (see Figure below).
Changes in Females During Puberty. Two obvious changes of puberty in g irls are growth and development of the breasts
and pubic hair. The stages begin around age 10 and are completed by about age 14.

13.58.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13333Adolescent Growth Spurt
Like boys, girls also go through an adolescent growth spurt. However, girls typically start their growth spurt a year or two earlier
than boys (and therefore a couple of centimeters sh orter, on average). Girls also have a shorter growth spurt. For example, they
typically reach their adult height by about age 15. In addition, girls generally do not grow as fast as boys do during the growth
spurt, even at their peak rate of growth. As a result, fe males are about 10 centimeters (about 4 inches) shor ter, on average, than
males by the time they reach their final height.
Menarche
One of the most significant changes in females during puberty is menarche. Menarche is the beginning of menstruation, or
monthly periods as the ovaries begin the cyclic rele ase of an egg. In U.S. girls, the average age of menarch e is 12.5 years, although
there is a lot of variation in this age. The variati on may be due to a combination of genetic factors a nd environmental factors, such
as diet.
Summary
Female reproductive organs form before birth. However, they do not mature until puberty.
Review
1. State two ways that puberty differs in girls and boys.
2. Define menstruation. What is the first menstrual peri od called?
W a lte r J a h n
DEVEL OP MENT OF THE FEMALE REP
DEVEL OP MENT OF THE FEMALE REP
Watch on

13.58.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/133333. Males and females are quite similar in height when they be gin the adolescent growth spurt. Why are females about 10
centimeters shorter than males by adulthood?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Spirit-Fire
Source:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/spiritfire/4965078010/in/photolist-8yKjHhdGRwuM-bzcz3H-L5MSUV-5xm55AL5MHvV-grmCvv-7crUnb-KY3bSPKY3cUP-VTs7Jo-5KrfJL-iU1kNqL5N3JV-f4hrhj-L5MA2X-L5MXNnL5MD2z-L5MBh2-L5N1GZ-fX7BtdArUJh-eEAEi1-nCTucM-eSxy3p2h5NsZw-THc7pA-bBD3Cr-73Zras7WCsNq-2nCkcF-e3es9X-atE9v99YNGAd-JVQ6Dw-7Hjvsx-pfSSo9phbjVY-Kx3baX-pcvzh8-8EVRmLXn8JcM-R8Syz6-boHW5J-p1j3e7-pdacv6boHVWU-p2W1Hx-dTQ6Y-2h5Ntbd
License: CC BY
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.58: Female Reproductive Development is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.59.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353013.59: Egg Cells
What's amazing about these cells?
Many things. A human egg cell. Just add sperm and you have the necessary ingredients for a new baby. What's amazing about these
cells is that they are all produced before the girl is eve n born. Before the girl is even born, plans for the n ext generation have begun.
And that is the start of an amazing process.
Egg Production
At birth, a female’s ovaries contain all the eggs she will ever produce. However, the eggs do not start to matu re until she enters
puberty. After menarche, one egg typically matures each month until a woman reaches middle adulthood.
Oogenesis
The process of producing eggs in the ovary is calle d oogenesis. Eggs, like sperm, are haploid cells, and their production occurs in
several steps that involve different types of cells, as shown in Figure below. You can follow the process of oogenesis in th e figure
as you read about it below.
Oogenesis. Oogenesis begins before birth but is not finished until after pubert y. A mature egg forms only if a secondary
oocyte is fertilized by a sperm.
Oogenesis begins long before birth when an oogonium with the diploid number of chromosomes undergoes mit osis. It produces a
diploid daughter cell called a primary oocyte. The primary oocyte, in turn, starts to go through t he first cell division of meiosis

13.59.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13530(meiosis I). However, it does not complete meiosis until much later. The primary oocyte remains in a resting state, nestled in a tiny,
immature follicle until puberty.
Maturation of a Follicle
Beginning in puberty, each month one of the follicle s and its primary oocyte starts to mature (also see Figure below). The primary
oocyte resumes meiosis and divides to form a secondary oocyte and a smaller cell, called a polar body. Both the secondary oocyte
and polar body are haploid cells. The secondary oocy te has most of the cytoplasm from the original cell a nd is much larger than the
polar body.
Maturation of a Follicle and Ovulation. A follicle matures and its pr imary oocyte (follicle) resumes meiosis to form a
secondary oocyte in the secondary follicle. The follicle ruptures a nd the oocyte leaves the ovary during ovulation. What
happens to the ruptured follicle then?
Ovulation and Fertilization
After 12–14 days, when the follicle is mature, it bur sts open, releasing the secondary oocyte from the ov ary. This event is called
ovulation (see Figure above). The follicle, now called a corpus luteum, starts to degenerate, or break down. After the secon dary
oocyte leaves the ovary, it is swept into the nearby fall opian tube by the waving, fringelike end (see Figure below).
Egg Entering Fallopian Tube. After ovulation, the fringelike end of the fallopian tube sweeps the oocyte inside of the tube,
where it begins its journey to the uterus.
If the secondary oocyte is fertilized by a sperm as it is passing through the fallopian tube, it compl etes meiosis and forms a mature
egg and another polar body. (The polar bodies break down and disappear.) If the secondary oocyte is not fertilized, it passes into the
uterus as an immature egg and soon disintegrates.

13.59.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13530Summary
Immature eggs form in the ovaries before birth.
Each month, starting in puberty, one egg matures and is re leased from the ovary.
Release of an egg is called ovulation.
Review
1. When does a female begin to produce her eggs?
2. What is a polar body?
3. Describe ovulation.
4. Predict how blockage of both fallopian tubes would affect a woman’s ability to reproduce naturally. Explain your ans wer.

13.59.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135305. Create a flow chart showing the steps in which an oogonium d evelops into a mature egg.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright GRei, 2014,
modified by CK-12 Foundation - Zachary
Wilson
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: User:Mysid/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray5.s
vg
License: Public Domain
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright GRei, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 4]Credit: Image copyright GRei, 2014,
modified by CK-12 Foundation - Zachary
Wilson
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.59: Egg Cells is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.60.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353113.60: Menstrual Cycle
What's the most important part of the female menstrual cycle?
A menstrual cycle calendar. A lot of things to keep t rack of. And for a few very important reasons, it is i mportant to know when a
woman is ovulating. But what's the most important part of the female menstrual cycle? That depen ds on who you ask.
Menstrual Cycle
Ovulation, the release of an egg from an ovary, is part of t he menstrual cycle, which typically occurs each month in a sexually
mature female unless she is pregnant. Another part of t he cycle is the monthly period, or menstruation. Menstruation is the process
in which the endometrium of the uterus is shed from the body. The menstrual cycle is controlled by hormones from the
hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and ovaries.
Phases of the Menstrual Cycle
As shown in Figure below, the menstrual cycle occurs in several phases. The cycle begins with menstruation. During menstruatio n,
arteries that supply the endometrium of the uterus co nstrict. As a result, the endometrium breaks down and de taches from the
uterus. It passes out of the body through the vagina over a period of several days.

13.60.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13531
Phases of the Menstrual Cycle. The menstrual cycle occurs in the phase s shown here.
After menstruation, the endometrium begins to build u p again. At the same time, a follicle starts maturing in an ovary. Ovulation
occurs around day 14 of the cycle. After it occurs, th e endometrium continues to build up in preparation for a fertilized egg. What
happens next depends on whether the egg is fertilized.
If the egg is fertilized, the endometrium will be mai ntained and help nourish the egg. The ruptured foll icle, now called the corpus
luteum, will secrete the hormone progesterone. This hormone keeps the endometrium from breaking d own. If the egg is not
fertilized, the corpus luteum will break down and disapp ear. Without progesterone, the endometrium will also break down and be
shed. A new menstrual cycle thus begins.

13.60.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13531Menopause
For most women, menstrual cycles continue until their m id- or late- forties. Then women go through menopause, a period during
which their menstrual cycles slow down and eventually st op, generally by their early fifties. After menopause, women can no
longer reproduce naturally because their ovaries no lon ger produce eggs.
Summary
The menstrual cycle includes events that take place in th e ovary, such as ovulation.
The menstrual cycle also includes changes in the uterus, i ncluding menstruation.
Menopause occurs when menstruation stops occurring, usually i n middle adulthood.
Review
1. Define menstruation.
2. What is menopause? When does it occur?
3. What is the corpus luteum?
4. Compare and contrast what happens in the menstrual cycle whe n the egg is fertilized with what happens when the egg is no t
fertilized.
TED-Ed
How menstruation works - Emma Bry
How menstruation works - Emma Bry
Watch on

13.60.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135315. Make a cycle diagram to represent the main events of the me nstrual cycle in both the ovaries and the uterus, includi ng the days
when they occur.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright 9nong,
2013;Image copyright GRei, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright GRei, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.60: Menstrual Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.61.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353213.61: Fertilization
How far does a sperm have to swim?
Sperm swimming to an egg. If fertilization occurs, the egg wi ll have all the "instructions" to grow into a new org anism. That one
cell will become two, then four, then eight, then sixtee n, and on and on and on. And after about 9 months, that one cell will have
become a new baby. But it all starts with the sperm swim ming to the egg. A sperm cell is about two thousandths of an inch long.
And although they are small, they can swim roughly 8 i nches in an hour. To reach an egg, they will ultimate ly they have to swim
around 192,000 times their own length.
Cleavage and Implantation
A day or two after an ovary releases an egg, the egg may unite with a sperm. Sperm are deposited in the vagina during sexual
intercourse. They propel themselves through the uterus and enter a fallopian tube. This is where fertilization usually takes place.
When a sperm penetrates the egg, it triggers the egg to complete meiosis. The sperm also undergoes change s. Its tail falls off, and
its nucleus fuses with the nucleus of the egg. The resulti ng cell, called a zygote, contains all the chromosomes needed for a new
human organism. Half the chromosomes come from the egg and h alf from the sperm.
Morula and Blastocyst Stages
The zygote spends the next few days traveling down th e fallopian tube toward the uterus, where it will take u p residence. As it
travels, it divides by mitosis several times to form a ball of cells called a morula. The cell divisions are called cleavage. They
increase the number of cells but not the overall size of the new organism. As more cell divisions occur, a fluid-filled cavity forms
inside the ball of cells. At this stage, the ball of cells is called a blastocyst.
The cells of the blastocyst form an inner cell mass and an out er cell layer, as shown in Figure below. The inner cell mass is called
the embryoblast. These cells will soon develop into an embryo. The ou ter cell layer is called the trophoblast. These cells will
develop into other structures needed to support and nouris h the embryo.

13.61.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13532
Blastocyst. The blastocyst consists of an outer layer of cells cal led the trophoblast and an inner cell mass called the
embryoblast. The blastocyst fluid-filled cavity is also known as the blasto coel or blastocoele.
Implantation
The blastocyst continues down the fallopian tube and r eaches the uterus about 4 or 5 days after fertilizati on. When the outer cells of
the blastocyst contact cells of the endometrium lin ing the uterus, the blastocyst embeds in the endomet rium. The process of
embedding is called implantation. It generally occurs about a week after fertilization.
Summary
Fertilization is the union of a sperm and egg, resulting in the formation of a zygote.
The zygote undergoes many cell divisions before it implan ts in the lining of the uterus.
Review
1. What happens during fertilization? Where does it usua lly take place?
2. What is implantation? When does it occur?
Cra sh Cou rse
Reproductive System, P art 3 - Sex &
Reproductive System, P art 3 - Sex &
Watch on

13.61.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135323. Describe a morula and blastocyst.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson;Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.61: Fertilization is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.62.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353313.62: Embryo Growth
At one time, did we really all look alike?
We all start as a single cell and soon grow into an e mbryo. Notice the remarkable details beginning to form. The eyes, backbone,
and limb buds are obvious. Think about the amazing complexity that must be going on inside the embryo, and the tremendous
amount of growth and development still to come. So, yes, at one time we all looked similar.
Growth and Development of the Embryo
After implantation occurs, the blastocyst is called an embryo. The embryonic stage lasts through the eighth week fo llowing
fertilization. During this time, the embryo grows in siz e and becomes more complex. It develops specialized cells and tissues and
starts to form most organs.
Formation of Cell Layers
During the second week after fertilization, cells in the embryo migrate to form three distinct cell layers, called the ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm. Each layer will soon develop into different types of c ells and tissues, as shown in Figure below.

13.62.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13533
Cell Layers of the Embryo. The migration of cells into three layer s occurs in the 2-week-old embryo. What organs
eventually develop from the ectoderm cell layer? Which cell l ayer develops into muscle tissues?
Differentiation of Cells
A zygote is a single cell. How does a single cell develop into many different types of cells? During the third week after
fertilization, the embryo begins to undergo cellular differentiation. Differentiation is the process by which unspecialized cells
become specialized. As illustrated in Figure below, differentiation occurs as certain genes are expressed ("switched on") while
other genes are switched off. Because of this process, cells develop unique structures and abilities that s uit them for their
specialized functions.
Cellular differentiation occurs in the 3-week-old embryo.
Organ Formation
After cells differentiate, all the major organs begin to form during the remaining weeks of embryonic deve lopment. A few of the
developments that occur in the embryo during weeks 4 through 8 are listed in Figure below. As the embryo develops, it also grows
in size. By the eighth week of development, the embryo is about 30 millimeters (just over 1 inch) in lengt h. It may also have begun
to move.

13.62.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13533
Embryonic Development (Weeks 4–8). Most organs develop in the embryo during weeks 4 through 8. If the embryo is
exposed to toxins during this period, the effects are likely to be ver y damaging. Can you explain why? (Note: the drawings
of the embryos are not to scale.)
Summary
The embryonic stage begins with implantation.
An embryo forms three distinct cell layers, and each laye r develops into different types of cells and organs.
Review
1. Explain how the embryo forms specialized cells.
2. What organs eventually develop from the ectoderm cel l layer?
3. Which cell layer develops into muscle tissues?
in cre dible le o
human development
human development
Watch on

13.62.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135334. If the embryo is exposed to toxins during weeks 4 throu gh 8, the effects are likely to be very damaging. Can you explain why?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, using embryo
illustrations copyright lelik759, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Embryo illustrations used under
license from Shutterstock.com
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 4]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, using embryo
illustrations copyright lelik759, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Embryo illustrations used under
license from Shutterstock.com
13.62: Embryo Growth is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.63.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353413.63: Prenatal Development
What characterizes this fetus as human?
The human fetus. Notice the details in the face and h ands. Compare this to the human embryo, and the amou nt of growth and
development is truly remarkable.
Growth and Development of the Fetus
From the end of the eighth week until birth, the devel oping human organism is referred to as a fetus. Birth typically occurs at about
38 weeks after fertilization, so the fetal period gen erally lasts about 30 weeks. During this time, as outlin ed in Figure below, the
organs complete their development. The fetus also grows rapi dly in length and weight.
Fetal Development (Weeks 9–38). Organ development is completed and bo dy size increases dramatically during weeks 9–
38.
By the 38th week, the fetus is fully developed and re ady to be born (see Figure below). A 38-week fetus normally ranges from 36
to 51 centimeters (14–20 inches) in length and weighs bet ween 2.7 and 4.6 kilograms (about 6–10 pounds).

13.63.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13534
A 38-week-old fetus has completed development and will soon be born.
M a itri V e n ka te sh
Development of Fetus
Development of Fetus
Watch on

13.63.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13534Summary
The fetal stage begins about two months after fertiliza tion and continues until birth.
During this stage, organs continue to develop, and the fet us grows in size.
Review
1. Make a flow chart of embryonic and fetal development.
2. Why would an embryo be more susceptible than a fetus to damage by toxins?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Gray's Anatomy, modified by
User:Amada44/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Placenta
.svg
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation, using embryo
illustrations copyright lelik759, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Embryo illustrations used under
license from Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Gray's Anatomy, modified by
User:Amada44/Wikimedia Commons
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Placenta
.svg
License: Public Domain
13.63: Prenatal Development is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
m a ka n a 116
fetal development
fetal development
Watch on

13.64.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353513.64: The Placenta
How does a developing baby breathe?
Or eat? From mom, of course. Shown is a detailed representati on of the placenta. And this is where all these interactions occur.
Placenta and Related Structures
The fetus could not grow and develop without oxygen a nd nutrients from the mother. Wastes from the fetus must also be removed
in order for it to survive. The exchange of these subst ances between the mother and fetus occurs through the placenta.
Placenta
The placenta is a temporary organ that begins to form from the trophoblast layer of cells shortly after implantation. The placenta
continues to develop and grow to meet the needs of th e growing fetus. A fully developed placenta is made up of a large mass of
blood vessels from both the mother and fetus. The mate rnal and fetal vessels are close together but separa ted by tiny spaces. This
allows the mother’s and fetus’s blood to exchange substan ces across their capillary walls without the blood actuall y mixing.
The fetus is connected to the placenta through the umbilical cord, a tube that contains two arteries and a vein. Blood f rom the fetus
enters the placenta through the umbilical arteries, e xchanges gases and other substances with the mother’s bl ood, and travels back
to the fetus through the umbilical vein.
The fetus and the placenta. Notice the fetus is attached to the placenta by the umbilical cord, made of two arteries and one
vein.

13.64.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13535Amniotic Sac and Fluid
Attached to the placenta is the amniotic sac, an enclosed membrane that surrounds and protects t he fetus. It contains amniotic
fluid, which consists of water and dissolved substances. The fluid allows the fetus to move freely until it grows to fill most of the
available space. The fluid also cushions the fetus and hel ps protect it from injury.
Summary
The placenta allows nutrients and wastes to be exchanged be tween the mother and fetus.
The fetus is connected to the placenta through the umbili cal cord.
Review
1. What makes up a placenta?
2. Describe the role of the placenta in fetal development.
3. What is the umbilical cord? What occurs in the umbilica l cord?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1]Credit: Image copyright EmeCeDesigns,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright EmeCeDesigns,
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.64: The Placenta is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
TED-Ed
How one scientist averted a national
How one scientist averted a national
Watch on

13.65.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353613.65: Pregnancy
Why is it called labor?
So…the mother carries the developing baby for nine m onths. We know about the tremendous growth and develop ment of the
embryo and fetus. Then comes labor.
Pregnancy and Childbirth
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from ferti lization until birth. It is the development of an em bryo and fetus from
the expectant mother’s point of view.
The Mother’s Role
The pregnant mother plays a critical role in the de velopment of the embryo and fetus. She must avoid tox ic substances such as
alcohol, which can damage the developing offspring. She must also provide all the nutrients and other substa nces needed for
normal growth and development. Most nutrients are need ed in greater amounts by a pregnant woman, but some are especially
important, including folic acid (vitamin B), calcium, iron, and omega-3 fatty acids.
Childbirth
Near the time of birth, the amniotic sac breaks in a gush of fluid. Often when this occurs, wome n say that their " water broke."
Labor usually begins within a day of this event. Labor inv olves contractions of the muscular walls of the uterus, which cause the
cervix to dilate. With the mother’s help, the contraction s eventually push the fetus out of the uterus and t hrough the vagina. After
birth, the umbilical cord is cut. The baby can breathe air now that it is no longer in amniotic fluid.
Summary
A pregnant woman should avoid toxins and take in adequat e nutrients for normal fetal growth and development.
During childbirth, contractions of the uterus push the c hild out of the body.
Review
1. What causes the fetus to be pushed out of the uterus d uring birth?9

13.65.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135362. Why is the umbilical cord cut before a newborn has started to breathe on its own?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.65: Pregnancy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.66.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/140113.66: Joints
What allows running?
Running. A means of terrestrial locomotion allowing humans and other animals to move rapidly on foot. The knees, which connect
one part of the leg to the other, have to allow the legs to move. The knee is a joint, the part of the skel etal system that connects
bones.
Joints
A joint is a place where two or more bones of the skeleton mee t. With the help of muscles, joints work like mechanic al levers,
allowing the body to move with relatively little forc e. The surfaces of bones at joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage
that reduces friction at the points of contact between the bo nes.
Types of Joints
There are three main types of joints: immovable, partly mo vable, and movable.
Da n ie l Izzo
Movement of the Joints
Movement of the Joints
Watch on

13.66.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1401Immovable joints allow no movement because the bones at these joints are h eld securely together by dense collagen. The
bones of the skull are connected by immovable joints.
Partly movable joints allow only very limited movement. Bones at these joints a re held in place by cartilage. The ribs and
sternum are connected by partly movable joints.
Movable joints allow the most movement. Bones at these joints are connect ed by ligaments. Movable joints are the most
common type of joints in the body, so they are described in more detail next.
Movable Joints
Movable joints are also known as synovial joints. This is because the space between the bones is fille d with a thick fluid, called
synovial fluid, that cushions the joint (see Figure below).
A movable, or synovial, joint is protected and cushioned by cartilage and syno vial fluid.
There are a variety of types of movable joints, whic h are illustrated in Figure below. The joints are classified by how they move.
For example, a ball-and-socket joint, such as the shoulder, has the greatest range of mot ion, allowing movement in several
directions. Other movable joints, including hinge joints such as the knee, allow less movement.
ge n e e din c
T ypes of Synovial Joints
T ypes of Synovial Joints
Watch on

13.66.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1401
Types of Movable Joints in the Human Skeleton. Movable joints can move in a variety of ways. Try moving each of the
joints indicated in the diagram. Can you tell how their movements di ffer? Other joints in the human skeleton that are not
depicted here include saddle, ellipsoid, and plane joints.
Summary
Joints are places where two or more bones of the skeleton mee t.
With the help of muscles, joints allow the body to move with relatively little force.
Some joints can move more than others.
Review
1. Define immovable joint, and give an example of bones tha t are connected by this type of joint.
2. Describe a synovial joint.
3. Describe the movement of a pivot joint, such as the el bow.
Explore More
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
Ale ja n dra Cork
Synovial Joints
Synovial Joints
Watch on

13.66.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1401Describe the motion of the following joints:
1. shoulder
2. knee
3. neck
4. wrist
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Zachary Wilson, using skeleton by
User:GregorDS/Wikimedia Commons
Source: CK-12 Foundation (skeleton
available at
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Human_
skeleton_diagram_trace.svg)
License: CC BY-NC 3.0; Skeleton: Public
Domain
This page titled 13.66: Joints is shared under a CC BY-NC license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.67.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353713.67: Birth to Adulthood
What's the main difference between an adorable little baby and a teenager?
This quiet little baby will soon grow into someone who t alks and expresses feelings and attitudes. What's th e main difference
between an adorable little baby and a teenager? Plenty.
From Birth to Adulthood
For the first year after birth, a baby is called an infant. Childhood begins at age two and continues until adolescence. Adolescence
is the last stage of life before adulthood.
Infancy
Infancy is the first year of life after birth. Infants are born with a surprising range of abilities. For exampl e, they have welldeveloped senses of touch, hearing, and smell. They can also communicate their needs by crying. During their first year, they
develop many other abilities, including those described b elow.
By 6 weeks after birth, infants typically start smili ng (see Figure below) and making vocal sounds. By 6 months, infant s are
babbling. They have also learned to sit and are starti ng to crawl. The deciduous teeth (baby teeth) have started to come in. By 12
months, infants may be saying their first words. They usually can stand with help and may even have started to walk.
A baby’s first smile is an early milestone in infant development.
Infancy is the period of most rapid growth after bir th. Growth is even faster during infancy than it is dur ing puberty. By the end of
the first year, the average baby is twice as long as it was at birth and three times as heavy.

13.67.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13537Childhood
A toddler is a child aged 1 to 3 years. Children of this age are learning to walk, or “toddle.” Growth is still relat ively rapid during
the toddler years but it has begun to slow down. During the n ext three years, children achieve many more milestones.
By age 4, most children can run, climb stairs, and scribble with a crayon. They know many words and use simple sente nces.
The majority are also toilet trained.
By age five, children are able to carry on conversation s, recognize letters and words, and use a pencil to trace le tters. They can
usually tie their own shoelaces and may be learning to r ide a bicycle, swing a bat, kick a ball and play other games (Figure
below).
By age 6, most children begin losing their deciduous tee th, and their permanent teeth start coming in. They spea k fluently and
are learning to read and write. They spend more time with peers and develop friendships.
Five year olds can usually play various games.
Older children continue to grow slowly until they start the adolescent growth spurt during puberty. They also continue to develop
mentally, emotionally, and socially. Think about all t he ways you have changed since you were as young as the child in Figure
above. What milestones of development did you achieve d uring these childhood years?
Puberty
Puberty is the stage of life when a child becomes sex ually mature. Puberty begins when the pituitary gland tells the testes to secrete
testosterone in boys, and in girls the pituitary gland signals the ovaries to secrete estrogen. Changes tha t occur during puberty are
discussed in the Male Reproductive Development and Female Reproductive Development concepts.
Adolescence
Adolescence is the period of transition between the b eginning of puberty and adulthood. Adolescence is also a time of significant
mental, emotional, and social changes. For example:
Adolescents generally develop the ability to think abst ractly.
Adolescents may have mood swings because of surging hormones.
H e a lth gu ru
Y our Baby' s Maj or Milestones (Baby
Y our Baby' s Maj or Milestones (Baby
Watch on

13.67.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13537Adolescents usually try to be more independent from t heir parents.
Adolescents typically spend much of their time with peers.
Adolescents may start to develop intimate relationship s.
Science Friday: The Real Guide to Imaginary Companions
Children often have imaginary friends of various sh apes and sizes. In this two-part video series by Scienc e Friday, psychologists
Marjorie Taylor and Tracy Gleason discuss why kids cre ate these companions, and the roles that these comp anions play in
development.
m isssm ith 891
P iaget' s Stages of Development
P iaget' s Stages of Development
Watch on
Sc iF ri
The Real Guide to Imaginary Compan
The Real Guide to Imaginary Compan
Watch on

13.67.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13537Summary
Growth and development are most rapid during infancy and s lower throughout the rest of childhood until adolescence.
Adolescence involves mental, emotional, and social chang es in addition to the physical changes of puberty.
Review
1. Distinguish infancy from childhood.
2. What is a toddler?
3. List two abilities of an infant.
4. Describe three changes associated with adolescence.
5. Think about all the ways you have changed since you were a five year old child. List milestones of development y ou have
achieved since then.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Image copyright S.Borisov, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
[Figure 3]Credit: Image copyright aastock, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under license from
Shutterstock.com
13.67: Birth to Adulthood is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Sc iF ri
The Real Guide to Imaginary Compan
The Real Guide to Imaginary Compan
Watch on

13.68.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353813.68: Adulthood
Does getting older have to be a bad thing?
Being older doesn't necessarily mean being unable to do things and not enjoy life. These seniors look as if they thoroughly enjoy
life. And some would say that life begins after all the ch ildren have moved out of the house.
Adulthood and Aging
Adulthood does not have a definite starting point. A person may be physically mature by age 16 or 17 but not de fined as an adult
by law until older ages. In the U.S., you can’t join the armed forces or vote until age 18. You can’t buy or use alcohol or take on
many legal and financial responsibilities until age 21.
The video below, 21 Years, is a daily video pictorial of the aging process, fro m birth to 21 years. Over 7,500 images of the same
person have been condensed in a little over 6 minutes.
cloddy clips
21 Y ears
21 Y ears
Watch on

13.68.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13538Early Adulthood
Early adulthood coincides with the 20s and early 30s. During early ad ulthood, people generally form intimate relationship s, both
in friendship and love. Many people become engaged or marry during this time. Often they are completing t heir education and
becoming established in a career. Health problems in young adults tend to be minor. The most common caus es of death are
homicides, car crashes, and suicides.
Middle Adulthood
Middle adulthood lasts from the mid-30s to the mid-60s. During this stag e of life, many people raise a family and strive to attain
career goals. They start showing physical signs of agin g, such as wrinkles and gray hair. Typically, vision, strength and reaction
time start declining. Diseases such as type 2 diabetes, c ardiovascular or heart disease, and cancer are often d iagnosed during this
stage of life. These diseases are also the chief causes of death in middle adulthood.
Heart Disease
Heart disease is the number one killer of Americans, and one of the main killers of people the world over. A common cause of heart
disease is arteriosclerosis. This is the stiffening or hardening of the arteries that happens, in part, because of growing older.
Atherosclerosis, which is the buildup of fatty deposit s in the arteries, is another cause of cardiovascular disease. When fat
accumulates along the walls of arteries, there is less space for blood to flow. This makes it harder for blo od to get to all the parts of
the body that need it, including the heart itself. The accumulation of fatty deposits, or plaque, can eventua lly lead to a heart attack
or stroke.
Other changes to the heart occur during middle adult hood. For example, to help the heart pump blood thro ugh stiffer blood vessels,
some parts of the heart wall thicken. The size of the four chambers of the heart also change, as do the va lves between the chambers.
The resting heart rate does not change as you age, but the heart cannot beat as fast when you are physic ally active or stressed, as it
did when you were younger.
Both genetic and lifestyle choices lead to heart dise ase. Though you cannot change your genetic backgroun d, there are things you
can do to slow or prevent the onset of heart disease, especia lly as you grow older.
try to be more physically active,
if you smoke, quit,
follow a heart healthy diet,
keep a healthy weight.
Old Age
Old age begins in the mid-60s and lasts until the end of lif e. Many people over 65 have retired from work, freeing up their time for
hobbies, grandchildren, and other interests. Stamina, strength, reflex time, and the senses all decline duri ng old age, and the number
of brain cells decreases as well. The immune system becomes less effi cient, increasing the risk of serious illnesses such as cancer
and pneumonia. Diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease that cause l oss of mental function also become more common.
Causes of Aging
Why do we decline in all these ways as we age? Generally, it’s because cells stop dividing and die. There are at least two reasons
why cells stop dividing:
1. Cells are programmed to divide only a set number of times.
2. Mutations accumulate in DNA, and cells with damaged DNA may no t divide.
Summary
During early adulthood, people form intimate relationshi ps and start careers.
Serious health problems start showing up in middle adultho od and old age.
Aging occurs as cells lose their ability to divide.

13.68.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13538Review
1. When does adulthood begin?
2. What are the most common causes of death associated with early adulthood?
3. What diseases are often diagnosed during middle adultho od?
4. Aging is associated with the death of cells. Give two reaso ns why cells die.
5. List three ways to help prevent heart disease as a person a ges.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
13.68: Adulthood is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.69.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1353913.69: STIs
What does “safe sex” truly mean?
“Safe Sex.” The thought of a sexually transmitted infection should be enough to make you think about and believe in this saying.
Understanding Sexually Transmitted Infections
A shocking statistic made headlines in 2008. A recen t study had found that one in four teen girls in th e U.S. had a sexually
transmitted infection. A sexually transmitted infection (STI) (also known as a sexually transmitted disease, or STD) is an
infection caused by a pathogen that spreads mainly through sexual contact. Worldwide, a million people a day become infected
with STIs. The majority of them are under the age of 25.
To be considered an STI, an infection must have only a small chance of spreading naturally in ways other t han sexual contact.
Some infections that can spread through sexual contac t, such as the common cold, spread more commonly by o ther means. These
infections are not considered STIs.
se xa n du
T ypes of Sexually T ransmitted Infect
T ypes of Sexually T ransmitted Infect
Watch on

13.69.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13539Pathogens that Cause STIs
STIs may be caused by several different types of pathog ens, including protozoa, insects, bacteria, and viruses. For example:
Protozoa cause an STI called trichomoniasis. The pathogen infects the vagina in females and the uret hra in males, causing
symptoms such as burning and itching. Trichomoniasis is comm on in young people.
Pubic lice, like the one in Figure below, are insect parasites that are transmitted sexuall y. They suck the blood of their host and
irritate the skin in the pubic area.
Pubic lice like this one are only about as big as the head of a pin.
Most STIs are caused by bacteria or viruses. Bacterial STIs can be cured with antibiotics. Viral STIs cannot be cured. Once you are
infected with a viral STI, you are likely to be infected for life.
How STIs Spread
Most of the pathogens that cause STIs enter the body th rough mucous membranes of the reproductive organs. All sexual
behaviors that involve contact between mucous membran es put a person at risk for infection. This includes vaginal, anal, and oral
sexual behaviors. Many STIs can also be transmitted th rough body fluids such as blood, semen, and breast mi lk. Therefore,
behaviors such as sharing injection or tattoo needles i s another way these STIs can spread.
Why are STIs common in young people? One reason is tha t young people often take risks. They may think, “It can’t happen to
me.” They also may not know how STIs are spread, so they don’t know how to protect themselves. In addition, youn g people may
have multiple sexual partners.
Preventing STIs
The only completely effective way to prevent infecti on with STIs is to avoid sexual contact and other ris ky behaviors. Using
condoms can lower the risk of becoming infected with ST Is during some types of sexual activity. However, condo ms are not
foolproof. Pathogens may be present on areas of the body not covered by condoms. Condoms can also break or be us ed incorrectly.
Summary
STIs are diseases caused by pathogens that spread throug h sexual contact.
Abstinence from sexual activity and other risk behaviors is the only completely effective way to prevent the spread of STIs.
Review
1. Describe how STIs spread.
2. What causes most STIs?
3. Can bacterial STIs be cured? If so, how? What about viral STIs?
4. What is the only completely effective way to prevent a sexually transmitted infection?
5. Assume you are preparing a public service announcement (PSA) to explain to teens how and why to avoid STIs. List thre e facts
you think it would be important to include for an inform ative and persuasive PSA.
Explore More
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.

13.69.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135391. List five facts about STDs.
2. List five myths about STDs.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Courtesy of Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pthius_p
ubis_-_crab_louse.jpg
License: Public Domain
13.69: STIs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Discove ry L ife
Sex and Intimacy - STD' s
Sex and Intimacy - STD' s
Watch on

13.70.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1354013.70: Bacterial STIs
Single-celled organisms. Can they be dangerous?
These are chlamydia. Innocent-looking single-celled o rganisms. But these bacteria can lead to painful and devastating
consequences.
Bacterial STIs
Many STIs are caused by bacteria. Some of the most common bacterial STIs are chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Bacterial STIs
can be cured with antibiotics.
Chlamydia
Chlamydia is the most common STI in the United States. As shown in the graph in Figure below, females are much more likely
than males to develop chlamydia. Like most STIs, rates of chl amydia are highest in teens and young adults.
This graph shows the number of cases of chlamydia per 100,000 people in t he U.S. in 2004. Which age group had the
highest rates? How much higher were the rates for females aged 15– 19 than for males in the same age group?

13.70.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13540Symptoms of chlamydia may include a burning sensation during urination and a discharge from the vagina o r penis. Chlamydia can
be cured with antibiotics, but often there are no symptoms, so people do not se ek treatment. Untreated chlamydia can lead to more
serious problems, such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). This is an infection of the uterus, fallopian tub es, and/or ovaries. It
can scar a woman’s reproductive organs and make it diffi cult for her to become pregnant.
Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is another common STI. Symptoms of gonorrhea may incl ude painful urination and discharge from the vagina o r penis.
Gonorrhea usually can be cured with antibiotics, althou gh the bacteria have developed resistance to many of the drugs. Gon orrhea
infections may not cause symptoms, especially in female s, so they often go untreated. Untreated gonorrhea can lead to PID in
females. It can lead to inflammation of the reproductive organs in males as well.
Syphilis
Syphilis is less common than chlamydia or gonorrhea but more serious if untreated. Early symptoms of syphilis infec tion include a
small sore on or near the genitals. The sore is pain less and heals on its own, so it may go unnoticed. If t reated early, most cases of
syphilis can be cured with antibiotics. Untreated syphi lis can cause serious damage to the heart, brain, and other organs. It may
eventually lead to death.
Summary
Bacterial STIs include chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis.
Bacterial STIs usually can be cured with antibiotics.
Review
1. Identify three common STIs that are caused by bacteria.
2. Often, STIs do not cause symptoms. Why is it important to detect and treat STIs even when they do not cause symptoms? Give
an example of the consequences of an untreated STI.
3. Which age group had the highest rates of chlamydia? How much higher were the rates for females aged 15–19 than fo r males in
the same age group?
F u se Sch ool - Globa l Edu ca tion
Bacterial Disease | Health | Biology |
Bacterial Disease | Health | Biology |
Watch on

13.70.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/135404. Explain how a lack of symptoms might contribute to the spre ad of STIs.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Hana Zavadska, based on data
from Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.70: Bacterial STIs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.71.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1354113.71: Viral STIs
How long does a viral STI last?
This is the Human Papilloma Virus, which causes a viral STI. Viral STIs can be especially dangerous, as they c annot be cured.
Once you get one, it's yours for life. And also, it's the person' s you give it to.
Viral STIs
STIs caused by viruses include genital herpes, hepati tis B, genital warts, and HIV/AIDS. Whereas bacterial STIs can usually be
cured with antibiotics, viral STIs cannot be cured.
Genital Herpes
Genital herpes is an STI caused by a herpes virus. In the United Sta tes, as many as one in four people are infected with th e virus.
Symptoms of genital herpes include painful blisters on the genitals (see Figure below). The blisters usually go away on their own,
but the virus remains in the body, causing periodic outbreaks of blisters throughout life. Outbreaks may b e triggered by stress,
illness, or other factors. A person with genital herpes is m ost likely to transmit the virus during an outbreak.
Blisters like these on the genitals are a sign of genital herpes.

13.71.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13541Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B is inflammation of the liver caused by infection wit h the hepatitis B virus. In many people, the immune system quickly
eliminates the virus from the body. However, in a small percentage of people, the virus remains in the body and continues to cause
illness. It may eventually damage the liver and increas e the risk of liver cancer, which is usually fatal.
Genital Warts and Cervical Cancer
Infections with the human papillomavirus (HPV) are very common. HPV may cause genital warts, which are small, rough
growths on the genitals. It may also cause cancer of t he cervix in females. A simple test, called a Pap test, can detect cervical
cancer. If the cancer is detected early, it usually can b e cured with surgery. There is also a vaccine, GARDASIL, t o prevent
infection with HPV. The vaccine is recommended for female s aged 11 to 26 years.
Summary
Viral STIs include genital herpes, hepatitis B, genital warts, and cervical cancer.
Viral STIs cannot be cured, but some of them can be preve nted with vaccines.
Review
1. Name and describe an STI caused by a virus.
2. Discuss treatment for the human papillomavirus.
3. Compare and contrast bacterial and viral STIs with regar d to their treatment, cure, and prevention.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: неизвестен
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Genital
Gerpes.gif
License: Public Domain
13.71: Viral STIs is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.72.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1326913.72: Skeletal Diseases
Do you think this would hurt? Why?
That would probably hurt. And hurt a lot. Broken bones, or fractures, may be one of the more common problem s of the skeletal
system. And this one would probably need surgery to fix. But, in addition to broken bones, there are other p roblems and diseases of
the skeletal system.
Skeletal System Problems
Despite their hardness and strength, bones can suffer from injury and disease. Bone problems include frac tures, osteoarthritis, and
rickets.
Fractures are breaks in bone, usually caused by excessive stress on b one. Fractures heal when osteoblasts form new bone. Soon
after a fracture, the body begins to repair the break. The area becomes swollen and sore. Within a few days, bone cells travel to
the break site and begin to rebuild the bone. It takes a bout two to three months before compact and spongy bone f orm at the
break site. Sometimes the body needs extra help in repai ring a broken bone. In such a case, a surgeon will piece a brok en bone
together with metal pins. Moving the broken pieces together will help keep the bone from moving and give the body a chan ce to
repair the break.
Osteoarthritis is a condition in which cartilage breaks down in joints d ue to wear and tear, causing joint stiffness and pain.
Osteoporosis is a disease in which bones lose mass and become more fragile than they should be. Osteoporosis also makes
bones more likely to break. Two of the easiest ways to pre vent osteoporosis are eating a healthy diet that has th e right amount of
calcium and vitamin D and to do some sort of weight-bearing exercise every day. Foods that are a good source of calciu m
include milk, yogurt, and cheese. Non-dairy sources of ca lcium include Chinese cabbage, kale, and broccoli. Many f ruit juices,
fruit drinks, tofu, and cereals have calcium added to t hem. It is recommended that teenagers get 1300 mg of calci um every day.
For example, one cup (8 fl. oz.) of milk provides about 300 m g of calcium, or about 30% of the daily requirement.
Rickets is softening of the bones in children that occurs becau se bones do not have enough calcium. Rickets can lead to
fractures and bowing of the leg bones, which is illustrated in the Figure below.

13.72.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13269
The bones of a child with rickets are so soft that the weight of the body ca uses them to bend.
Science Friday: Jump In Jerboas
It's a potato on toothpicks! No, it's a hopping noodl e! A fuzzy rodent T-rex! Any way you look at them, jerb oas are about as cute as
they come. These adorable critters bounce about on long, springy legs - appendages that just might help u s better understand and
perhaps manipulate the growth of human bones.
Da n ie l Izzo
How the Body Works: Repair of Bone
How the Body Works: Repair of Bone
Watch on

13.72.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13269Summary
Skeletal system problems include fractures, osteoarthr itis, and rickets.
Review
1. Osteoporosis is a disease in which osteoclasts are more activ e than osteoblasts. How is this likely to affect the bo nes? Why
would a person with osteoporosis have a greater-than-normal risk of bone fractures?
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.72: Skeletal Diseases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Sc iF ri
Jump In Jerboas
Jump In Jerboas
Watch on

13.73.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327013.73: Muscles
What exactly are muscles?
Does the word "muscle" make you think of the biceps o f a weightlifter, like the man in pictured above? Musc les such as biceps that
move the body are easy to feel and see, but they are n’t the only muscles in the human body. Many muscles are deep within the
body. They form the walls of internal organs such as the heart and stomach. You can flex your biceps like a body builder, but you
cannot control the muscles inside you. It’s a good thing that they work on their own without any consciou s effort on your part,
because movement of these muscles is essential for surviva l.
What Are Muscles?
The muscular system consists of all the muscles of the body. Muscles are organs composed mainly of muscle cells, which are also
called muscle fibers. Each muscle fiber is a very long, thin cell that c an do something no other cell can do. It can contra ct, or
shorten. Muscle contractions are responsible for virtu ally all the movements of the body, both inside and o ut. There are three types
of muscle tissues in the human body: cardiac, smooth, and skeletal muscle tissues. They are shown in Figure below and described
below.

13.73.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13270
Types of Muscle Tissue. Both skeletal and cardiac muscles appear stri ated, or striped, because their cells are arranged in
bundles. Smooth muscles are not striated because their cells are arrange d in sheets instead of bundles.
Smooth Muscle
Muscle tissue in the walls of internal organs such as th e stomach and intestines is smooth muscle. When smooth muscle contracts,
it helps the organs carry out their functions. For exa mple, when smooth muscle in the stomach contracts, it sq ueezes the food inside
the stomach, which helps break the food into smaller pi eces. Contractions of smooth muscle are involuntary. Th is means they are
not under conscious control.
Skeletal Muscle
Muscle tissue that is attached to bone is skeletal muscle. Whether you are blinking your eyes or running a m arathon, you are using
skeletal muscle. Contractions of skeletal muscle ar e voluntary, or under conscious control. When skeletal muscle contracts, bones
move. Skeletal muscle is the most common type of muscle in t he human body.
Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle is found only in the walls of the heart. When cardia c muscle contracts, the heart beats and pumps blood. Car diac
muscle contains a great many mitochondria, which pro duce ATP for energy. This helps the heart resist fat igue. Contractions of
cardiac muscle are involuntary, like those of smooth muscle. Cardiac muscle, like skeletal muscle, is arrang ed in bundles, so it
appears striated, or striped.
Further Reading
Skeletal Muscles
Muscle Contraction
J a m e s W a tts
Muscle Tissue
Muscle Tissue
Watch on

13.73.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13270Summary
There are three types of human muscle tissue: smooth muscl e (in internal organs), skeletal muscle, and cardiac mus cle (only in
the heart).
Review
1. Compare and contrast the three types of muscle tissue.
2. What can muscle cells do that other cells cannot?
3. Why are skeletal and cardiac muscles striated?
4. Where is smooth muscle tissue found?
5. What is the function of skeletal muscle? Give an examp le.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: Zachary Wilson
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
13.73: Muscles is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.74.1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1327113.74: Skeletal Muscles
How do your bones move?
By the contraction and extension of your skeletal mu scles. Notice how the muscles are attached to the bones. The muscles pull on
the bones, causing movement.
Skeletal Muscles
There are well over 600 skeletal muscles in the human body, some of which are identified in Figure below. Skeletal muscles vary
considerably in size, from tiny muscles inside the middle ear to very large muscles in the upper leg.
Skeletal Muscles. Skeletal muscles enable the body to move.
Structure of Skeletal Muscles
Each skeletal muscle consists of hundreds or even thou sands of skeletal muscle fibers. The fibers are bundled together and
wrapped in connective tissue, as shown Figure below. The connective tissue supports and protects t he delicate muscle cells and
allows them to withstand the forces of contraction. It also provides pathways for nerves and blood vessels to reach the muscles.
Skeletal muscles work hard to move body parts. They need a rich blood supply to provide them with nutrients a nd oxygen and to
carry away their wastes.

13.74.2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13271
Skeletal Muscle Structure. A skeletal muscle contains bundles of muscl e fibers inside a “coat” of connective tissue.
Skeletal Muscles and Bones
Skeletal muscles are attached to the skeleton by tou gh connective tissues called tendons (see Figure above). Many skeletal
muscles are attached to the ends of bones that meet at a joint. The muscles span the joint and connect the bones. When the muscles
contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move.
gre a tpa ci  cm e dia
Skeletal Muscle Structure
Skeletal Muscle Structure
Watch on
K e vin T a n
Incredible Human Machine-knowledg
Incredible Human Machine-knowledg
Watch on

13.74.3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13271Muscles can only contract. They cannot actively extend, or lengthen. Therefore, to move bones in opposite di rections, pairs of
muscles must work in opposition. For example, the bice ps and triceps muscles of the upper arm work in oppositi on to bend and
extend the arm at the elbow (see Figure below). What other body movements do you think requir e opposing muscle pairs?
Triceps and biceps muscles in the upper arm are opposing muscles.
Use It or Lose It
In exercises such as weight lifting, skeletal muscle contracts against a resisting force (see Figure below). Using skeletal muscle in
this way increases its size and strength. In exercises such as running, the cardiac muscle contracts faster an d the heart pumps more
blood. Using cardiac muscle in this way increases its strength and efficiency. Continued exercise is necess ary to maintain bigger,
stronger muscles. If you don’t use a muscle, it will get sm aller and weaker—so use it or lose it.
Da n ie l Izzo
How the Body Works: Muscles move
How the Body Works: Muscles move
Watch on

13.74.4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/13271
This exercise pits human muscles against a force. What force is it?
Summary
Skeletal muscles are attached to the skeleton and cause bo nes to move when they contract.
Review
1. What is a muscle fiber?
2. What is the function of skeletal muscle?
3. How are skeletal muscles attached to bones?

13.74.5 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/132714. Explain why many skeletal muscles must work in opposing pai rs.
Image Reference Attributions
[Figure 1] License: CC BY-NC
[Figure 2]Credit: CK-12 Foundation;By OpenStax https://cnx.org/contents/FPtK1zmh@8....8O
t@10/Preface, CC BY 4.0,
commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...curid=30
Source: CK-12 Foundation; By OpenStax
https://cnx.org/contents/FPtK1zmh@8.25:f
EI3C8Ot@10/Preface; CC BY 4.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=30015038
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 3]Credit: Courtesy of National Cancer
Institute/SEER Training Modules;By
OpenStax https://cnx.org/contents/FPtK1zmh@8....8O
t@10/Preface, CC BY 4.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/inde...cu
rid=30015038
Source:
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Illu_mus
cle_structure.jpg; By OpenStax https://cnx.org/contents/FPtK1zmh@8.25:f
EI3C8Ot@10/Preface; CC BY 4.0;
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=30015038
License: Public Domain
[Figure 4]Credit: Laura Guerin
Source: CK-12 Foundation
License: CC BY-NC 3.0
[Figure 5]Credit: Images copyright Philip Date, 2014
Source: http://www.shutterstock.com
License: Used under licenses from
Shutterstock.com
13.74: Skeletal Muscles is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

Index
D
dire

Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/16396Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Biology
Webpages: 349
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
Undeclared: 72.5% (253 pages)
CK-12 License: 18.3% (64 pages)
CC BY-NC 4.0: 9.2% (32 pages)
By Page
Biology - CK-12 License
Front Matter - CK-12 License
TitlePage - CC BY-NC 4.0
InfoPage - CC BY-NC 4.0
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Biology - CK-12 License
1.1: Carbohydrates - Undeclared
1.2: Proteins - Undeclared
1.3: Lipids - Undeclared
1.4: Nucleic Acids - Undeclared
1.5: Biochemical Reactions - Undeclared
1.6: Energy and Biochemical Reactions - Undeclared
1.7: Types of Biochemical Reactions - Undeclared
1.8: Enzymes - Undeclared
1.9: Enzyme Function - Undeclared
1.10: Water and Life - Undeclared
1.11: Scientific Method - CC BY-NC 4.0
1.12: Acids and Bases - Undeclared
1.13: Experiment - CK-12 License
1.14: Scientific Theories - CK-12 License
1.15: Characteristics of Life - CK-12 License
1.16: Principles of Biology - CK-12 License
1.17: Interdependence of Living Things - CK-12
License
1.18: Organization of Living Things - Undeclared
1.19: Evolution of Life - Undeclared
1.20: Significance of Carbon - Undeclared
2: Cell Biology - CK-12 License
2.1: Cell Organization - Undeclared
2.2: Diffusion - Undeclared
2.3: Osmosis - Undeclared
2.4: Passive Transport - Undeclared
2.5: Active Transport - Undeclared2.6: Sodium-Potassium Pump - Undeclared
2.7: Exocytosis and Endocytosis - Undeclared
2.8: Autotrophs and Heterotrophs - Undeclared
2.9: Glucose and ATP - Undeclared
2.10: Chloroplast - Undeclared
2.11: Parts of the Cell - CK-12 License
2.12: Leaves and Photosynthesis - Undeclared
2.13: Photosynthesis - Undeclared
2.14: Calvin Cycle - Undeclared
2.15: Photosynthesis Summary - Undeclared
2.16: Chemosynthesis - Undeclared
2.17: Cellular Respiration - Undeclared
2.18: Glycolysis - Undeclared
2.19: Krebs Cycle - Undeclared
2.20: Electron Transport - Undeclared
2.21: Fermentation - Undeclared
2.22: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells - CK-12
License
2.23: Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration Undeclared
2.24: Cell Division - Undeclared
2.25: Cell Cycle - Undeclared
2.26: Chromosomes - Undeclared
2.27: Mitosis - Undeclared
2.28: Reproduction - Undeclared
2.29: Meiosis - Undeclared
2.30: Gametogenesis - Undeclared
2.31: Genetic Variation - Undeclared
2.32: Life Cycle - Undeclared
2.33: Phospholipid Bilayer - CK-12 License
2.34: Membrane Proteins - CK-12 License
2.35: Cytoplasm and Cytoskeleton - CK-12 License
2.36: Nucleus - CK-12 License
2.37: Ribosomes and Mitochondria - Undeclared
2.38: Cell Structure - Undeclared

2 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/163962.39: Plant Cell Structure - Undeclared
3: Genetics - CK-12 License
3.1: Genetic Linkage - Undeclared
3.2: Mendelian Inheritance - Undeclared
3.3: Genetic Disorders - Undeclared
3.4: Biotechnology - Undeclared
3.5: Biotechnology Applications - Undeclared
3.6: Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues in
Biotechnology (ELSI) - Undeclared
3.7: Pea Plants - CK-12 License
3.8: Mendel's First Experiment - CK-12 License
3.9: Mendel's Second Experiment - CK-12 License
3.10: Mendel's Laws - CK-12 License
3.11: Probability - CK-12 License
3.12: Punnett Squares - CK-12 License
3.13: Non-Mendelian Inheritance - Undeclared
3.14: Human Genome - Undeclared
3.15: Human Chromosomes - Undeclared
4: Molecular Biology - CK-12 License
4.1: Mutation Effects - Undeclared
4.2: Gene Expression - Undeclared
4.3: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation - Undeclared
4.4: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation - Undeclared
4.5: Central Dogma - CK-12 License
4.6: DNA - CK-12 License
4.7: DNA Structure and Replication - CK-12 License
4.8: RNA - CK-12 License
4.9: Transcription - CK-12 License
4.10: Genetic Code - CK-12 License
4.11: Translation - Undeclared
4.12: Mutation - Undeclared
4.13: Mutation Causes - Undeclared
5: Evolution - CK-12 License
5.1: Classification - Undeclared
5.2: Phylogeny and Cladistics - Undeclared
5.3: Darwin - Undeclared
5.4: Influences on Darwin - Undeclared
5.5: Theory of Evolution - Undeclared
5.6: Fossils - Undeclared
5.7: Comparative Anatomy - Undeclared
5.8: Biogeography - Undeclared
5.9: Population Genetics - Undeclared
5.10: Hardy-Weinberg - Undeclared
5.11: History of Life - CK-12 License
5.12: Forces of Evolution - Undeclared
5.13: Natural Selection - Undeclared
5.14: Origin of Species - Undeclared
5.15: Coevolution - Undeclared
5.16: Macroevolution - Undeclared5.17: Animal Evolution - Undeclared
5.18: Formation of Earth - CK-12 License
5.19: First Organic Molecules - CK-12 License
5.20: First Cell - CK-12 License
5.21: Eukaryote Evolution - CK-12 License
5.22: Late Precambrian - CK-12 License
5.23: Paleozoic Era - Undeclared
5.24: Mesozoic Era - Undeclared
5.25: Cenozoic Era - Undeclared
6: Ecology - CK-12 License
6.1: Aquatic Biomes - Undeclared
6.2: Freshwater and Wetland Biomes - Undeclared
6.3: Aquatic Organisms - Undeclared
6.4: Predation - Undeclared
6.5: Competition - Undeclared
6.6: Symbiosis - Undeclared
6.7: Succession - Undeclared
6.8: Population - Undeclared
6.9: Population Structure - Undeclared
6.10: Population Growth - Undeclared
6.11: Ecosystems - CK-12 License
6.12: Population Growth Patterns - Undeclared
6.13: Human Population - Undeclared
6.14: Demographic Transition - Undeclared
6.15: Recent and Future Population Growth Undeclared
6.16: Biodiversity - Undeclared
6.17: Importance of Biodiversity - Undeclared
6.18: Mass Extinction - Undeclared
6.19: Resources - Undeclared
6.20: Soil and Water - Undeclared
6.21: Air Pollution - Undeclared
6.22: Energy Flow - CK-12 License
6.23: Global Warming - Undeclared
6.24: Food Chain - CK-12 License
6.25: Trophic Level - CK-12 License
6.26: Water Cycle - CK-12 License
6.27: Carbon Cycle - Undeclared
6.28: Nitrogen Cycle - Undeclared
6.29: Biomes and Climate - Undeclared
6.30: Terrestrial Biomes - CK-12 License
7: Prokaryotes and Viruses - CK-12 License
7.1: Virus Structure - Undeclared
7.2: Virus Classification - Undeclared
7.3: Virus Origin - Undeclared
7.4: Virus Replication - Undeclared
7.5: Viral Disease - Undeclared
7.6: HIV - Undeclared
7.7: Virus Control - Undeclared

3 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/163967.8: Viruses in Research - Undeclared
7.9: Prokaryotes - CK-12 License
7.10: Bacteria Classification - CK-12 License
7.11: Bacteria Structure - CK-12 License
7.12: Bacteria Nutrition - CK-12 License
7.13: Bacteria Habitat - CK-12 License
7.14: Bacteria Reproduction - CK-12 License
7.15: Bacteria and Humans - Undeclared
7.16: Viruses - Undeclared
7.17: Virus Characteristics - Undeclared
8: Protists and Fungi - CK-12 License
8.1: Fungi Reproduction - Undeclared
8.2: Fungi Evolution - Undeclared
8.3: Fungi Classification - Undeclared
8.4: 8.13 Fungi Nutrition - Undeclared
8.5: Fungi Symbiosis - Undeclared
8.6: Use of Fungi - Undeclared
8.7: Fungi Diseases - Undeclared
8.8: Protists - CK-12 License
8.9: Protist Evolution - CK-12 License
8.10: Protist Characteristics - CK-12 License
8.11: Protozoa - CK-12 License
8.12: Algae - CK-12 License
8.13: Mold - CK-12 License
8.14: Protists and Disease - Undeclared
8.15: Fungi - Undeclared
8.16: Fungi Structure - Undeclared
9: Plants - CK-12 License
9.1: Angiosperm - Undeclared
9.2: Plant Cell - Undeclared
9.3: Plant Tissue - Undeclared
9.4: Plant Growth - Undeclared
9.5: Roots - Undeclared
9.6: Stems - Undeclared
9.7: Leaves - Undeclared
9.8: Plant Reproduction and Life Cycle - Undeclared
9.9: Life Cycle of Nonvascular Plants - Undeclared
9.10: Life Cycle of Seedless Vascular Plants Undeclared
9.11: Plant Characteristics - CK-12 License
9.12: Life Cycle of Gymnosperms - Undeclared
9.13: Life Cycle of Angiosperms - Undeclared
9.14: Plant Adaptations - Undeclared
9.15: Plant Responses - Undeclared
9.16: Importance of Plants - Undeclared
9.17: Plant Life Cycle - CC BY-NC 4.0
9.18: Plant Evolution - CC BY-NC 4.0
9.19: Seed Plant Evolution - CC BY-NC 4.0
9.20: Plant Classification - CC BY-NC 4.09.21: Nonvascular Plants - CC BY-NC 4.0
9.22: Vascular Plants - Undeclared
9.23: Seed Plants - Undeclared
10: Animals - CK-12 License
10.1: Animals - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.2: Animal Classification - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.3: Animal Behavior Evolution - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.4: Innate Behavior - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.5: Learned Behavior - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.6: Social Behavior - CC BY-NC 4.0
10.7: Cyclic Behavior - Undeclared
10.8: Reproductive Behavior - Undeclared
11: Invertebrates - CK-12 License
11.1: Arthropods - Undeclared
11.2: Insects - Undeclared
11.3: Echinoderms - Undeclared
11.4: Invertebrate Chordates - Undeclared
11.5: Invertebrate Diversity - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.6: Invertebrate Evolution - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.7: Invertebrate Classification - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.8: Sponges - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.9: Cnidarians - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.10: Flatworms - CC BY-NC 4.0
11.11: Roundworms - Undeclared
11.12: Mollusks - Undeclared
11.13: Annelids - Undeclared
12: Vertebrates - CK-12 License
12.1: Amphibian Structure and Function - Undeclared
12.2: Amphibian Reproduction - Undeclared
12.3: Amphibian Classification - Undeclared
12.4: Amphibian Evolution and Ecology Undeclared
12.5: Reptile Structure and Function - Undeclared
12.6: Reptile Reproduction - Undeclared
12.7: Reptile Classification - Undeclared
12.8: Reptile Evolution - Undeclared
12.9: Reptile Ecology - Undeclared
12.10: Bird Structure and Function - Undeclared
12.11: Chordates - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.12: Bird Reproduction - Undeclared
12.13: Bird Classification - Undeclared
12.14: Bird Evolution - Undeclared
12.15: Bird Ecology - Undeclared
12.16: Mammal Overview - Undeclared
12.17: Mammal Structure and Function - Undeclared
12.18: Endothermy - Undeclared
12.19: Locomotion - Undeclared
12.20: Placental Mammals - Undeclared
12.21: Marsupials - Undeclared

4 https://k12.libretexts.org/@go/page/1639612.22: Vertebrate Diversity - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.23: Monotremes - Undeclared
12.24: Mammal Ancestors - Undeclared
12.25: Mammal Evolution - Undeclared
12.26: Mammal Classification - Undeclared
12.27: Vertebrate Reproduction - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.28: Vertebrate Classification - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.29: Vertebrate Evolution - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.30: Fish - CC BY-NC 4.0
12.31: Fish Reproduction - Undeclared
12.32: Fish Classification - Undeclared
12.33: Fish Evolution and Ecology - Undeclared
13: Human Biology - CK-12 License
13.1: Muscle Contraction - Undeclared
13.2: Skin - Undeclared
13.3: Nails and Hair - Undeclared
13.4: Neuron - Undeclared
13.5: Nerve Impulse - Undeclared
13.6: Central Nervous System - Undeclared
13.7: Peripheral Nervous System - Undeclared
13.8: Senses - Undeclared
13.9: Drugs and the Nervous System - Undeclared
13.10: Nervous System Diseases - Undeclared
13.11: Human Body - CC BY-NC 4.0
13.12: Endocrine Glands - Undeclared
13.13: Hormone - Undeclared
13.14: Hormone Regulation - Undeclared
13.15: Endocrine System Diseases - Undeclared
13.16: Heart - Undeclared
13.17: Blood Vessels - Undeclared
13.18: Circulatory System - Undeclared
13.19: Cardiovascular Diseases - Undeclared
13.20: Blood - Undeclared
13.21: Respiratory System - Undeclared
13.22: Homeostasis - CC BY-NC 4.0
13.23: Respiratory System Organs - Undeclared
13.24: Breathing - Undeclared
13.25: Regulation of Breathing - Undeclared
13.26: Respiratory System Disorders - Undeclared
13.27: Digestive System Organs - Undeclared
13.28: Digestive System - Undeclared
13.29: Small Intestine - Undeclared
13.30: Large Intestine - Undeclared
13.31: Digestive System Diseases - Undeclared
13.32: Food and Nutrients - Undeclared
13.33: Skeletal System - CC BY-NC 4.013.34: Balanced Eating - Undeclared
13.35: Excretory System - Undeclared
13.36: Urinary System - Undeclared
13.37: Kidneys - Undeclared
13.38: Excretory System Diseases - Undeclared
13.39: Innate Immune System - Undeclared
13.40: Inflammatory Response - Undeclared
13.41: Lymphatic System - Undeclared
13.42: Humoral Response - Undeclared
13.43: Cell-Mediated Response - Undeclared
13.44: Bones - CC BY-NC 4.0
13.45: Immunity - Undeclared
13.46: Allergies - Undeclared
13.47: Autoimmune Disease - Undeclared
13.48: Immunodeficiency - Undeclared
13.49: HIV AIDS - Undeclared
13.50: Carcinogens and Cancer - Undeclared
13.51: Air Pollution and Illness - Undeclared
13.52: Bioterrorism - Undeclared
13.53: Male Reproductive Organs - Undeclared
13.54: Male Reproductive Development - Undeclared
13.55: Bone Growth - CC BY-NC 4.0
13.56: Sperm - Undeclared
13.57: Female Reproductive Organs - Undeclared
13.58: Female Reproductive Development Undeclared
13.59: Egg Cells - Undeclared
13.60: Menstrual Cycle - Undeclared
13.61: Fertilization - Undeclared
13.62: Embryo Growth - Undeclared
13.63: Prenatal Development - Undeclared
13.64: The Placenta - Undeclared
13.65: Pregnancy - Undeclared
13.66: Joints - CC BY-NC 4.0
13.67: Birth to Adulthood - Undeclared
13.68: Adulthood - Undeclared
13.69: STIs - Undeclared
13.70: Bacterial STIs - Undeclared
13.71: Viral STIs - Undeclared
13.72: Skeletal Diseases - Undeclared
13.73: Muscles - Undeclared
13.74: Skeletal Muscles - Undeclared
Back Matter - CK-12 License
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared