BIOLOGY II
LABORATORY MANUAL
Lynette Hauser
Tidewater Community College

Biology II Laboratory Manual

Lynette Hauser
Tidewater Community College

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 03/01/2026

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41773TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: Safety and Viruses
1.1: Lab Safety Contract
1.2: Viruses Lab
1.3: Viruses Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
1.4: Dolphin Case Study
1.5: Dolphin Case Study (Instructor Materials Preparation)
2: Microbiology
2.1: Microbiology and Protista Lab
2.2: Microbiology and Protista Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
2.3: Reading- Prokaryotes
2.4: Reading- Protists
3: Fungi
3.1: Fungi Lab
3.2: Fungi Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
3.3: Reading- Fungi
3.4: Case Study- Amphibian Die Off, Chytrid Fungi
4: Seedless Plants
4.1: Seedless Plant Lab
4.2: Seedless Plant Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
4.3: Reading- Seedless Plants
5: Seed Plants
5.1: Seed Plants Lab
5.2: Seed Plants Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
5.3: Reading- Seed Plants
6: Plant Organization
6.1: Plant Organization Lab
6.2: Plant Organization Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
7: Invertebrate I
7.1: Invertebrate Lab I
7.2: Invertebrate Lab I (Instructor Materials Preparation)
7.3: Reading- Sponges
7.4: Reading- Cnidarians
7.5: Reading- Roundworms
7.6: Reading- Arthropods

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417738: Invertebrate II
8.1: Invertebrate Lab II
8.2: Invertebrate Lab II (Instructor Materials Preparation)
8.3: Reading- Flatworms
8.4: Reading- Mollusks
8.5: Reading - Annelids
8.6: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles
8.7: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
9: Deuterostomes
9.1: Deuterostome Lab
9.2: Deuterostome Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
9.3: Reading- Echinoderms
9.4: Reading- Chordates
10: Cardiovascular/Respiratory System and Pig Dissection
10.1: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab
10.2: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
10.3: Reading- Fetal Pig Dissection
10.4: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab
10.5: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
11: Homeostasis
11.1: Homeostasis Lab
11.2: Homeostasis Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
12: Food Choice
12.1: Food Choice Lab
12.2: Food Choice Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
13: Succession Lab
13.1: Community Ecology Lab
13.2: Community Ecology Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
14: Ecosystem Lab
14.1: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab
14.2: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
15: Sample Lab Report
15.1: Sample Lab Report- Sugar Size and Diffusion Through a Mock-Cell Membrane
15.2: Rubric

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41773Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/97973Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Safety and Viruses
1.1: Lab Safety Contract
1.2: Viruses Lab
1.3: Viruses Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
1.4: Dolphin Case Study
1.5: Dolphin Case Study (Instructor Materials Preparation)
This page titled 1: Safety and Viruses is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417801.1: Lab Safety Contract
Read over and sign the Laboratory Safety Contract. This document goes over essential practices for lab sa fety.
This page titled 1.1: Lab Safety Contract is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417811.2: Viruses Lab
At the conclusion of the lab, the student should be able to:
Understand the properties of a virus
Explain how viruses are spread through a population by shar ing bodily fluids
A virus is not considered a living organism as it only con tains DNA surrounded by a protein coat. However, viruses are serious
infectious agents causes conditions such as AIDS, chicken pox, and herpes. Viruses must have a live host cel l to reproduce. The
virus takes over the protein building machinery of the cell to create new viruses to spread the infectio n. Viruses can infect many
different types of organisms, both prokaryotic and eukar yotic.
One way a virus can be spread through a population is by sharing bodily fluids such as saliva, blood, or sem en. We will
demonstrate how quickly a virus can spread through today’ s simulation activity.
Sharing Bodily Fluids
During this lab you will share “bodily fluids” with ot her students in the lab to simulate the spread of an infectious disease through a
population.
Procedure
1. Obtain a numbered vial of solution and a plastic pipet fr om your instructor.
2. Record your student name and vial number on the class dat a sheet.
3. Share bodily fluids with another person in lab. Use the plastic pipet to withdraw solution from your vial and place 5 dr ops of
your solution in another classmate’s vial. Your classm ate will also share fluids with you in the same way. Return the ca p to the
vial and invert to mix.
4. Record the name of the person you shared bodily fluids wit h in the table below.
5. Exchange bodily fluids with another person following the directions above. Record the name of the person with who m you
exchanged fluids.
6. Exchange fluids with another student (different than th e first two) and record his/her name below. You should com plete three
total fluid exchanges.
My vial #:_______________________
Record of Bodily Fluid Exchanges
Exchange 1: ______________________________
Exchange 2: ______________________________
Exchange 3: ______________________________
Your lab instructor will add a drop of the test reage nt to determine if you are infected with the disease. If your sample turns pink
then you are infected. If it turns yellow you are no t infected. If you are positive for the disease you may have originally had the
disease or you may have contracted the disease in lab toda y from sharing bodily fluids.
Are you infected?
Is it possible to determine if you were originally infe cted or did you contract the disease from someone during to day’s lab?
As a class you will fill in Table 1 below. Include eac h person’s name. If your test result is positive put a plus sign (+) next to your
name. If your result is negative put a negative sign (−) by your name. For those individuals that are positi ve, record whom they
exchange fluids with and whether that person was positive or ne gative.
Questions
1. How many people in the class are infected?
2. Can you determine who was originally infected?
3. If you can, whom do you think was originally infected?Learning Objectives

1.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417814. What do the class results show about the spread of dis ease through activities in which bodily fluids are shared?
Fill out a table similar to Table 1 for all members of you r class. Be sure to add as many tables as there are students!
Table 1. Class results for bodily fluid exchange activi ty
Student’s Name Test result (+/−) Exchange #1 (+/−) Exchange #2 (+/−) Exchange #3 (+/−)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
After you’ve completed Table 1, discuss with your lab group how this experiment simulates a real life infe ction through a
population and answer the following questions.
1. What are some ways that viruses are spread?
2. What are some diseases that are spread by contact with bod ily fluids?
3. What are ways to prevent the spread of these diseases?
This page titled 1.2: Viruses Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417821.3: Viruses Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Sharing Bodily Fluids
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
Vials labeled 1-24 24randomly choose 1 vial to be infected. This
should be a number less than 10 in case
there is a small # of students in the class.
Let instructor know which vial is infected
in advance

Plastic pipets
Reagent
This page titled 1.3: Viruses Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417831.4: Dolphin Case Study
After completing the activities, you should be able to:
Define unusual mass stranding events
Explain the difference between mass strandings and an u nusual mass stranding event
State one symptom of cetacean morbillivirus and explai n in general how the virus is spread
Explain in general how a virus can spread through a popula tion of organisms
Explain in general how a vaccine works
State two different ways a vaccine can be created
Introduction
In July 2013, stranding teams (such as the Virginia Aquar ium’s Stranding Response team) from New York to North Car olina started
noticing a large amount of dolphin strandings.
Some data that was collected on how many dolphins were being f ound dead or dying on the beaches:
430 from July to September
553 total from July to November
6 in one day in Virginia Beach
Using your computer and the Internet, research dolphin strandings. Here is one website to get you started: NOAA Strandings.
Answer the questions below based on your research. Please pu t your answers in your own words. Copying directly from a
website is considered plagiarism.
1. Give two examples of marine mammals that can strand themsel ves.
2. Give two specific reasons why marine mammals strand them selves.
Note: Data are dolphin strandings that have been conf irmed and responded to by Stranding Network Members. Florida data is
through Brevard County. Current UME Data are conside red preliminary and may be subject to change as more information
becomes available. From NOAA.gov data
3. Using the data above, how many dolphins were found a year o n average in the Mid Atlantic states in the years 2007–2012?Learning Objectives

1.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417834. How much larger were the number of strandings in 2013? C alculate how many times larger.
These data lead researchers to believe that this event in 2 013 would be classified as an Unusual Mortality Event (UME). Usin g
your computer and the Internet, research UMEs. Here is on e website to get you started: Marine Mammal Unusual Mortality
Events (www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/health/mmume/). Answer the questions below based on your research. Please put your answers
in your own words. Copying directly from a website is considere d plagiarism.
5. Explain the difference between mass strandings, group st randings, and an unusual mass stranding event.
6. The dolphins that washed ashore exhibited skin lesions an d weight loss that was abnormal for bottle nose dolphins.
1. What kinds of data do you think would be useful in determ ining the cause of this UME event based on the condition of the
dolphins? Name three things you think researchers should record about these dolphins.
2. Some scientists remembered that there was a similar ca se in 1987–1988, as described in Morbilliviral Disease in Atlantic
Bottlenose Dolphins and in Dophin Strandings.
7. What happened to bottlenose dolphins in 1987–1988?
8. Does this UME seem similar to that situation? Why or why n ot?
In the 2013 strandings, dolphins were tested for cetacea n morbillivirus, and approximately 85% of them were po sitive
(NOAA.gov data). Using your computer and the Internet, resea rch cetacean morbillivirus. Here is one website to get you
started: Morbilliviris Infection. Answer the questions belo w based on your research. Please put your answers in your own
words. Copying directly from a website is considered plagi arism.
9. What is cetacean morbillivirus? What symptoms does it cause?
10. How is cetacean morbillivirus spread?
One of the things that researchers keep track of is th e different populations of marine mammals. Scientists are able to track
dolphins based on photo IDs and genetics. Different population s can have different coloration and caudal fins (tail fi ns). The
populations of dolphins that have been monitored are shown on the next page.
Researchers noticed that dolphins that were being found s tranded were not only from coastal resident stocks of dolp hins, but
included migratory populations.
11. Thumbnail for the embedded element "How A Virus Chan ges The World (Nominated 2012 Webby Award)""title="How A Virus
Changes The World (Nominated 2012 Webby Award)"src="/@ api/deki/files/29087/hqdefault.jpg"/>
12. How long do dolphins live?
13. Would dolphins have immunity to this virus?
Humans receive vaccines for many viruses like smallpox and m easles. Using your computer and the Internet, research how a
vaccine works. Use this website to get you started: How Vaccines Work. Answer the questions below based on your research.
Please put your answers in your own words.
14. What substances from the immune system naturally fi ght against a virus?
15. How does a vaccine work?
16. List two different ways vaccines can be created.
17. Based on your research, do you think vaccination a p ossibility for cetacean morbillivirus? Discuss the practica lity of
vaccinating a mobile, wild population.
Data and information from NOAA Fisheries and Susan Barco, Virginia Aquarium Stranding Response Team.
This page titled 1.4: Dolphin Case Study is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser,
Tidewater Community College & Staci Forgey via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417841.5: Dolphin Case Study (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Dolphin Stranding Case Study
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
computers 1 per 2-3 students can be laptops or tablets

This page titled 1.5: Dolphin Case Study (Instructor Materials Preparatio n) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Microbiology
2.1: Microbiology and Protista Lab
2.2: Microbiology and Protista Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
2.3: Reading- Prokaryotes
2.4: Reading- Protists
This page titled 2: Microbiology is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417852.1: Microbiology and Protista Lab
After completing this lab, you student should be able to:
Describe the basic structures of a bacterial cell.
State the three domains of life
Name the shape of a given bacteria specimen
State the domain of cyanobacteria
Be able to identify the cyanobacteria examples viewed in lab
State the domain of the protista
Be able to identify the green algae examples viewed in lab and know if they are colonial or filamentous
Be able to recognize the protista specimen viewed in l ab
Identify protista as photosynthetic or heterotrophic
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Part 1: Prokaryotes
Procedure
1. Access the page “Reading: Prokaryotes.”
2. We will not be using any live bacteria specimens. Instea d, watch this video about aseptic technique.This technique is important
to avoid microorganism contamination.
Questions
1. Answer the questions below based on the video.
1. What two tools are most commonly used to transfer bacte ria?
2. With the Bunsen burner, what color is the hottest flame?
3. How are the inoculation tools sterilized?
4. When transferring bacteria from a liquid culture to a Petri plate, why do you turn the plate while spreading th e bacteria?
5. When transferring bacteria from a Petri plate to a s tab culture, how many times should you stab the needle?
6. When transferring bacteria into a liquid tube do you flame the mouth of the tube before inoculation, after i noculation, or
both?
2. Skip to the end of the lab activity where it says “Prepare d slides of typical bacteria” and view the prepared slide s of bacterial
shapes available in the laboratory.
1. Draw a picture of the coccus shaped bacteria.
2. Draw a picture of the bacillus shaped bacteria.
3. Draw a picture of the spirillum shaped bacteria.
3. View the prepared slides of cyanobacteria available in the laboratory. Although they are single celled note how the y form
colonies and attach to one another
1. What is the function of the heterocycst in the Anabaena?
2. If the Oscillatoria is moving, describe the movement quality below.
3. Which cyanobacteria species form chains? Which cyano bacteria species form clumps?
Part 2: Protista
Procedure
1. Access the page “Reading: Protists.”
2. Watch this video.Learning Objectives

2.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41785Questions
1. View the Euglenozoans specimens available.
1. What color is the euglena?
2. What structure does the euglena use to move?
3. Can you see any internal chloroplasts?
4. Can you see the red eyespot? It does not give the org anism vision, rather allows it to sense the presence of light.
5. Trypanosoma sp. cause African sleeping sickness. (This disease was discusse d in the video.)
6. What part of the human body does the Trypanosoma invade?
7. What structure does the Trypanosoma use to move?
8. How does the Trypanosoma avoid being killed by the white blood cells?
9. Can African sleeping sickness cause death?
2. View the diatom specimens available.
1. What material is found in the cell wall of the diatoms?
2. Are the organisms single or multi cellular?
3. View the brown algae specimens available.
1. What pigment does brown algae use for photosynthesis?
2. Name and describe the characteristics of one brown algae specimen below.
4. View the dinoflagellate specimens available.
1. What structure does the dinoflagellate use for movement? How many of these structures does it have?
2. Are the organisms single or multi cellular?
5. View the ciliate specimens available.
1. What structure does Paramecium use to move? Does it have only one or many of these struct ures?
2. Paramecium contains two nucli, a macronucleus (large) and a micronu cleus (small). Can you find both of them on your
specimen?
3. Paramecium also contains contractile vacuoles that help maintain wa ter balance through osmosis. Can you locate any on
your specimen?
6. View the red algae specimens available.
1. What pigment does red algae use for photosynthesis?
2. Name and describe the characteristics of one red algae specimen below.
7. View the green algae specimens available.
1. What pigment does green algae use for photosynthesis?
2. Name and describe the characteristics of one green alga e specimen below.
8. View the Tubulinid specimens available.
1. What structure does Amoeba use to move?
2. Is the Amoeba single or multi celled?
3. The Amoeba contains contractile vacuoles that help maintain water balance through osmosis. Can you locate any on your
specimen?
Summary Questions
1. Answer the questions below to summarize the lab activity:
1. What type of cell is considered more primitive or bas ic?
2. State one difference between a prokaryotic and a eukary otic cell.
3. What two domains contain prokaryotic celled organis ms?

2.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417854. Identify structures 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 on the generaliz ed prokaryotic cell pictured below
5. Are the cyanobacteria autotrophic or heterotrophic?
6. Which cyanobacteria species secretes a gelatinous sheat h?
7. Which protista are most similar to green plants? Why?
8. You viewed several protista that exhibited movement. Gi ve an example of a protista that used each of the following
movement structures:
1. Flagella:
2. Cilia:
3. Pseudopod:
9. Give two examples of photosynthetic protista you viewed in lab and state what pigment each uses for photosynthesi s.
This page titled 2.1: Microbiology and Protista Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette
Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417862.2: Microbiology and Protista Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Part 1: Prokaryotes
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
bacteria types slide 1 per tablecontains coccus, bacillus and spirilla
shaped, can also be set up on side bench as
demo
anabaena live organisms are ideal but prepared slides
will work
oscillatoria live organisms are ideal but prepared slides
will work
gloeocapsa live organisms are ideal but prepared slides
will work
Part 2: Protista
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
Trypanosoma slide 1 per table
Dinoflagellate slide 1 per table
mixed diatom slide 1 per table
euglena slide 1 per table
brown algae variable can be plastimounts or preserved spec imens
paramecium slide 1 per table live organisms can be used if available
red algae variable can be plastimounts or preserved speci mens
green algae variablecan be plastimounts or preserved
specimens. Live organisms can be used like
volvox and spirogyra
amoeba slide 1 per table live organisms can be used if ava ilable
This page titled 2.2: Microbiology and Protista Lab (Instructor Materia ls Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417872.3: Reading- Prokaryotes
Introduction
Prokaryotes include the domains Bacteria and Archaea. All of the organisms that we study in this lab will be i n the domain
Bacteria.
This exercise is designed to familiarize students with some basic equipment and techniques used in the stu dy of microorganisms. In
addition, students will learn some basic techniques us ed in identifying prokaryotes and make and view micr oscope slides of some
common prokaryotes.
Microbiology Laboratory Equipment
Sterilization
It is important that all instruments and media disc ussed below be sterile, that is, free of any living o rganisms. The use of sterile
equipment, media, and techniques prevents unwanted microo rganisms from contaminating your cultures.
Media
Culture media containing the necessary nutrients are used to grow microorganisms in a laboratory. Four kinds of commonly- used
culture media are shown below.
Figure 1. Common culture media
Broth
Broth is a liquid that contains nutrients for bacteria to grow. It is kept in glass tubes and capped with a metal or plastic sleeve.
Agar
Agar is solid or semisolid. It liquefies at 100º C and sol idifies at 40º C.
Agar plates are Petri dishes that contain agar for growing micro organisms. They have a large surface area and are usef ul for
isolating and studying microorganisms. After they ar e inoculated, they are incubated in an inverted posi tion. This prevents
condensation from dripping from the cover onto the agar.
Agar slants are useful for maintaining cultures. Microorganisms gro w on the surface of agar plates and slants.
Transfer Instruments
Subculturing refers to transferring microorganisms from one medi um to another. For example, bacteria growing in broth may be
transferred to an agar plate.
Wire loops are used to transfer microorganisms from liquid media t o liquid or solid media.

2.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787
Figure 2. Wire loop
Pipettes are used to transfer liquids. A mechanical device must b e used with pipettes to create a vacuum.
Incubation
Bacterial cells on the agar or in the broth will rep roduce rapidly if other environmental conditions such as temperature are
favorable. A single cell on the agar will shortly pro duce a colony of cells that is easily visible to the naked eye. Su ch a colony is a
pure culture because it is a single species.
An incubator is a chamber that maintains a constant temperature. After microorganisms are transferred to broth or a gar, they are
placed in an incubator (incubated) for a period of time wh ile the cells reproduce.
Refrigerators are useful for maintaining stock cultu res for long periods of time because microorganisms gr ow (reproduce) very
slowly at low temperatures. They can also be used to store subcult ures after they have been incubated.
Culture Transfer Techniques
Figure 3. Bacti-cinerator
The procedure discussed below can be used to transfer mic roorganisms from a tube of broth to another culture tube.
Figure 4. Bunsen burner
Microorganisms are often transferred from one medium to another with a wire loop. Before the loop is used to remove a sample of
microorganisms, it must first be sterilized. A bacti-ci nerator or bunsen burner can be used to heat the loo p. Figure 3 shows a bacticinerator. Figure 4 shows a bunsen burner being used to sterilize the loop. The wire should be heated in a b acti-cinerator or a
bunsen burner flame until it glows red. The loop should be cooled in the air for 10 to 20 sec. Care should be taken not to put it
down in order to avoid contamination.
Hold the source tube and also the tube to be inoculated in one h and as shown in figure 5. The loop is held in the other ha nd.
The two tubes are uncapped by using the hand that ho lds the loop. The likelihood of contamination can be minimized by keeping
the caps in your hand as shown below.

2.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787
Figure 5. Uncapping test tubes
Pass the mouths of the tubes through the flame. Skip this ste p if you are using a bacti-cinerator.
Figure 6. Sterilize tubes
Remove a sample from a broth culture by using a sterile wi re loop.
Figure 7. Transfer sample
Touch the colony to be subcultured with the wire but do not break the surface of the agar.

2.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787
Figure 8. Transfer is completed
Reflame the mouths of the tubes and replace the caps.
Figure 9. Reflaming tubes
Sterilize the loop in the flame or the bacti-cinerator befo re putting it down.
Notes on Transferring Samples
Transferring to broth— Put the loop in the broth and then swirl it.
Agar slant or plate— When inoculating an agar slant or plate, draw the loop very l ightly over the surface while being careful
not to break the surface. A straight or a zig-zag motion c an be used.
Laboratory Procedure
1. Transfer S. marcescens: from broth to a sterile agar slant using a wire loop.
2. Transfer S. marcescens: from broth to a sterile broth using a wire loop.
3. Transfer S. marcescens: from a slant to a sterile slant.
4. Transfer S.marcescens: from a broth to an agar plate.
Put your name on each tube or plate and place them in a 37 degree incubator for 48 hours.
Sampling the Environment
The procedure below will demonstrate that bacteria are com monly found throughout our environment.
Use a cotton swab to sample bacteria on a surface such a s a desktop, the floor, or a stair handrail. After rubb ing the swab on the
surface, rub it lightly on the surface of an agar plate.
Your instructor will place the plates in an incubator for 48 hours. They can be examined during the next lab per iod.

2.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787Staining
Procaryotes are typically stained to make them easier for viewing. We will use a basic staining procedure c alled gram staining.
This staining method separates bacteria into two grou ps based on the thickness of their cell wall. Gram po sitive bacteria have a
thick cell wall and will appear dark purple after a g ram stain. Gram negative bacteria have a thinner cell wall and will appear
lighter in color.
Preparing a Smear
The gram staining technique involves making a smear of bacteria on a slide and then adding the stain.
Use a wire loop to take a sample Staphlococcus epidermidis from a slant and place it on the center of a slide. Take a sample of
Escherichia coli from a slant and place it on the center of a second slide.
Use a wire loop to add a very small amount of distille d water to the sample and use a wire loop to spread the culture evenly over an
area the size of a dime or smaller. Be careful not to use to o much water so that it will not take too long to dry.
Allow the slides to air-dry. If you used too much water, it can be sp read over the surface of the slide so that it dries faster.
After the slides are air dried, the bacteria must be f ixed (attached) to the surface of the slides so that th ey do not wash off during the
staining process. The bacteria can be fixed by holdin g the slide above the opening of the bacti-cinerato r for about 30 seconds. If a
bunsen burner is used, pass the slide over the flame two or three times. A continuous, nonstop motion shoul d be used as the slide
passes over the flame. Each pass should take approximat ely 1 second.
Gram Staining
Figure 10. Gram Staining
1. Place a wire test tube rack in a plastic tray and place the sli des on the test tube rack as shown in figure 10.
2. Flood the slides with crystal violet for 1 minute. This sh ould be done over the sink or a tray to prevent stain from s pilling on the
laboratory bench top.
3. Wash the slides with tap water.
4. Flood the slides with Gram’s iodine (a mordant) for 1 minu te.
5. Wash again with tap water.
6. Flood the slides with 95% ethyl alcohol. This decolorizes b acteria that have thin cell walls.
7. Wash with tap water.
8. Counterstain with safranin for 45 seconds.
9. Wash with tap water.
10. Blot dry. The slide is ready for viewing; cover slips are not necessary. View the slide using high power. You may wish to also
view the slide using the oil immersion lens.
1. Draw and describe each slide. Note the gram positive coc ci (Staphlococcus epidermidis) and the gram negative bacilli
(Escherichia coli).
2. Observe and draw a prepared slide of typical spirilla.
11. After you are finished with the slides, clean the immersi on oil from the microscope lens.
Shape
The shape of a cell is used to help classify bacteria. Round cells are called cocci (sing. coccus), rod-shaped cells are bacilli
(bacillus), and rigid, spiral-shaped cells are spirilla (spirillum). Flexible, spiral-shaped bacteria are spirochetes.

2.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787
Figure 11. Cocci x 400
Figure 12. Bacilli X 1000.

2.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41787
Figure 13. Spirilla X 400
Cyanobacteria
Cyanobacteria (sometimes called blue-green algae) are gram-negative bacteria that can photosynthesize and some can fix
atmospheric nitrogen. The only organisms capable of fixing nitrogen are bacteria, and this is primarily done by the cyanobacteria.
The fixation of nitrogen by cyanobacteria may have all owed plants to invade the land during the Paleozoic.
Like plants, cyanobacteria have the photosynthetic pi gment chlorophyll A and they use water as an electron d onor during
photosynthesis. When water molecules are split, oxygen i s liberated. This process resulted in oxygen accumu lating in the earth’s
early atmosphere.
Unicellular, filamentous, and colonial species of cyanob acteria are common.Gloeocapsa is a unicellular cyanob acteria. The
gelatinous material surrounding each cell causes the cells to stick together. Some Cyanobacteria form symb iotic associations with
fungi forming structures called lichens.
Procedure
Observe and draw live Oscillatoria and Anabaena. If live organisms are not available, use prepared sl ides. Live organisms can be
viewed by placing a small amount of the organism on a slide in a drop of water and then covering it with a cover slip. Be sure to
indicate the magnification used in your drawing.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Prokaryotes (Biology 102). Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D. Provided by: LibreText. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Prokaryotes. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 2.3: Reading- Prokaryotes is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417882.4: Reading- Protists
The goal of this exercise is to learn about the prot ists. We will study major groups and for most of the groups, we will study
representative genera.
Procedure
For each specimen:
1. Read the information thoroughly.
2. Create notes. Your notes will be most helpful if they incl ude a drawing, a description, and significant information such as life
cycle, commercial value, ecological significance, and unusu al characteristics.
Euglenozoans
Kinetoplastids
Kinetoplastids are flagellated and unicellular. They h ave a dark staining region of mitochondria called a kin etoplast.
Some kinetoplastids are symbiotic (close) relationships with other organisms. Trypano somes are Kinetoplastids that cause African
sleeping sickness. They are transmitted to their huma n hosts by the bite of a tsetse fly. Trypanosoma causes African sleeping
sickness.
Euglena
Euglena are unicellular. Many Euglenids feed by pha gocytosis. Many species of Euglenids are photosynthetic but can become
heterotrophic when sunlight is unavailable (mixotrophs).
Euglena use flagella for moving. The outer covering called a pellicle, is flexible and assists in moving. Some have an eyespot with
a photoreceptor is capable of detecting the presence of l ight. Reproduction is asexual.
Diatoms
Diatoms are the most numerous unicellular algae in th e oceans and as such are an important source of food and oxygen. They are
also important in freshwater environments. They captu re 20 to 25% of solar energy captured by living org anisms. The cell walls of
diatoms contain silica (a component of glass) and ar e formed in 2 halves like a pillbox. Their remains f orm diatomaceous earth. It
is used for filtering agents, and abrasives such as scouring powders. Diatoms are a major component of phy toplankton in
freshwater and marine environments.
Brown Algae
Brown algae are autotrophs (photosynthetic). Their c haracteristic brown color is due to carotenoid pigmen ts. They are multicellular
and range in size from small to very large. Some are 50 m to 100 m long. They are often found along roc ky shores in temperate
climates. The body (thallus) contains holdfasts for attachment, blades, and a stem-like structure that holds the blades is c alled a
stipe. Many species have floats that function in floatation. Some have gas-filled floats. Mucilaginous (slimy) mat erial in the cell
walls retards drying in exposed individuals when the tide go es out. Most species have a life cycle with alternation of generations.
Fucus
Fucus is a common “seaweed” found along the rocky coast. Some sp ecies of Fucus have diploid adults.

2.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41788
Figure 1. Gametes are produced in the receptacles.
Macrocystis and Nereocystis
Macrocystis and nereocystis are deep-water kelps.
Sargassam
Sargassam sometimes breaks off to form floating masses. Other m arine organisms congregate around these masses.
Laminaria
Laminaria is a brown alga that is usually found attach ed just below the intertidal zone. It has a life cyc le with alternation of
generations.
Figure 2. Alternation of Generations
Dinoflagellates
Protective cellulose plates cover dinoflagellates and two flagella enable them to move. One of the flagella lies in a transverse
groove that causes cell to spin as it moves.
Most are found in marine or freshwater environments and many are photosynthetic. They are important component s of
phytoplankton and thus are important in aquatic food chains. This group also includes many heterotrophic and man y mixotrophic
species.
Some species are responsible for red tides that kill f ish and shellfish (Gymnodinium, Gonyaulax, Pfiesteria). Some live as
symbiants within some invertebrates. For example, some corals grow faster with dinoflagellates living within their c ells. Some
species are capable of bioluminescence (they produce li ght).
Both sexual and asexual reproduction occur. Sexual re production produces cysts which are resistant to unfa vorable environmental
conditions. Cysts are dormant and become active when envi ronmental conditions improve.
Ciliates
The genus Vorticella belongs in this group.

2.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41788Paramecium
Figure 3. Paramecium caudatum X 100
The pellicle (outer covering) of paramecium is covered with hund reds of cilia. They have numerous organelles including a gullet
(oral groove) and an anal pore. Ciliates have a large macr onucleus and a smaller micronucleus.
The micronucleus is involved in sexual and asexual reproduction. Other nuclear activities are handled by the macronucleus. The
macronucleus is polyploid (approximately 860 N in Paramecium aurelia) and the micron ucleus is diploid.
Figure 4. Paramecium X 200
During reproduction, the macronucleus disintegrates. La ter, a micronucleus will develop into a macronucleus. Mo st reproduction is
asexual (mitosis). Sexual reproduction is by conjugation.
The micronucleus will divide by meiosis; 3 of the 4 re sulting nuclei will disintegrate as will the macronucle us. The remaining
haploid nucleus will divide by mitosis producing an individual with two haploid nuclei. Two conjugating in dividuals will each
exchange one of the nuclei. The two haploid nuclei will then fuse producing a diploid nucleus.

2.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41788
Red Algae
Red algae are mostly multicellular and are found ma inly in warmer, tropical oceans. Their red color is due to an accessory
photosynthetic pigment called phycoerythrin. The accessory pigments of red algae are able to absorb blue and green light. This
allows some species to survive in deep waters where blue and green l ight predominates.
Some species are filamentous but most have a complex pattern of branching. Some cor alline forms deposit calcium carbonate in
their cell walls, which contributes to the development of c oral reefs.
Green Algae
Four common forms of green algae are single-celled, colonial, filamentous, and multicellular. Green algae are thought to be
ancestors of the first plants. Both kinds of organisms ha ve the following characteristics in common:
1. They have a cell wall that contains cellulose.
2. They have chlorophyll a and b.
3. They store their food as starch inside the chloroplast.
Most species are freshwater but there are many marine species. Some live in damp soil.
Chlamydomonas
Chlamydomonas is a single-celled organism with two flagella. Although this organism is a single cell, the life c ycle is similar to
that with haploid adults.
Figure 5. Chlamydomonas’ life cycle
It reproduces asexually (by mitosis) when conditions are favorable. Sexual reproduction occurs when conditions become
unfavorable. The zygote forms a thick-walled zygospore that is resistant to environmental extremes and divides by meiosis when

2.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41788environmental conditions become favorable.
Most species of Chlamydomonas are isogamous (both gametes are th e same size; they are isogametes), some are oogamous
(gametes are two sizes; the larger gametes are eggs, the smal ler ones are sperm).
Volvox
Volvox is a colonial green algae. The cells are arranged in a gelatinous sphere with two flagella directed to t he outside. They divide
asexually to produce a daughter colony.
Some cells are specialized to produce sperm and eggs for sexual reproduction. Specialization of cells as see n in the reproductive
cells is a characteristic of multicellular organisms. V olvox is considered to be a colony because it appea rs to be intermediate
between a group of individual cells and a multicellular o rganism.
Spirogyra
Spirogyra is a filamentous form. It has a ribbonlike spiral-shaped chloroplast. Th e life cycle has haploid adults.
Sexual reproduction occurs by conjugation. Conjugation refers to the process where gametes ar e transferred from one individual to
another by a connection between the two.
The zygote is resistant and overwinters. In the spring, it div ides by meiosis to produce haploid filaments.
Ulva
Ulva is multicellular with a leaflike body that is two c ells thick but up to one meter long. The life cycle is alternation of
generations. Both the haploid and the diploid generatio ns look alike (isomorphic).
Tubulinids
Figure 7. Amoeba proteus X 100
Tubulinids move by cytoplasmic extensions called pseudopodia. They feed by phagocytizing (engulfing) their prey. Tubulinids
are found in soil, marine, and freshwater environments. Amoeba proteus (figure 7) is found in freshwater.
Amoeba movement and phagocytosis (video)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Protists (Biology 102). Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Protists. Project: The Biology Web. License:
CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 2.4: Reading- Protists is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Fungi
3.1: Fungi Lab
3.2: Fungi Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
3.3: Reading- Fungi
3.4: Case Study- Amphibian Die Off, Chytrid Fungi
This page titled 3: Fungi is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

3.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417893.1: Fungi Lab
State the kingdom of mushrooms, yeast, and bread molds
State the phylum of the bread mold
State the phylum of the mushroom (club fungi)
State the phylum of the yeast (sac fungi)
State if spores are haploid or diploid
Be able to identify a zygospore.
Be able to identify hyphae
Be able to identify the conidiospores and conidiphore s of the ascomycota specimens
Be able to identify the basiodcarp and basidospores and basidia of the mushroom.
State what two organisms are involved in a symbiotic relatio nship to create a lichen.
Give an example of a type of lichen.
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Procedure
1. Access the page “Reading: Fungi.”
2. Watch this video:
Questions
1. Zygomycota (bread mold): View the prepared slides of the zygospores and sporangia.
1. What kind of reproduction is used by the zygomycota?
2. Is the zygospore diploid or haploid?
3. Draw a picture of the zygospores you viewed under the mic roscope.
2. Ascomycota (sac fungi).
1. We do not have a slide of the Peziza -please view the pictures on the website.
2. Aspergillus: View the slides available of Aspergillus.
1. Can you find any conidiospores?
2. Are conidiospores used in sexual or asexual reproduction?
3. Use the space below to draw a picture of the conidiospores as you viewed under the microscope.
3. Yeast: create a wet mount slide of the yeast (as assis ted by your instructor) to view under the microscope.
1. Are yeast single or multi celled?
2. Do yeast reproduce asexually or sexually?Learning Objectives
Budding Y east - Time-lapseBudding Y east - Time-lapse

3.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417893. Are you able to view budding, the asexual reproductive p rocess of yeast? Review the Yeast Budding video to help
visualize budding.
4. When yeast reproduces sexually, what is the name of the diploid cell that is formed?
3. We do not have a slide of the Schizosaccharomyces octosporus— please view the pictures on the website.
4. Skip over the Morels.
5. View the Penicillium slides only, no live specimens.
1. Name the specialized stalks that the asexual spores att ach to.
2. Use the space below to draw a picture of the Penicillium specimen as you viewed it under the microscope.
Basidiomycota (club fungi)
1. View the mushroom specimens available in the lab. Do not dissect them. See if you can find the gills on the unders ide of the
basidiocarp.
1. Name the specific spores formed by the mushroom in th e gills.
2. View the cross section slide of the Coprinus mushroom.
1. Can you locate the basiodispores?
2. Name the specific stalk that the basidiospores attac h to.
3. Use the space below to draw a picture of the Coprinus basidiospores and basidia as you viewed under the microscope.
Lichens
1. There may or may not be live specimens of the lichens t o view in the classroom. If live specimens are present, pl ease look at
them. And, access this website to learn more.
1. What type of lichen has the algae dispersed throughout?
2. What type of lichen exhibits the fastest growth?
3. What type of lichen grows in a circular pattern forming lo bes?
2. View the lichen thallus slide under the microscope.
1. What two organisms create the lichen?
2. Use the space below to draw a picture of the lichen thallu s as you viewed it under the microscope. On your picture t ry to
label both the fungi and the algae.
Answer the questions below to summarize the lab activity:
1. What is the domain of the fungi?
2. How do fungi obtain energy?
3. What is the reproductive structure of the fungi? It’s n ot sperm and egg!
4. In the lab activity, which groups of fungi prefer to rep roduce asexually? Which groups of fungi tend to exhibit sexual
reproduction?
5. A lichen is a mutualisic relationship between what two o rganisms?
This page titled 3.1: Fungi Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417903.2: Fungi Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Fungi
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity NotesDry
Rhizopus slides 1 per table include sporangia and zygospo res
Asergillus slides 1 per table include conidia and coidio phores
Penicillium 1 per table conidiophores only
Lichens variousdifferent forms (frutisoe, foliose, etc.) set
up as demo on side bench
mushrooms varioussamples for students to view under
dissecting microscope. Can be purchased at
grocery store.
Coprinus slide 1 per table cross section view
lichen thallus slide 1 per table
Materials on side bench:
Dry yeast packet (1 per class)
250 ml beaker
sugar (sucrose)
slides
coverslips
plastic pipets (~3)
glass stir rod
access to microwave or hot plate (heat for water)
To prepare yeast culture: heat 150 ml of water to 45 C and dissolve 1 yeast packet. It’s important the wat er is not too hot or the yeast
will die. Add 1 teaspoon of sugar. Stir until yeast dissolve d. Let sit for 5-10 minutes. If yeast is activated it will foam/bubble.
This page titled 3.2: Fungi Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417913.3: Reading- Fungi
Zygomycota
Fungi in the phylum Zygomycota are called zygomycete s. The zygomycetes are terrestrial. They are usually saprotrophs but there
are some parasites. The hyphae are coenocytic (theyn lack septa). Septa are f ound only in the reproductive structures.
Reproduction in Zygomycota
Fusion of two hyphae leads to the formation of a zygosporangium, a thick-walled structure that is capable of survivin g
environmental extremes. Before karyogamy, the zygos porangium contains many haploid nuclei. after karyog amy, it contains many
diploid nuclei.
Rhizopus (Bread Mold)
Figure 2. Rhizopus* sporangia
Asexual reproduction involves mycelia producing sporang ia that produce haploid spores by mitosis. The spor es produce new
mycelia.
Figure 3. Rhizopus* zygotes
When environmental conditions deteriorate, sexual re production may occur. Hyphae from opposite mating typ es produce structures
that contain several haploid nuclei. Fusion of two of these structures from opposite mating types results i n a heterokaryotic
zygosporangium. A thick wall develops that functions to protect the zygospore until environmental conditions become fa vorable.
When conditions are favorable, nuclear fusion (karyog amy) occurs within the zygosporangium producing dipl oid nuclei. This is
followed by meiosis. The zygosporangium then germinates to p roduce a sporangium which releases haploid spores.
Observe Rhizopus (bread mold) growing on a culture dish. Use a dissect ing microscope to see details of the hyphae and spor angia.
Is there any evidence of sexual reproduction?

3.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791Phylum: Ascomycota (Sac Fungi)
Examples: Yeasts, molds, morels, truffles
Figure 4. Morels (left) are sac fungi. Photo courtesy of Michael Lawliss.
Ascomycetes are important in digesting resistant materia ls such as cellulose (found in plant cell walls), lignin (found in wood), an d
collagen (a connective tissue found in animals). This group also includes many important plant pathogens.
Many, perhaps half of the species of ascomycota form lic hens—a symbiotic relationship between a fungus and a ph otosynthetic
cell such as a green algae or a cyanobacteria. The fungal component of most lichens is an Ascomycete.
Reproduction in Sac Fungi
Sexual
Hyphae from opposite mating types fuse, forming a heter okaryotic structure which then produces dikaryotic hy phae. The fruiting
body is called an ascocarp. It is composed of dikaryotic hyphae and haploid hyphae.
Dikaryotic hyphae within the ascocarp produces asci (singular: ascus), sacs that are walled off from the rest of the hypha e. Nuclear
fusion within an ascus will produce a diploid zygote. The zygote will undergo meiosis, followed by mitosis t o produce 8 haploid
ascospores.
Asci with ascospores can be seen in figure 5.

3.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 5. Peziza cross section X 200.
Asexual
Most reproduction is by asexual spores called conidia. Unlike the Zygomycetes which produce asexual spores within sporangia,
conidia are produced on the ends of specialized hyphae called conidiophores.
Examples of Sac Fungi
Morels and truffles are gourmet delicacies. This grou p includes many important plant parasites such as Dut ch elm disease, chestnut
blight, leaf curl fungi, and Claviceps.
An ergot is the hard, purple-black fungus Claviceps purpurea. It contains toxic alkaloids, including LSD. When infec ted rye is
made into bread, the toxins are ingested and cause v omiting, muscle pain, feeling hot or cold, hand and fo ot lesions, hysteria and
hallucinations. Historians believe that those that accu sed their neighbors of witchcraft in Salem may have be en suffering from
ergotism. Claviceps is used to stimulate uterine contractions and to treat migraine headaches.
Peziza (Cup Fungi)
Observe preserved Peziza (cup fungus) using a dissecting microscope.
Observe a slide of Peziza at scanning, low, and high power magnification. Find an ascus and ascospores on the upper surface
(inside the cup).
Aspergillus
Observe the conidiophores and conidia (asexual spores) of Aspergillus.
Yeast
Yeast are single-celled members of the sac fungi. Mos t reproduction is asexual; a small cell pinches off fr om a larger cell. This type
of mitosis where a smaller individual grows from a larger in dividual is called budding.
Make a wet mount of live yeast and see if you can obse rve budding under high power. If you cannot see yeas t budding, view a
prepared slide of yeast budding under high power.
Yeast also reproduce sexually by forming an ascus a nd eight ascospores. View a slide of Schizosaccharomyces oc tosporus under
high power or oil immersion and find an ascus with ascospore s.
Figure 6. Yeast (Saccharomyces) budding X 1000.
During sexual reproduction, the fusion of two cells results in the formation of an ascus.

3.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 7. Schizosaccharomyces octosporus X 1000
The elongated cell in the upper left part of figure 7 contains ascospores.
Figure 8. Schizosaccharomyces octosporus X 1000
Cells in the lower left part of the figure 8 contain asco spores.
Yeast is important in leavening bread by CO production an d in producing ethanol for alcoholic beverages.
Penicillium
Observe Penicillium growing on a culture dish.
Figure 9. Penicillium growing on an agar plate
Penicillium reproduces asexually. Observe a slide of Penicillium conidiophores under high power. The spores are called conidia.
Figure 10. Penicillium Conidiophores and conidia X 400.
Phylum: Basidiomycota (Club Fungi)
Reproduction
Asexual reproduction in club fungi is rare. Their fruiting bodies are called basidiocarps. This is the visible mushroom.2

3.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 11. Mushrooms showing gills
Spores, called basidiospores are produced on basidia within the basidiocarps. In mushrooms, the basidia ar e located along the gills
on the underside of the cap. In figure 6, a portion of the c ap of this mushroom has been broken away to reveal the gill s.
Figure 12. Basidia and basidiospores X 1000
In ascomycota (sac fungi), the ascospores were enclosed in an ascus. In basidiomycota, the basi diospores are not enclosed.
Compare the diagrams of a basidium with basidiospores ab ove with that of an ascus with ascospores seen earlier.
Basidiospores germinate to produce monokaryotic (hapl oid, one nucleus per cell) hyphae. Mushrooms are comp osed of dikaryotic
hyphae which are formed when hyphae fuse. Dikaryotic nu clei within the basidium fuse to produce a zygote and meiosis then
produces basidiospores.
Observe some representative club fungi on display includi ng mushrooms, puffballs, and bracket fungi.

3.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791Bracket Fungi
Figure 13. Bracket fungi
Bracket Fungi and Lichens
Figure 14. Bracket fungi and lichens
Mushrooms
Figure 15. Mushrooms
Cut a mushroom to reveal the gills as shown in figure 16. Ba sidia and basidiospores form on the gills.
Figure 16. Mushroom cut to reveal the gills
View a cross section of the cap of a mushroom (Coprinus) showing the gills. Find a basidium and basidiospores.

3.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 17. Coprinus X 400
Figure 18. Coprinus X 1000 showing basidia and basidiospo res
Symbiotic Associations of Fungi and Other Organisms
Lichens
Lichens are structures made up of two different species:
1. a fungus
2. either a cyanobacterium or a green algae
The photosynthetic cells are contained within the middl e layer.
The photosynthetic cells provide photosynthesis for t he lichen. It was thought that the relationship was mu tualistic because the
fungus prevented the algal cells from desiccation. Re cent evidence indicates that the photosynthetic cell s may grow faster when
separated from the fungus. Perhaps the fungus is parasiti zing the photosynthetic cells.
Reproduction is asexual. Fragments are produced that contai n fungal hyphae and photosynthetic cells.
Lichens derive most of their water and minerals from rainwater and air. This allows them to survive on bare rock, tree trunks,
inhospitable places.
Observe the lichens on display. Some lichens have a crus t-like appearance (crustose). Others have a shrublike (fruticose) or leaflike
(foliose) appearance.

3.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 19. Lichens growing on a rock
Figure 20. Lichens growing on a tree
Figure 21. Lichens growing on a tree
Figure 22. Lichen thallus (cross-section X 200)

3.3.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41791
Figure 23. Lichen thallus X 400
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Kingdom: Fungi, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Fungi. Project: The Biology Web. License:
CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 3.3: Reading- Fungi is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417923.4: Case Study- Amphibian Die Off, Chytrid Fungi
Review this slideshow then answer the questions below.
Questions
1. What phylum of fungi is responsible for chytridiomycosi s?
2. Why is this fungi successful at killing amphibians?
3. Why be concerned about the world’s amphibian population s? What role do amphibians play in ecosystems?
4. How might Bd be spreading through the environment?
5. Propose a hypothesis that would explain why Bd is spreading like a new disease throughout the world.
6. Some scientists are attempting to prevent the extincti on of amphibians by capturing amphibians in the wild, bree ding them in
chytrid free labs, then releasing some of the amphibians in to the wild. Discuss how such a strategy could save some sp ecies of
amphibians.
7. How else might we prevent the spread of Bd throughout the wor ld?
This page titled 3.4: Case Study- Amphibian Die Off, Chytrid Fungi is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Seedless Plants
4.1: Seedless Plant Lab
4.2: Seedless Plant Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
4.3: Reading- Seedless Plants
This page titled 4: Seedless Plants is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417934.1: Seedless Plant Lab
At the conclusion of the lab, the student should be able to:
Explain what is meant by “alteration of generations”
Explain the difference between the sporophyte and gameto phyte generation in plants. State which generation is haploid and
which is diploid
Name the process that makes spores and state if spores are hap loid or diploid
Name the process that creates sperm and egg from spores a nd state if sperm and egg are haploid or diploid
Name the phyla discussed in the lab and give an example of a plant from each
Identify and know the function of the archegonium and th e antheridum
Identify the fern structures discussed
Understand the basic moss and fern life cycle
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Procedure
1. Access the page “Reading: Seedless Plants.”
2. Phylum Bryophyta (Mosses)
1. View the live moss specimens available in the lab.
1. Is the green “leaf like” tissue gametophyte or sporo phyte?
2. Is the stalk that emerges from the green “leaf like” tiss ue gametophyte or sporophyte?
2. As indicated in #3 of the website use the space below to draw a simple life cycle of the moss. Include in the life cycle 2 N, N,
sporophyte, gametophyte, meiosis, spores, egg, sperm, anthe ridium, archigonium, fertilization. If you need help in
constructing your life cycle picture check out this website.
3. View the prepared slide of the archigonium and the anth eridum (there should be a slide with both).
1. Is the archegonium male or female?
2. What cell is produced in the archegonium?
3. Is this cell haploid or diploid?
4. Is the antheridium male or female?
5. What cell is produced in the antheridium?
6. Is this cell haploid or diploid?
4. View the prepared slide of the moss capsule.
1. Is the capsule sporophyte or gametophyte tissue?
2. What cell is produced in the capsule?
3. Is this cell haploid or diploid?
4. How are moss spores dispersed to new locations?
3. Skip the liverworts section (Phylum Hepatophyta)
4. Seedless Vascular Plants
5. Phylum Pterophyta (Ferns)
1. As indicated in #1 of the website use the space below to draw a simple life cycle of the fern. Include in the life cycl e 2N, N,
sporophyte, gametophyte, meiosis, spores, egg, sperm, anthe ridium, archigonium, fertilization, sorus. If you need he lp in
constructing your life cycle picture check out this webs ite.
2. Observe the preserved fern frond. Locate the sori on the underside.
1. Is the frond sporophyte or gametophyte?
2. What cell is produced in the sori?
3. Is this cell diploid or haploid?Learning Objectives

4.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417933. View the prepared slide of the fern prothallus under the microscope.
1. What shape is the prothallus?
2. Is the prothallus sporophyte or gametophyte?
3. Can you find the archegonium and the antheridium?
4. What cell is made in the archegonium?
5. What cell is made in the antheridium?
6. Skip the horsetails
7. Skip the spikemosses and club mosses (Phylum Kycophyta)
8. Answer the review questions below.
1. Is gametophyte tissue haploid or diploid?
2. Is sporophyte tissue haploid or diploid?
3. Is the moss life cycle gametophyte or sporophyte dom inant?
4. Is the fern life cycle gametophyte or sporophyte domin ant?
5. In the life cycle of the primitive plant, the process of meiosis produces what cell?
6. Does the gametophyte or sporophyte generation produc e spores?
7. What process do spores undergo to create sperm and egg?
8. State one reason why moss and fern are considered primit ive plants.
9. What is meant by the idea of “alteration of generatio ns?”
This page titled 4.1: Seedless Plant Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417944.2: Seedless Plant Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Seedless Plants
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
live moss speciman with gametophye and
sporophyte tissue1-2put on side bench as demo, helpful to view
under dissecting scope
moss antheridium slide 1 per table
moss archigonium slide 1 per table
moss capsule with spores slide 1 per table
fern leaf with sori 1-2put on side bench as demo, helpful to view
under dissecting scope
fern prothallus slide 1 per tableshould contain both antheridia and
archegonia
This page titled 4.2: Seedless Plant Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417954.3: Reading- Seedless Plants
Introduction
Plants (kingdom Plantae) are autotrophs; they make their own organic nutrients. The term “or ganic” refers to compounds that
contain carbon. Organic nutrients such as sugars are made b y photosynthesis.
Plants are adapted to living on land. For example, the above-ground parts of most plants are covered by a wax y layer called a
cuticle to prevent water loss. Aquatic plants are secondarily adapted to living in water.
Some evidence that suggests that plants evolved from the gr een algae is:
they both use chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and caroteno id pigments during photosynthesis.
the primary food reserve of both is starch.
they both have cellulose cell walls.
Genetic and morphological evidence indicates that pl ants evolved from a group of green algae called cha rophyceans. Many
charophyceans inhabit shallow freshwater environments. Natural selection may have favored individuals capab le of surviving
occasional drying in these environments and this gave ri se to land plants.
These traits occur in plants but not charophyceans. Some evo lved independently in other algae.
Apical meristems
Alternation of generations
Spores with protective walls
Spores produced in sporangia
Gametes are produced in multicellular structures called gametangia; Antheridia produce sperm; Archegonia produce eggs
Multicellular dependent embryos
Many have a cuticle that waterproofs and offers some protec tion
Alternation of Generations
The basic alternation of generations life cycle is illustr ated below.
The diploid plant that produces spores is called a sporophyte. The haploid plant that produces gametes is called a gametophyte.
Some protists also have an alternation of generations life cycle but the structures that produce gametes in protists are usually single
cells. Plants produce gametes in multicullar structure s that have an outer protective layer. Sperm are pro duced in structures called
antheridia (sing. antheridium), eggs are produced in archegonia (sing. archegonium),. As in protists and fungi, spores o f plants are
produced in sporangia (sing. sporangium).
A dependent sporophyte is a sporophyte that is small and grows attached to the gametophyte. It obtains nutrients from the
gametophyte. An independent sporophyte grows separately from the gametophyte. Similarly, a dependent gametophyte is small
and grows attached to the sporophyte while an independent gametophyte grows separately from the sporophyte.
The evolutionary trend in plants has been from plan ts with a dominant gametophyte and reduced, dependent sporophyte (ex.
Mosses) to plants with a dominant, independent sporophyte a nd a reduced, dependent gametophyte (ex. Seed plants).

4.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41795Classification
Evolutionary relationships among the plants are shown be low.
We will study the following phyla of plants.
Characteristics Classification
Bryophytes (no vascular tissue)Liverworts (Phylum Hepatophyta)
Mosses (Phylum Bryophyta)
Hornworts (Phylum Anthocerophyta
Seedless vascular plantsClub mosses, Spike Mosses, Quillworts (Phylum
Lycophyta)Horsetails, Whisk Ferns, Ferns (Phylum Pterophyta)
Gymnosperms (vascular, naked seeds)Conifers (Phylum Coniferophyta)
Cycads (Phylum Cycadophyta)
Ginkgos (Phylum Ginkgophyta)
Gnetophytes (Phylum Gnetophyta)
Angiosperms (vascular, protected seeds)Flowering Plants (Phylum Anthophyta)Monocots
Eudicots
Bryophytes
Phylum: Bryophyta (Mosses)
1. Observe different kinds of moss on display and note the bod y form of the gametophyte.
Figure 1. Moss growing on a rock.
2. Obtain live sporulating moss and identify the sporophy te and gametophyte generations.

4.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41795
Figure 2. Moss gametophytes and sporophytes
3. Draw the life cycle of a typical bryophyte such as moss. Yo ur drawing should contain the following terms:
1. 2N
2. N
3. sporophyte
4. sporangium
5. meiosis
6. spores
7. protonema
8. gametophyte
9. antheridium
10. sperm
11. archegonium
12. egg
13. fertilization
4. Observe a slide showing the antheridial head of Mnium (a moss). Begin using the scanning (4X) objective and the n switch to
the low power objective (10X).
5. What is produced in this structure (the antheridium)?
6. Show where the antheridium occurs on the live moss plant. Ind icate where this structure occurs in the life cycle dia gram that
you prepared (above).
Figure 3. Mnium (a moss) antheridial head

4.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41795
Figure 4. Mnium (a moss) antheridial head x40
Figure 5. Mnium (a moss) antheridial head x100
7. Observe a slide showing the archegonial head of Mnium (a moss). Begin using the scanning (4X) objective and the n switch to
the low power objective (10X).
8. What is produced in this structure?
9. Show where the archegonium occurs on the live moss plant. In dicate where this structure occurs in the life cycle diagra m that
you prepared (above).
Figure 6. Moss archegonial head x 40
Figure 7. Moss archegonial head x 100

4.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4179510. After the egg is fertilized, it grows and produces a sporop hyte. A capsule containing a sporangium is found at the ti p of the
mature sporophyte. Refer back to figure 2 to view a sporophyt e.
11. Use a dissecting microscope to view a longitudinal sect ion (cut lengthwise).
12. What is produced within this structure (the capsul e)?
13. Be sure that you can identify the sporophyte and the spo rangium on the live moss plant. Indicate where these struc tures occur in
the life cycle diagram that you prepared (above).
Figure 8. Moss capsule containing spores
Figure 9. Moss capsule x40
14. How are moss spores dispersed to new locations?
Phylum: Hepatophyta (Liverworts)
Observe live Marchantia (a liverwort). Do the plants contain gemma cups? What is th e function of gemma cups?
Figure 10. Marchantia (live)
Seedless Vascular Plants

4.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41795Phylum: Pterophyta
Ferns
Figure 11. Fern gametophyte
1. Draw the life cycle of a fern. Your drawing should contai n the following terms:
1. 2N
2. N
3. sporophyte
4. sorus
5. sporangium
6. meiosis
7. spores
8. gametophyte
9. antheridium
10. sperm
11. archegonium
12. egg
13. fertilization
2. Observe sori on the underside of a fern leaf. Are sporangia visible? Indicate where this structure occurs in the lif e cycle diagram
that you prepared (above).
Figure 12. Fern showing sori on underside of leaf
Figure 13. Fern sorus x40

4.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417953. View a slide of a fern gametophyte showing antheridia. W hat reproductive cells are produced by gametophytes? I ndicate where
the gametophyte occurs in the life cycle diagram that yo u prepared.
Figure 14. Fern prothallium (gametophyte)
Horsetails
Observe a live horsetail if available. Find the a strobilus. What reproductive structures are contained within the st robilus?
Figure 15. Horsetails
Figure 16. Horsetail showing strobilus
Phylum: Lycophyta
Members of this phylum have horizontal stems, upright stems, and small, spike-shaped leaves called microphylls.
Club Mosses
Observe a specimen of live club mosses such as Lycopodium. Find rhizomes. Identify microphylls. Do the specimens have any
strobili? (Be sure to look up these words if you do not understand t hem.)

4.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41795
Figure 17. Club moss (lycopodium)
Spike Mosses
Observe a specimen of a spike moss such as Selaginella. Note the structure of the microphylls.
Figure 18. Spike moss (selaginella)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Seedless Plants (Kingdom: Plantae), Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located
at: bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/L aboratory_Exercises/Seedless_Plants. Project: The Biology
Web. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 4.3: Reading- Seedless Plants is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Seed Plants
5.1: Seed Plants Lab
5.2: Seed Plants Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
5.3: Reading- Seed Plants
This page titled 5: Seed Plants is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417965.1: Seed Plants Lab
Define the terms (meanings of the names) angiosperm and g ymnosperm
State what type of cells create eggs and what type of cells cr eate sperm in gymnosperms and angiosperms
Describe the general characteristics seed plants.
Name the phyla discussed in the lab and give an example of a plant from each
Recognize and identify plant specimens viewed in the la b, both slides and live samples
Understand the basic gymnosperm and angiosperm life cycle
Recognize the difference between a male and female pin e cone
Explain the seed plant alteration of generations includin g sporophyte and gametophyte structures
Identify and know the function of the microscopes and the megaspores
Identify the flower parts and which structures and male an d female
Explain and recognize the difference between a monocot a nd a eudicot flower
Distinguish between the different types of fruits and give an ex ample of each type
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Procedure
1. Access the Seed plant lab.
2. Gymnosperms
1. Name the four subgroups within gymnosperms.
2. We will focus on conifers. Observe the conifer leaf sample s available.
1. How does the needle-like leaf benefit the conifer?
3. Reproduction in Pines: As indicated on the website, draw a simple pine life cycle in the space on the next page. B e sure to
include the terms egg, embryo, fertilization, megaspore, microscope, gametophyte, sporophyte, meiosis, mitosis, an d pollen.
Use this website to get you started.
4. Observe the pine cones on display. Are pine cones haploid or di ploid?
5. Are male or female pine cones larger?
6. View the slide of the pollen (male) pine cone cross section.
1. Can you find the microscopes on the slide?
2. Are microscopes haploid or diploid?
3. What process do microscopes undergo to form pollen gra ins?
4. Can you find pollen grains on the slide?
5. Use the space on the next page to draw what you observed u nder the microscope.
7. View the slide of the seed (female) pine cone cross section.
1. Can you find the megaspores on the slide?
2. Are megaspores haploid or diploid?
3. What process do megaspores undergo to form the egg or ovule?
4. Can you find the egg on the slide?
5. Is the tissue surrounding the egg haploid or diploid?
6. Once the egg is fertilized what structure will form?
7. Use the space below to draw what you observed under the mi croscope.
8. View the pine seeds on display
1. Are the seeds haploid or diploid?
2. How will the seeds be dispersed through the environment?
3. What cell division process will the seeds undergo to cr eate a new pine tree?
3. AngiospermsLearning Objectives

5.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417963. g ospe s
1. As indicated on the website, draw a simple angiosperm life cycle in the space below. Be sure to include the terms egg,
embryo, fertilization, megaspore, microscope, gametophy te, sporophyte, meiosis, mitosis, and pollen. Use this websit e to get
you started: http://www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/ angiosperm.html
2. Use the flower model to identify the different structures.
1. Collectively, the male flower parts are called the _____ ______________.
2. Collectively, the female flower parts are called the ___ _______________.
3. Use the table below to describe the function of each fl ower part and if it is male, female, or neither.
Flower structure Function Male/Female/Neither
Anther
Filament
Stigma
Style
Ovary
Petal
Sepals
3. Dissect the live flower. Start with the outside (sepals, peta ls) and work your way in. Identify each structure as you dis sect
the flower.
1. How many petals does the flower have?
2. Is the flower a monocot or a eudicot? What characteri stic did you use to determine?
3. Once you dissect the flower, dispose of the flower parts. Yo u do not have to cut into the ovary or the anther as indica ted
on the website.
4. View the slide of the lily mature female gametophyte.
1. Can you locate the egg?
2. Is the egg haploid or diploid?
3. What type of cell underwent mitosis to create the egg?
4. Can you locate the polar nuclei?
5. Is the ovary (tissue surrounding the egg) haploid or d iploid?
6. Use the space below to draw what you observed under the mi croscope.
5. View the slide of the lily anther cross section.
1. Can you locate the pollen grains?
2. Is the pollen haploid or diploid?
3. What cell type underwent mitosis to create the pollen?
4. Is the anther (tissue surrounding the pollen) haploid or diploid?
5. Use the space below to draw what you observed under the mi croscope.
6. View the slide of the lily pollen grains.
1. How many cells are held within a single pollen grain?
2. Use the space below to draw what you observed under the mi croscope.
7. Skip the slide of germinated pollen. That slide is not ava ilable in the lab.
8. Skip the slide of the lily developing embryo. It is not a vailable in the lab.
9. Skip the slide of the Capsella embryo, both early and mature embryo. These slides are not available in the lab.
10. Although there is not a live bean seed available, plea se view the preserved bean seed.
1. Is the seed haploid or diploid?
2. How many cotyledons does the bean seed have?

5.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417963. Is the bean a monocot or a eudicot?
11. Although there is not a live corn seed available, pleas e view the preserved corn seed.
1. How many cotyledons does the corn seed have?
2. Is the corn a monocot or a eudicot?
3. What is the function of the endosperm tissue?
12. Skip over the recently germinated bean and corn plan ts.
13. Fruits. There will be several fruit examples available in the lab. They may be different than the ones desc ribed on the
website. Use the table below to discuss the fruits you view.
Name of fruit Simple, Aggregate, or Multiple Dry or fle shy

Review Questions
Answer the review questions below.
1. What does gymnosperm mean?
2. What group of gymnosperm plants is the largest?
3. What type of spore is used for male reproduction in se ed plants?
4. Through mitosis, the male spore develops into what structu re?
5. What type of spore is used for female reproduction in s eed plants?
6. Through mitosis, the female spore develops into what stru cture?
7. What does angiosperm mean?
8. What structures of the flower are female?
9. What structures of the flower are male?
10. What is the function of the petals of the flower?
11. The process of ___________________ occurs in the flo wer anther to create haploid ________________ followed by mitosis to
create __________________.
12. The process of __________________ occurs in the flowe r ovary to create the haploid ___________________ foll owed by
mitosis to create the ______________ and the n+n ____ __________________.
13. State one difference between monocots and eudicots.
14. Explain how angiosperms undergo a double fertiliza tion.
15. What part of the flower develops into a fruit?
16. How is a simple fruit different from a complex fruit?
17. Give an example of a fleshy fruit
18. Give an example of a dry fruit.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology 102 Labs. Authored by: Lynette Hauser. Provided by: Tidewater Community College. Located at:
http://www.tcc.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 5.1: Seed Plants Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417975.2: Seed Plants Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Seed Plants
Conifers
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
pine seeds various on side bench as demo
pine cone variousboth pollen and seed cone examples on side
bench as demo
pine pollen cone cross section slide 1 per table
pine seed cone cross section slide 1 per table
flower model 1 per table
live flower 1 per table for dissection, Alstroemeria wor ks well
lily gametophyte slide 1 per table
lily anther cross section slide 1 per table
lily pollen grain slide 1 per table
corn seed model 2-3 per class demo on side bench
bean seed model 2-3 per class demo on side bench
fruit examples variousexamples include apples, beans,
raspberries, walnuts, acorns. Try to have
several simple and multiple fruits, both
fruity and dry
This page titled 5.2: Seed Plants Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417985.3: Reading- Seed Plants
Gymnosperms
The four phyla of gymnosperms are cycads, ginkgo, gnetophy tes, and conifers.
Gymnosperms have naked seeds. The seeds of angiosperms are c ontained within a fruit.
Gymnosperm Diversity
We will examine conifers in some detail during this lab class but will use photographs on the Internet to study the other three
divisions. Click on the links below to view photographs of th em.
Cycads
Cycads re cone-bearing palmlike plants found mainly i n tropical and subtropical regions today. They were v ery numerous in the
Mesozoic Era.
Ginkgo
There is only one species of Ginkgo left. It survived du e to Chinese planting them along roadsides. Click here for information and
photographs.
Gnetophytes
Welwitschia and Ephedra (information and photographs)
Conifers
Conifers are the largest group of gymnosperms. They i nclude evergreen trees such as pine, cedar, spruce, f ir, and redwood trees.
Examine the leaves of pine on display.
The leaves of conifers are needle-like and are adapt ed for dry conditions such as hot summers or freezi ng winters. Needles lose
water slower than broad, flat leaves and therefore do n ot need to be shed during seasons when water is scarce, so most conifers are
evergreen.
Reproduction in Pine
Life Cycle of Seed Plants
Seed plants are heterosporous —they have two different spore sizes: megaspores and microsp ores.
The generalized life cycle of plants has been modifi ed (below) to illustrate plants which have separate mal e and female
gametophytes (megagametophyte and microgametophyte) produced by different sized spores (megaspores and microspores).
The evolutionary trend from nonvascular plants to se edless vascular plants to seed plants has been a reduc tion in the size of the
gametophyte. In seed plants, the gametophyte is usually micr oscopic and is retained within the tissues of the sporophyte.
The megasporangium is surrounded by layers of sporo phyte tissue called the integument. The integument and structures within
(megasporangium, megaspore) are the ovule.

5.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798Microspores germinate within the sporophyte tissue and become pollen grains. The microgametophyte is conta ined within the
tough, protective coat of the pollen grain.
The entire microgametophyte (pollen grain) is transfe rred to the vicinity of the megagametophyte by a pr ocess of pollination. Wind
or animals usually accomplish this transfer.
When pollen reaches the female gametophyte, it prod uces an elongate structure (pollen tube) that grows to the egg cell. Sperm are
transferred directly through this tube to the egg. The advantage of this process is that sperm do not have to swim long distances as
they do in seedless plants.
Seeds
Seeds contain the sporophyte embryo, food for the embryo, a nd a protective coat.
The embryo within the seed is dormant; it can survive for long periods without additional food or water. Wh en conditions become
favorable, the embryo resumes growth as the seed germinates.
1. Draw the life cycle of pine and include the following ter ms: eggs, embryo, fertilization, megagametophyte, megaspo rangium,
megaspore, meiosis, microgametophyte, microsporangium, microspores, and zygote.
2. Observe the pine pollen cones on display. Is this structure h aploid or diploid?
3. View a slide showing a section (l.s.) of a pine pollen cone. Identify the microsporangium. Identify the microgame tophytes.
What is another name for microgametophyte?

5.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
4. View a pine seed cone on display. Are there any seeds withi n the cone?
5. View a slide showing a longitudinal section of a pine see d cone. Identify the integument, ovule, megasporangium, an d
megagametophyte. Which of these structures is part of th e sporophyte? Which are haploid? Which are diploid?

5.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798

5.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417986. View the pine seeds on display. From your drawing of the li fe cycle of pine, identify the structures that are part of the seed.
Angiosperms
Create another diagram of the life cycle of seed pla nts that includes the following terms: eggs, embryo, f ertilization,
megagametophyte, megasporangium, megaspore, meiosis, microgametophyte, microsporangium, microspores, and zygote. This
diagram will be used as a reference when viewing the reprodu ctive structures of angiosperms.
Flower Parts
1. Obtain a monocot flower such as lily and identify the fol lowing structures: anther, filament, stamen, stigma, styl e, ovary, pistil,
petals, sepals. State the function of each of these structu res.

5.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417982. Remove the petals, stamens and pistil.
3. How many petals are present? How many sepals? Is lily a mon ocot or a eudicot? List three characteristics that can be used to
distinguish between monocots and eudicots.
Within the Ovary
1. Use a scalpel to cut a thin cross section slice from th e ovary. This can be done by cutting across the ovary and the n slicing a thin
section next to the first cut. Use a dissecting microscope t o determine the number of carpels within the ovary. Iden tify the
ovules. Which structures on the life cycle diagram are f ound within the ovules?
2. View a prepared slide of a lily mature female gametophy te. Identify the megagametophyte, Find the megagametophyt e on the
life cycle diagram. Try to find an egg and polar nuclei.

5.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
The photograph below shows a megaspore mother cell. It will divide by meiosis to produce megaspores.
Within the Anther
1. Use a scalpel to cut a thin cross-section of a lily anthe r and view it under a dissecting microscope. Identify the
microsporangium. Are pollen grains visible? What struct ures on the life cycle diagram are contained within the a nther?
Meiosis occurs within the anther to produce microspores. Mic rospores undergo mitosis to produce microgametophytes (polle n
grains).
2. If you were unable to get a good view of a lily anther i n the dissection above, view a prepared slide of a lily an ther c.s. and
identify the microsporangium and pollen grains. Find wher e these two structures are located on your life cycle diagr am.

5.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417983. View a slide of lily pollen. identify the two nuclei.
4. View slides of germinated pollen. Note the three nuclei wi thin the pollen tubes. One is a tube nucleus. It directs the growth of
the pollen tube. The other two are sperm.
After Fertilization: Embryonic Development
1. View a slide of a Capsella early embryo. Identify the suspensor and cotyledons. Is Capsella a monocot or a eudicot?
2. View a slide of a Capsella mature embryo. Identify the cotyledons, the tip of the growing root (root apical meristem) and the tip
of the growing shoot (shoot apical meristem).

5.3.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
3. Obtain a bean seed that has been soaking in water. Cu t the seed in half so that each cotyledon is visible and ex amine it using a
dissecting microscope. Identify the embryo.
4. Obtain a corn that has been soaking in water and cut it lengthwise. Use a dissecting microscope to identify the e mbryo, the
cotyledon, and the endosperm.

5.3.10 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
5. Observe beans and corn on display that have been recentl y germinated. Identify the cotyledons on the beans. Can you see
cotyledons on the corn? Can you identify the coleoptile?

5.3.11 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
Fruits
Angiosperms are distinguished from Gymnosperms in that the seeds are enclosed in a covering called the fruit.
Observe peas. Peas are seeds contained within a pod (fruit).

5.3.12 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798Observe the sliced tomato. It is produced from several fused carpels. Can you see the carpels? How many are there?
Observe a strawberry or a blackberry. These fruits are form ed from a single flower that contained many pistals.
Observe a pineapple. This fruit is produced by the fusion of many flowers. Can you see each individual fruit?

5.3.13 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41798
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Seed Plants (Kingdom: Plantae), Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Seed_Plants. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 5.3: Reading- Seed Plants is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Plant Organization
6.1: Plant Organization Lab
6.2: Plant Organization Lab (Instructor Materials Prepara tion)
This page titled 6: Plant Organization is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417996.1: Plant Organization Lab
At the conclusion of the lab, the student should be able to:
List and give the major function of the three main typ es of plant tissues
Identify a monocot verses a eudicot plant by observing either root, stem, leaf, or flowers
Name and describe the various components and tissues within t he root, both monocot and eudicot
Name and describe the various components and tissues within t he stem, both monocot and eudicot
Name the describe the various components and tissues wit hin the leaf, both monocot and eudicot
Identify various examples of stem diversity
Distinguish between simple and compound leaves
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Angiosperms, or flowering plants are incredibly diverse. This group of plants contains between 250,000 and 400,000 different
species. Although flowering plants are diverse in siz e, shape, color, and habitat, all angiosperms have the following four structures:
the root, the stem, the leaf, and the flower. Each struc tures in comprised of one or more different types of tissues. In this lab activity
we will learn more about angiosperm structures and tissues.
Angiosperm Tissues
Flowering plants contain three main types of tissues in the roots, stems, and leaves. Each tissue has a spec ific function as described
below:
1. Dermal tissue: protects the outside of the plant.
2. Ground tissue: used for photosynthesis and storage. An internal plant tissue.
3. Vascular tissue: used for transport of water and sugars. Xylem transports water and phloem transports sugars.
Unlike animals, angiosperms increase in size their ent ire life because of meristematic tissue. Meristematic tissue continues to
divide and create new cells through photosynthesis incr easing the height and width of flowering plants. Plant s have two types of
meristems, as described below:
1. Apical meristem: located at the tip of the shoot and the tip of the root. The apical meristem lengthens up and down. It is
responsible for primary growth.
2. Lateral meristem: located at branches to increase plant girth. It is resp onsible for secondary growth.
Angiosperm Body Plan
View the representative plants on display in the lab. Notice that the plants have aboveground and below-grou nd portions. The shoot
system is aboveground. What components of the plan comprise th e shoot system?
The root system is below ground. State two functions of plant roots.
Angiosperms are divided into two different groups, monocots and eudicots. These groups differ based on tissue organization in the
seed, root, stem, leaf and flowers. For example, monoco ts have leaf veins that form a parallel patter and f lower parts in multiples of
threes. Eudicots have leaf veins in a net pattern and flower parts in multiples of fours or fives.
Using this information, identify the live plants on display as either monocots or eudicots using a table similar to t he one below.Learning Objectives

6.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41799Monocots Eudicots

Root
There are two main root arrangements. Most monocots ha ve a fibrous root system where all of the roots are about the same size.
Many eudicots have a taproot system with one very large main root and smaller root s branching off. A carrot is an example of a
taproot.
View the monocot and eudicot roots models on display and the cross section slides of the monocot and eud icot root. Identify the
following structures:
Root cap
Root hairs
Zone of cell division
Zone of elongation
Zone of maturation
Xylem
Cortex
Endodermis
Pith
Pericycle
Epidermis
Phloem
Questions
1. Draw and label the cross section of the monocot and eud icot root slides.
2. Why is the root cap necessary?
3. How does the arrangement of xylem and phloem differ in th e monocot verses the eudicot root?
Stem
The stem provides aboveground support for flowers an d leaves. Some stems are herbaceous or nonwoody while others are woody.
Herbaceous stems increase in length via the apical meris tem but they do not increase in girth through secondary gr owth.
View the cross section slides of the eudicot herbaceou s stem and the monocot herbaceous stem. Identify the following tissues in
both slides and notice that they have different arrange ments of the xylem and phloem.
Cortex
Xylem
Phloem
Pith
Epidermis
Questions
1. In the eudicot stem, which vascular tissue is more extern al, the xylem or the phloem?
2. The vascular bundles in a monocot herbaceous stem are sa id to have a scattered arrangement. Explain why in your own words.
3. Draw and label the cross section of the monocot and eud icot stem slides.
Many plants have modified stems to assist with food storage or for vegetative reproduction. Some examples include:

6.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417991. Rhizome: horizontal underground stem
2. Corm: underground fleshy stem, used for storage
3. Stolon: underground horizontal stem
4. Runner: aboveground horizontal stem
5. Tuber: underground storage stem
6. Bulb: underground storage stem with fleshy leaves
View the stems on display and identify which ones below to the categories described above. You may see more than one example
of some and no examples of others.
Leaf
The main function of the leaf is photosynthesis. Th erefore, it contains many chloroplasts and is thin t o facilitate gas and water
transport. View the leaf model and the leaf cross sectio n slide. Make sure you can identify the following component s:
Epidermis (upper and lower)
Cuticle
Spongy Mesophyll
Palisade Mesophyll
Xylem
Phloem
Stomata (stoma singular)
Guard Cells
Question
1. Draw and label the leaf with all of the components listed above.
The main, flat portion of the leaf is called the blade and it attaches to the stem via the petiole stalk. There are two main
arrangements for the leaf blade. Leaves can either b e simple or compound. A simple leaf has a single blade. A compound leaf has
a blade divded into leaflets. All of the leaflets sha re the same auxiliary bud which is the source of new growth. The auxiliary bud
is located at the base of the petiole.
There are two arrangements of compound leaves. Palmately compound leaves have all leaflets attached at the same point at th e
end of the petiole. Pinnately compound leaves have leaflets attached at intervals along the peitole.
View the preserved leaf specimens. Choose six to ident ify as simple or compound. If the leaf is compound, state if it is palmately or
pinnately compound. Record your findings in a table si milar to the one below.
Name of Leaf Simple or Compound Palmate or Pinnate

Questions
1. What cellular division process occurs in the apical meri stem region?
2. The plant has two apical meristems. Identify the locati on of both.
3. If a plant had parallel leaf veins would you identify it a s a monocot or a eudicot?
4. The tissue responsible for water transport is ________ and the tissue responsible for sugar transport is_______ _.
5. You look at a stem cross section and notice there is a ri ng of vascular bundles. Would you identify it as monocot or eudicot?

6.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/417996. A potato is an example of what type of modified stem?
7. What is the function of the root hairs?
8. Vascular bundles contain what two tissues?
9. Are fibrous roots more common in eudicots or monocots?
10. State one structure that is part of the plant shoot sy stem.
This page titled 6.1: Plant Organization Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418006.2: Plant Organization Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Angiosperm Tissues
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
root cross section slides 1 per table monocot and eudicot
stem cross section slides 1 per table monocot and eudicot
Angiosperm Body Plan
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
live stem examples varioussome options include ginger root for
rhizome, potato for tuber, carrot for tap
root, onion for bulb, set up as demo on side
bench
leaf examples varioustry to have several monocot, several
eudicot, and both simple and compound
leaves, set up as demo on side bench
leaf model 1 per table
live plant specimens varioustry to have several monocot and eudicot, set
up on side bench as demo
root model 2-3 per class
This page titled 6.2: Plant Organization Lab (Instructor Materials Prep aration) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Invertebrate I
7.1: Invertebrate Lab I
7.2: Invertebrate Lab I (Instructor Materials Preparation)
7.3: Reading- Sponges
7.4: Reading- Cnidarians
7.5: Reading- Roundworms
7.6: Reading- Arthropods
This page titled 7: Invertebrate I is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418017.1: Invertebrate Lab I
State the phyla of the organisms discussed in the lab acti vities
Use the characteristics of symmetry, coelom, embryo tissue l ayers, and patterns of development to differentiate b etween the
different invertebrate groups
Recognize and identify the sponge specimens viewed in th e lab
Explain the purpose of the different sponge cells
Recognize and identify the cnidaria specimens viewed in lab and if the specimens are polyp or medusa form
Recognize and identify the nematoda examples viewed in the lab
Recognize and identify the arthropoda examples viewed in the lab
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Sponges
Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Sponges.”
Questions
1. The preserved sponge specimens will be on display, but ma y differ from the ones directly mentioned in the lab han dout. Please
make observations on the available specimens and fill in the chart below.
Name of Specimen Physical DescriptionSponge Structures Visible (osculum, other
spores, spicules)

1. What type of symmetry is displayed in the sponge specime ns?
2. View the Grantia slides. There will not be slides available of the spicu les but view the pictures in the lab materials.
1. What is the function of spicules?
2. Do sponges contain true tissues?
3. Can you find any collar cells in the slide?
4. What is the function of the collar cells?
5. Can you find any epidermal cells in the sponge slide?
6. What is the function of the epidermal cells?
Cnidarians
Procedure
1. Access the page: “Reading: Cnidarians.”
2. View the hydra specimens (live and slides).
3. Watch these videos:
Questions
1. Does the hydra illustrate the polyp or the medusa stag e?
2. How many germ layers does the hydra contain?
3. What type of symmetry is seen in the hydra?Learning Objectives

7.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418014. Can you find the hydra tentacles? How many tentacles do es your hydra specimen contain?
5. Name the stinging cells present on the tentacles that a re unique to cnidarians.
6. Explain the movement of the hydra if live specimens are available. If they are not, review the video on hydra mov ement.
7. If there are live hydra specimens do not add the vinega r as indicated on the lab website. Vinegar causes them to expel the
cnidocytes. Review the nematocysts video, which shows a jellyfish discharging the nematocyst cells.
8. View the preserved cnidarian specimens will be on display. They may differ from the ones directly mentioned in the la b website
but there should be some medusa cnidarians as well as corals a nd sea anemones. Please make observations on the availabl e
specimens. And fill in the chart below.
Name of Specimen Physical Description Polyp or Medusa Stage?

Roundworms (phylum nematoda)
Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Roundworms”
Watch this video:
Questions
1. We will not be dissecting the Ascaris as indicated in the website. Instead view the preserved sli de.
1. What type of symmetry is seen in the roundworm?
2. Does it exhibit cephalization?
3. Ascaris is a parasite that swims constantly in human intestines. W hat structure protects the nematode from being digested?
2. View the Trichinella slide. Trichinella is also a parasite. It can infect humans as well as other mammals like pigs, bears, and
rodents. If untreated, it can lead to death.
1. What mammal tissue does this roundworm infect?
2. Draw a picture of the Trichinella as viewed under the microscope.
3. If there are live vinegar eel specimens available, vi ew them. If there are no live specimens available, review th e vinegar eels
video.
1. Describe the movement of the vinegar eels.
2. Do they have a complete or incomplete digestive syst em?
Arthropods
Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Arthropods.”
Questions
1. View the preserved arthropod specimens available. There wi ll be at least one example of each lineage group discusse d on the
website but not all of the specimens may be available. Use t he table below to organize your observations.

7.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41801Name of Specimen Lineage Exoskeleton? Jointed Appendages? Spe cialized Segments

2. What type of symmetry is displayed in the arthropods?
3. Do the arthropods exhibit cephalization?
Crayfish Dissection
Procedure
Complete the crayfish dissection using the directions av ailable on the lab website.
Questions
1. Make sure you can identify the following external struct ures: antenna, chiliped, cephalothorax, abdomen, and walk ing legs
2. Do you have a male or female crayfish?
3. How many swimmerets does your crayfish have?
4. How many rows of gills does the crayfish have?
5. Where do the gills attach?
6. Can you find the stomach and the digestive glands?
7. What does the stomach attach to directly?
8. Try to locate the green glands. What is the function of this structure?
Review Questions
Answer the review questions below. The phyla we viewed today wer e the porifera, the cnidaria, the nematoda and the arthr opoda.
1. Which phyla exhibited bilateral symmetry?
2. Which phyla had no true tissues?
3. Which phyla contained parasitic organisms?
4. Which phyla were coelomates?
5. Which phyla exhibited cephaliziation?
6. Which phyla that you viewed today contained specializ ed appendages?
7. Which phyla exhibited radial symmetry?
8. Which phyla were pseudocoelomates?
9. Which phyla had a complete digestive system?
10. Which phyla were multicellular?
11. Which phyla were asymmetrical?
12. Which phyla were acoelomates?
This page titled 7.1: Invertebrate Lab I is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418027.2: Invertebrate Lab I (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Sponges
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
sponge preserved specimens various on side bench as demo
grantia slide 1 per table
Cnidarians
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
hydra slide 1 per table
hydra live specimens 1 container per classview under dissecting scope as demo on
side bench
cnidaria preserved specimens various on side bench as dem o
hydra model 1-2 per class on side bench as demo
Roundworms (phylum nematoda)
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
Ascaris slide 1 per table
Trichinella slide 1 per table
live vinegar eels 1 vial per classview under dissecting scope as demo on
side bench

Arthropods
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
arthropod preserved specimens variouson side bench as demo, helpful to have
representatives from different subgroups
Crayfish Dissection
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).

7.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41802Materials Quantity Notes
dissection kit 1 per tableshould include scalpel, scissors, forceps,
dissection needles, dissection pins
dissection tray 1 per table
crayfish 1 per table
gloves 1 pair per student latex and non latex options i n various sizes
goggles 1 pair per student
lab coat 1 per student
dissection waste container 1 per classdissection waste should not go in regular
trash
This page titled 7.2: Invertebrate Lab I (Instructor Materials Preparat ion) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418037.3: Reading- Sponges
There are two phyla of sponges: Calcarea and Silicea.
Preserved Specimens
Examine preserved sponges on display. Identify the osculum. Can you see pores? Some of these specimens are shown below.
Figure 1. Chalina
Figure 2. Spongila
Figure 3. Commercial Sponge

7.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41803Structure of Sponges
The photographs below are of Grantia. The body of this species is highly folded producing many chambers. In the last two
photographs, the living cells have been removed to reveal t he spicules.
Examine the following prepared slides: Grantia c.s.and Grantia l.s. Find collar cells, epidermal cells, and pores. What is the
function of the collar cells? What is the function of t he pores?
Figure 4. Grantia c.s. X 400
Figure 5. Grantia l.s. X 40
Examine a slide of Grantia spicules. What is the functi on of the spicules?

7.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41803
Figure 6. Grantia spicules X 40
Figure 7. Grantia spicules X 100
Spicules are needle-like structures composed of either calcium carb onate or silica and offer support and protection.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Sponges, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Sponges. Project: The Biology Project.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 7.3: Reading- Sponges is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418047.4: Reading- Cnidarians
This laboratory exercise covers the following animals. You should learn this classification scheme and be ab le to classify the
animals into these categories.
Phylum: Cnidaria
Class: Hydrozoa (Hydra and relatives)
Class: Anthozoa (Sea Anemones and Corals)
Class: Scyphozoa (Jellyfishes)
Some examples of Cnidarians are hydra, jellyfishes, corals, sea anemones, and Portuguese man-of-wars.
Characteristics
Radial Symmetry
The body parts of a radially symmetrical animal are arranged around a central axis so that each part e xtends from the center. The
animal can be cut along the axis in more than one p lane to produce identical halves. Animals that exhibi t radial symmetry tend to
be sessile (immobile). Radial symmetry allows them to reach out in al l directions.
Cnidarians have two tissue layers. The outer layer is the epidermis. It is formed from ectoderm. The inner layer, the gastrodermis,
secretes digestive juices into the inner space called th e gastrovascular cavity. The gastrodermis is formed from endoderm.
Cnidarians do not have mesoderm and therefore do not have organs.
A nonliving gelatinous material called mesoglea separates the two tissue layers. A nerve net is located between the epidermis and
mesoglea. The body contains long structures called tentacles that can be moved to capture prey. The tentacles c ontain stinging cells
called cnidocytes and within each one is a capsule called a nematocyst, which dis charges to either trap or sting the prey. Contractile
(muscle-like) fibers are found in both the epidermi s and the gastrodermis. Their movements are not com plex because they do not
have a brain.
Cnidarians have a hydrostatic skeleton. The contractile fibers act against the fluid-fille d gastrovascular cavity. The movements are
like a balloon; the animal can be short and thick or long and thin. Cnidarians have a saclike gut and extracell ular digestion.
Two body forms are found among the Cnidarians, a polyp and a medusa. A polyp is attached and has the tentacles and mouth
directed upward. A medusa is free-floating and has th e mouth and tentacles on the ventral surface. It re sembles an upside-down
polyp. Some species have both a polyp and a medusa in thei r life cycle, others have one or the other form domina nt.
Hydrozoa
Hydra
1. Use a dropper to place a live Hydra on a slide. Examine the Hydra using a dissection microscope.

7.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41804
Figure 1. Hydra (live)
2. Hydra reproduce both sexually and asexually by budding. Try t o find a live Hydra with buds. If you cannot find a live Hydra
budding, look for budding in a prepared slide of Hydra.
Figure 2, Hydra budding. This is a form of asexual reproduction.
3. Add a drop of vinegar to the slide containing Hydra. Describe what happened to the cnidocytes.
Figure 3. Left: Hydra (Live) Exposed to 5% Vinegar Solution X 100. Right: Hydra (Live) Exposed to 5% Vinegar Solution X
4. Examine microscope slides of hydra l.s. and hydra c.s. L ook for the presence of two tissue layers. Identify stingin g cells
(Cnidocytes) in a slide of the whole animal.
Figure 4. Left: Hydra l.s. X 100. Middle: Hydra c.s. X 100. Right: Hydra c.s. X 200

7.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41804
Figure 5. Portion of a Hydra tentacle showing cnidocyt es
Figure 5. Left: Hydra l.s. X 40. Right: Hydra l.s. wit h ingested food X 40
Other Hydrozoans
Examine preserved specimens of Gonionemius, Polyorchis, and Physalia.
Figure 6. Left: Gonionemus, preserved. Middle: Polyorchis, preserved. Right: Portuguese Man-Of-War

7.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41804Sea Anemones and Coral (Class Anthozoa)
Examine a sea anemone and coral.
Figure 7. Sea anemone, preserved
Figure 8. Left: Astrangia (Northern Coral) Skeleton. Middle: Coral Skeleton. Right: Coral Skeleton.
Jellyfish (Class Schyphozoa)
Examine preserved jellyfish on display.
Figure 9. Aurelia
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Cnidarians, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Cnidarians. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

7.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41804This page titled 7.4: Reading- Cnidarians is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418057.5: Reading- Roundworms
Ascaris Dissection
Procedure
1. Obtain a female Ascaris and place it on a dissecting pan. The posterior end is curved in males and straight in females.
2. Make a shallow longitudinal cut the length of the worm and pin it open as illustrated below.
3. Identify the gut, ovary, oviduct, uterus, and vagina.
Trichinella
View a prepared slide of Trichinella in the muscle tissue of a host organism.

7.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41805
Figure 1. Trichinella spiralis encysted in muscle tissue of a host X 40
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Roundworms, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Roundworms. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 7.5: Reading- Roundworms is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418067.6: Reading- Arthropods
Three clades of arthropods are listed below.
Chelicerates
Arachnids—(Spiders, Scorpions, Harvestmen, Ticks and Mites)
Horseshoe Crabs
Myriapods
Millipedes
Centipedes
Pancrustaceans
Crustaceans
Decpods
Isopods
Krill
Copepods
Barnacle
Insects
Arthropods have an exoskeleton that cannot enlarge a s the animal grows. As a result, it must be shed from time to time to allow
growth. The exoskeleton from a tarantula (an arachnid) is on display.
Life Cycle
The young of some arthropods look like the adults. The change from young to adult that these species unde rgo is called incomplete
metamorphosis.
In many species, the egg hatches to produce a larva (pl. larvae) that does not look like the adult. At some point in the maturation
process, the larva will produce a pupa (pl. pupae). In this phase its tissues will become reorg anized into the adult form. This type of
development is called complete metamorphosis.
Observe a culture of fruit flies (Drosophila) and observe the eggs, larvae, pupae, and adults.
Chelicerates
The first pair of appendages of the members of this phylum are pincerlike or fanglike mouthparts called chelicerae. Observe these
mouthparts in the tarantula on display.
Arachnids (Spiders, Scorpions, Harvestmen, Ticks, Mites)
Figure 1. Left: Scorpion. Middle: Tick X 40. Right: M ite X 40.

7.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806Horseshoe Crabs
Figure 2. Left: Horseshoe crab dorsal surface. Right: Ho rseshoe crab ventral surface
Crustaceans—Lobsters and Relatives
Decapods
Figure 3. Crab
Crayfish Dissection
Obtain a crayfish and identify the structures shown in the photograph below. You should familiarize yours elf with the names of the
external structures shown in the photograph below.
Figure 4
The photographs below show the ventral surface of mal e and female crayfish. Click on the photographs to view them. Identify the
sex of your crayfish. Find somebody in class that has the opposite sex and view the ventral surface of the ir crayfish. Notice that

7.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806crayfish have five pairs of swimmerets. In males, the anterior two pairs are large and less flexible than those of females. They are
used to transfer sperm to the female.
Figure 5
Find the seminal receptacles located between the third and fourth walking legs. These structures function to receive sperm from the
male during mating.
Observe the sperm duct in males located at the base of the fift h walking leg.
Begin your dissection by cutting along the midline o f the carapace from the posterior edge to an area j ust behind the two eyes (see
the photographs below). Next, cut laterally just behind the eye until you reach the ventral edge. Carefull y remove the piece of
carapace that you have cut to expose the gills under neath. As you peel this piece of carapace away, it may be necessary to reach
underneath with the point of a scissors or needle to b rush away and detach any tissue from the interior of t he animal that is attached
to the carapace.
Figure 6
Your crayfish should look like the first photograph bel ow. Next, remove the carapace on the other side.
Using a needle, carefully separate the first row of gill s and notice that there is another row underneath. Re move one of the legs and
observe how the gills are attached to the walking legs.
The first two photographs below show the gills on the left side of a crayfish. The third photograph is a c rayfish with the entire
carapace removed. The first row of gills on each side has be en moved aside to expose a row underneath it.

7.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806
Figure 7.
Figure 8. Crayfish leg showing gill attachment
Brush all of the gills to the side and then carefully cut the membrane (epidermis) that covers the internal orga ns.
The heart is a small diamond-shaped structure located b elow where the posterior edge of the carapace was. It may be difficult to
see the blood vessels attached to the heart. Openings (ostia) in the side of the heart should be visible. T hese allow blood to enter the
circulatory system.
Large white digestive glands can be seen on each side of the st omach. They produce digestive enzymes.

7.6.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806
Figure 9.
Remove the digestive glands and then carefully remo ve the stomach. Notice how the stomach is attached to the mouth. Cut open
the stomach and observe the tooth-like structures at the a nterior end for grinding food. This is called the gastric mill.
The green glands are positioned ventrally near the anterior end of the body cavity. They are spherical and will appear to be
embedded within the surface. Their function is excre tion. Find the openings for the green glands on the out er surface near the base
of each antenna.
Find the brain near the anterior end and the two ventral ne rve cords attached to the brain.
Figure 10. Left: Crayfish ventral surface. Middle: Cra yfish viewed from above. The stomach has been removed revealing the nerve
cords and green glands underneath. Right: Crayfish vie wed from above looking into the head region. The sto mach has been
removed. The brain can be seen.

7.6.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806Copepods and Krill
Figure 11. Left: A copepod (Cyclops, male). Right: Kr ill (Gammarus).
Barnacles
Figure 12. Left: Balanus—a barnacle. Right: A stalked barnacle
Isopods
Figure 13
Myriopods

7.6.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806Millipedes
Figure 14
Centipedes
Figure 15. A centipede
Insects
Figure 16. Fly life history showing complete metamorpho sis
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Arthropods, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Arthropods. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

7.6.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41806This page titled 7.6: Reading- Arthropods is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Invertebrate II
8.1: Invertebrate Lab II
8.2: Invertebrate Lab II (Instructor Materials Preparation)
8.3: Reading- Flatworms
8.4: Reading- Mollusks
8.5: Reading - Annelids
8.6: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles
8.7: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles (Instruc tor Materials Preparation)*
This page titled 8: Invertebrate II is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418078.1: Invertebrate Lab II
State the phyla of the organisms discussed in the lab acti vities
Use the characteristics of symmetry, coelom, embryo tissue l ayers, and patterns of development to differentiate b etween the
different invertebrate groups
Recognize and identify the platehelminthes specimens v iewed in the lab
Describe the lifecycle of the tapeworm, Taenia pisiformes
Recognize the planeria structures eyespot, flame cell, phar ynx, scolex
Recognize and identify the mollusca specimens viewed in l ab
Identify identify foot, visceral, mantle, exoskeleton an d radula
Recognize and identify the annelidia examples viewed in th e lab
Identify setae and clitellum
Design and perform a set of experiments to evaluate whethe r female bean beetles (Callosobruchus maculatus) discriminate
between suitable species of beans.
Perform a chi square analysis and determine if the results from the bean beetle experiment are statistically signif icant by
using the degrees of freedom and the p value
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Flatworms (phylum platyhelminthes)
Procedure
Access the Flatworms Lab.
Questions
1. Observe the live planaria, if present, under the dissectin g. If there are no live specimens, review the planarian vid eo.
1. What type of symmetry does the planaria display?
2. Does the planaria exhibit cephalization?
3. Can you locate the planaria eyespots? What do the eyespo ts sense?
2. View the large planaria model. Make sure you can identi fy the pharynx, the eyespots, and the flame cells.
1. Does the planaria have a complete or incomplete digesti ve system?
2. What is the function of the flame cell?
3. Are planaria hermaphrodites?
4. Scientists say planaria have ladder like organs. Why?
Liver Flukes
View the preserved liver fluke specimens. Liver flukes are an example of a parasitic flatworm. Access this website to learn more
about the liver fluke life cycle.
Questions
1. Where does the adult liver fluke live?
2. When the liver fluke egg hatches, what organism does it in fect first?
3. Can humans become infected?
View the preserved tapeworm and the slides of the tapewo rm scolex (head) and proglottids (reproductive bodie s). This is another
example of a parasitic flatworm. Access this website to learn more about the tapeworm life cycle.Learning Objectives

8.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41807Questions
1. What structures are located on the scolex to help the t apeworm attach to the host?
2. Are tapeworms hermaphrodites?
3. Name two livestock that can be infected by tapeworms.
4. If a human is infected, where does the tapeworm live?
Mollusks
Process
Access the Mollusks Lab.
The preserved mollusca specimens will be on display, but may differ from the ones directly mentioned in the lab handout. Please
make observations on the available specimens and fill in the chart below.
Name of Specimen Physical Description Gastropod, chiton, bi -valve or cephalopod

Dissect a clam following the directions on the website. Make sure you can identify the mantle, the foot, the g ills, and the visceral
mass.
Questions
1. What is the function of the foot?
2. What is the function of the gills?
3. What does the mantle secrete for the clam?
4. What is contained within the visceral mass?
Squid Dissection
Dissect a squid following the procedure below
External Anatomy
1. Place the squid in the dissection pan with the mantle (major body part) facing away from you and the tentacles and arms
towards you.
2. Turn the squid so that the siphon faces you. It is located between the eyes. By expelling wa ter through the siphon the squid can
effectively move through the water.
3. Notice the chromatophores on the mantle. They allow the squid to change color and b lend into the environment.
4. At the pointed tip of the mantle there are two fins that help stabilize and propel the squid
5. Notice the eyes on either side-they are well developed and allow the squ id to have excellent vision
6. Distinguish between the tentacles and the arms. The tent acles are longer and are used to pass food to the arms.
7. Count the number of arms. How many are there?
8. Notice the suction cups on both the tentacles and the arms. How does the distribution of the suction cups differ between these
two structures?
9. Pull back the arms and locate the beak or mouth in the middle.
Internal Anatomy
1. Use a pair of scissors and starting at the bottom of the ma ntle above the siphon cut one long incision up to the tip of the mantle.
Be careful to lift up with the scissors while cutting to avoid cut ting the internal organs.
2. Spread the mantle open and try to indentify the followin g internal structures
1. Feathery gills
2. Heart, located at the base of each gill. Squid actually h ave three hearts!
3. Liver, probably yellowish in color and long in shape running down the middle

8.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418074. Ink sack, which looks like a small silver fish. If you fi nd it, cut it out at both ends and you can extract some of the ink and
try to write with it!
5. The pen, which is all that remains of the shell. To try a nd find the pen, lift the head of the squid and place it down over the
organs. You should notice a pointy area along the midlin e of the body, the tip of the pen. If you grasp the tip and pu ll the pen
will release from the mantle. It resembles a transparen t feather.
Annelidia
Process
Access the page “Reading: Annelidia.”
Skip the earthworm dissection indicated on the lab webs ite. Rather, view the earthworm model. Make sure you ca n identify the
setae and the clitellum.
Questions
1. What type of symmetry does the earthworm display?
2. Does the earthworm exhibit cephalization?
3. Does the earthworm exhibit segmentation?
The preserved annelida specimens will be on display, b ut may differ from the ones directly mentioned in t he lab handout. Please
make observations on the available specimens and fill in the table below.
Name of Specimen Physical Description Leech, Earthworm, or Marine Worm

Review Questions
Answer the review questions below. The phyla we viewed today wer e the platyhelminthes, mollusca, and annelida.
1. Which phyla exhibited bilateral symmetry?
2. Which phyla contained parasitic organisms?
3. Which phyla were coelomates?
4. Which phyla exhibited cephaliziation?
5. Which phyla that you viewed today contained specializ ed appendages?
6. Which phyla were aceolomates?
7. Which phyla had an incomplete digestive system?
8. Which phyla contained a shell?
9. Which phyla contained hermaphrodite organisms?
This page titled 8.1: Invertebrate Lab II is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418088.2: Invertebrate Lab II (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Flatworms (phylum platyhelminthes)
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
live planaria 1 vial can be shared by all lab sectionsset up on side bench under dissection
microscope as a demo
flatworm model 1 per bench
planaria slides 1 per bench can alternatively be set as a demo
Taneia slides 1 per bench can alternatively be set as a demo
Liver Flukes
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
live flukes 1 vial can be shared by all sectionsset up on side bench under dissection
microscope as a demo
fluke slides 1 per bench can alternatively be set as a d emo
Mollusks
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
mollusk examples (preserved) variousset up on side bench as a demo including
squid, octopus, chitin, clams, snails, etc.
Squid Dissection
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
dissection kit 1 per benchshould include scalpel, scissors, forceps,
dissection needles, dissection pins
dissection tray 1 per bench
squid 1 per bench
gloves 1 pair per student latex and non latex options i n various sizes
lab coat 1 per student
goggles 1 pair per student
dissection waste container 1 per classdissection waste should not go in regular
trash

8.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41808Clam Dissection
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
dissection kit 1 per bench
dissection tray 1 per bench
clam 1 per bench
gloves 1 pair per student latex and non latex options i n various sizes
lab coat 1 per student
goggles 1 pair per student
dissection waste container 1 per classdissection waste should not go in regular
trash
Annelidia
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
earthworm model 1 per table
preserved annelid examples variousexamples include earthworms, leeches,
polychete worms
This page titled 8.2: Invertebrate Lab II (Instructor Materials Prepara tion) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418098.3: Reading- Flatworms
This laboratory exercise covers the following animals. You should learn this classification scheme and be ab le to classify the
animals into these categories.
Phylum: Platyhelminthes (Flatworms)
Class: Turbellaria (planarians)
Class: Trematoda (Flukes)
Class: Cestoda (Tapeworms)
Characteristics
Flatworms are flattened and have bilateral symmetry.
They are triploblastic (have 3 embryonic tissue layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, a nd endoderm) and therefore have organ-level of
organization. There is no body cavity, so they are acoelom ate.
Flatworms have a gastrovascularcavity with one opening (a sac-like gut).
Free-living Species
Example: Dugesia —a freshwater planarian
Planarians have a branching sac-like gut (one opening).
The main function of the excretory system is for wate r regulation. It consists of two structures called protonephridia. Each
protonephridium contains flame cells that move excess water into tubes that open to the outsi de.
Planarians have a head region with sense organs. The n ervous system of Dugesia is somewhat more complex than the nerve net of
Cnidarians. It consists of a brain and nerve cords arrang ed in a ladder-like configuration.
Planarians have ocelli (eyespots) allow the presence and intensity of ligh t to be determined. These structures are covered bu t have
an opening to one side and forward. They can tell th e direction of light because shadows fall on some of the receptor cells while
others are illuminated. They move away from light.
Planarians are hermaphroditic, that is, they contain both male and female sex organ s. They can reproduce asexually simply by
pinching in half; each half grows a new half.
Movement is accomplished by the use of cilia and also by m uscular contractions.
Trematodes
Members of this group are primarily parasites (feed on a ho st species).
Parasitic forms lack cephalization.
The reproductive cycle typically involves two host sp ecies, a primary host and a secondary (or intermediate) host. Adults live in
the primary host and larvae develop in the secondary host. The life cycle often alternates between sexual and asex ual reproduction.
Liver flukes are found in vertebrate livers.
Nearly half of people in the tropics have blood fluk es. Schistosomiasis is a blood fluke that afflicts 200 million people in the
world. The secondary host is a snail.

8.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41809
Planarians
1. Place a living planarian on a watch glass and observe its movements under a dissecting microscope. Look for the eye spots,
auricles, gastrovascular cavity, and pharynx.
2. Planarians cannot see images but they can tell the direc tion of light with their eyespots. Cover 1/2 of the watch g lass with
aluminum foil. Does the planarian favor the light area o r the dark area?
3. View a slide of a preserved planarian and note the eye spots, auricles, gastrovascular cavity, and pharynx.
Figure 1. Left: Planarian anterior end X 40. Middle: Planarian digestive tract mid section X 40. Right: Pla narian c.s. X 40.
Liver Flukes
Observe either a preserved liver fluke or a slide of a liver fluke using a dissecting microscope.
Figure 2. Left: Sheep liver fluke (Fasciola hepatica) st ained. Right: Liver fluke (preserved)
Tapeworms
1. View a preserved tapeworm (Taenia).
2. View slides of Taenia. Locate the scolex. View a gravid (filled with eggs) proglottid.
Tapeworms live in the intestines of vertebrates.
They may reach 10 m in length (>30 feet). They have no digestive or nervous tissue. Attachment to the intes tinal wall is by a
scolex, a structure that contains hooks and suckers.

8.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41809
Figure 3. Taenia scolex X 40
Figure 4. Taenia (preserved)
The segments (proglottids) each contain male and female reproductive organs. Eggs are fertilized from sperm, which often come
from other proglottids of the same individual. After fertilization, other organs within the proglottid dis integrate and the proglottid
becomes filled with eggs.
The intermediate hosts are usually pigs or cattle. They can become infected by drinking water contaminated with human feces.
Tapeworms can be passed to humans in undercooked meat, espe cially pork.
The photographs below show the scolex and proglottids a t increasing distances from the scolex. Those segment s closest to the
scolex (on the left) are the smallest. Those furthest away (on the right) become filled with zygotes, brea k away, and pass out with
the feces.

8.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41809
Figure 5. Left: Taenia pisiformis anterior end. Middle: Taenia pisiformis mid region. Right: Taenia pisiformis posterior end
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Flatworms, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Flatworms. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 8.3: Reading- Flatworms is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418108.4: Reading- Mollusks
This laboratory exercise covers the following animals. You should learn this classification scheme and be ab le to classify the
animals into these categories.
Phylum: Mollusca (Mollusks)
Class: Polyplacophora (Chitons)
Class: Gastropoda (snails)
Class: Bivalvia (Clams)
Class: Cephalopoda (Nautilus, Squid, Octopus)
All mollusks have a visceral mass, a mantle, and a foot. The visceral mass contains the digestive, excretory, and reproductive
organs. The mantle is a covering. It may secrete a shel l. The foot is muscular and is used for locomotion, a ttachment, and/or food
capture.
The mantle and foot can be seen in the figure 1. The visceral mass is underneath the gill.
Figure 1.
There may be a radula, a structure that resembles a tongue but contains hard plates and is often used for scraping food. The coelom
is reduced and limited to the region near the heart.
Most mollusks have an open circulatory system but cephalopods (squids, octopus) have a closed circulatory system. The blood
pigment of mollusks is hemocyanin, not hemoglobin. Th e heart of a clam can be seen in the photograph bel ow. Bivalves have three
pairs of ganglia but do not have a brain.
Most mollusks have separate sexes but most snails (gastro pods) are hermaphrodites. Some marine mollusks have a ci liated larval
form called a trochophore.
Chitons (Class: Polyplacophora)
Chitons have a dorsal shell composed of 8 plates. A v entral foot is used for locomotion and for attachmen t to rocks. It pulls itself
close to rocks for protection. Observe the chiton on displ ay.

8.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41810
Figure 2. Left: chiton, dorsal surface. Right: ventral surface
Snails—Class Gastropoda
Gastropods have an elongated, flattened foot and usually a he ad and shell although nudibranchs (sea slugs) and terrestria l slugs lack
a shell.
Most are marine but there are also numerous freshwater and terrestrial species. Herbivorous gastropods use a rad ula to scrape food
from surfaces. Carnivores may use a radula to bore a hole through surfaces such as bivalve (clam) shell s. Some gastropods such as
the slug (below) do not have a shell.
The larvae undergo torsion during development. It is a twisting that positions th e visceral mass so that the anus is above the head.
It is due to one side of the visceral mass growing fa ster than the other. The advantage (or function) of torsion is uncertain but it may
be to balance the animal or it may be to allow the head to be withdrawn into the shell first when predators approach.
Observe the snails and slugs on display.
Figure 3. A slug. Slugs do not have shells.
Gas Exchange (Respiration)
Some gastropod species are terrestrial and have lungs for g as exchange, others are aquatic and use gills.
The space near the entrance to the shell that is bo und by the mantle is the mantle cavity. Aquatic gastropods have gills located in
the mantle cavity. The mantle of terrestrial gastropo ds functions as a lung.
Bivalves—Clams and relatives (Class: Bivalvia)
Bivalves have two shells (valves) held closed by powe rful muscles. The shell is produced by the underlying mantle; it grows along
the outer margins. They use their foot for burrowing. Mu ssels use their foot for the production of threads for atta chment.

8.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41810The gills are large because they are used for filter -feeding as well as respiration. Food is trapped by muc us on the gills and moved
by cilia. Water enters and exits through siphons.
Obtain a preserved clam for dissection and place it on a dissecting tray. Remove one of the valves (shells) by inserting a scalpel and
cutting the adductor muscles on each side of the hinge. See the diagram below for the location of the adductor muscles.
Figure 4. Adductor muscles of a clam.
Figure 5. The anterior and posterior adductor muscles b eing cut so that the valves can be pulled apart.
The mantle is a membrane that surrounds the internal structure s and is characteristic of all mollusks. The portion o f the mantle
from the exposed surface may have remained attached to the valve that was removed or it may be covering the internal structures.
Find the mantle and if necessary, remove it to expose the int ernal structures of the clam.
Identify the foot, visceral mass, gills, and labial palps. The gills are large because they are used for fi lter-feeding as well as
respiration. Food is trapped by mucus on the gills and moved by cilia to the mouth. Cilia on the labial p alps also direct food and
mucus to the mouth.

8.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41810
Figure 6.
The heart can be found in the area dorsal to and sl ightly posterior to the visceral mass. The coelom of bivalves is reduced and
limited to the area surrounding the heart. Because the coelom is reduced, it is difficult to see the dig estive organs. Cut through the
visceral mass and identify the intestine.
Figure 7.
In the photograph below, the foot and visceral mass ha ve been lifted so that the mouth can be seen. Notice the labial palps on either
side of the mouth.
Figure 8.

8.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41810Squid, Octopus, Nautilus, and Relatives (Class: Cephalopoda)
Cephalopods are predators and live in a marine envi ronment. A closed circulatory system allows them to m ove rapidly in pursuit of
prey. They move by jet propulsion; water in the mantl e cavity is squirted rapidly through a siphon. The f oot has evolved into
tentacles around head. Cephalopods have a powerful be ak-like structure to tear apart prey. The sense org ans of cephalopods are
well developed.
Mollusks are the simplest animals with eyes. Some mollusks have lenses and therefore are capable of forming clear images. The
camera-type eyes of some cephalopods (squid, octopus) are capable of focusing and forming clear images. Cephalopods are fastmoving predators and well-developed camera-type eyes hel p them catch prey.
Well-developed brains (especially in octopuses) giv e them a high learning capacity. Cephalopods can hid e from enemies by
releasing a dark colored fluid from ink sacs.
Shells
The shell of a nautilus encloses the animal. A squid ’s shell is small and internal. Octopuses do not have s hells. Examine
representative cephalopods on display.
Figure 9. A Squid
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Mollusks, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Mollusks. Project: The Biology Web. License:
CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 8.4: Reading- Mollusks is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418118.5: Reading - Annelids
This laboratory exercise covers the following animals. You should learn this classification scheme and be ab le to classify the
animals into these categories.
Phylum: Annelida (Annelids)
Class: Oligochaeta (Earthworms, Leeches)
Class: Polychaeta (Marine Annelids)
Oligochaeta (Earthworms, Leeches)
Earthworms
Segmentation
Segmented animals have repeating units. This has led to specialization of parts over evolutionary time b ecause the different
segments could become specialized for different pur poses. Notice the variety of specialized structures near the anterior end of the
clam worm in the photograph below.
Molecular data suggests that segmentation evolved inde pendently in the annelids, the arthropods, and the ch ordates because
ancestors to each of these three groups were not segmen ted.
Segmented Worms (Phylum Annelida)
Annelids are bilateral, coelomate protostomes. The coelom is partitioned by septa (crosswalls).
The fluid-filled coelom acts as a hydrostatic skeleton. When the circular muscles that surround each segment contract, the
segment becomes thinner and longer. When the longitudinal muscles that extend from one end of the segment to the oth er
contract, the segment becomes shorter but thicker.
Because muscles can only contract and cannot length en, other muscles are used to lengthen them. In annel ids, when circular
muscles contract to lengthen the segment, the longit udinal muscles are lengthened. When the longitudinal muscles contract to make
the segment shorter and thicker, the circular muscles beco me lengthened.
Setae are bristles on the skin that anchor or help move th e animal. Movement occurs when waves of contraction of longitudinal
muscles cause a “bulge” to progress from the anteri or end to the posterior end.
Annelids exhibit specialization of the digestive tract. Some of these structures are the pharynx, crop, gizzard, intestine, and
accessory glands. Annelids have a closed circulatory system.
A pair of cerebral ganglia function as a simple brai n. A ventral nerve cord extends the length of the an imal and connects to a pair of
fused ganglia (mass of nervous tissue) in each segme nt. The ganglia within each segment function to coord inate muscle
contractions.
Examine the exterior of an earthworm and find the ve ntral surface. Place the worm in a dissecting pan with t he ventral surface
down. Identify the clitellum. This structure produces mucous needed for reproduction. Find rows of setae alon g either side of the
ventral surface. These help provide traction as the an imal moves through the soil.
Find the dorsal blood vessel. This structure should be v isible through the body wall and will appear slightly d arker than the rest of
the body. It extends the length of the animal. With a scalpel, make a shallow cut along the dorsal surface beginning at a point
approximately half way between the clitellum (see phot ograph below) and the posterior end and ending at th e anterior end. Try to

8.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41811avoid cutting the dorsal blood vessel by keeping you r cut to one side of the vessel. Try to cut only the body wall but not the internal
structures.
Figure 1.
The septa between each segment will prevent you from spreading the walls open to view the interior structu res. Use a needle or
scalpel to carefully cut the septa while spreading the b ody open. Pins can be used to hold the body open.
Find the structures shown in the photographs below. Be sure that y ou understand the function of each of these structures.
Figure 2. The anterior end of this earthworm is on the right.
Figure 3. Left: The anterior end of the worm. Middle: The brain. Right: The mid-section
Use a needle to cut the septa in the region of the intes tine and roll it aside to expose the nerve cord underneat h.
Examine a labeled earthworm composite. This slide shows t hree different cross sections. The cross-section on th e right side of the
slide is from the intestinal region.
Identify the intestine, typhlosole, coelom, nephridi um, longitudinal muscles, circular muscles, and dorsa l blood vessel. Are any
setae present in the cross section?
Leeches
Most leeches are freshwater predators or parasites. Parasite s have oral and posterior suckers used to attach to the host.
Bloodsucking leeches produce hirudin, a powerful antico agulant, in their saliva.
When surgeons reattach severed human fingers, they occasionally use laboratory-raised leeches during the patient’s recovery. The
leeches remove blood from the tissues around the reat tachment sites, release anesthetics and anticoagulants, an d thereby relieve
pressure and decrease pain. Removal of fluids from the area by the leech enables fresh fluids to move into the ar ea.

8.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41811
Figure 4. Leech
Marine Annelids (class: Polychaeta)
The largest class of annelids is polychaeta. Polychaet es have parapodia, fleshy, paddlelike lobes on each segment. Parapodia
function in locomotion and gas exchange. Setae are loca ted on the parapodia.
Feeding
Many Polychaetes are predators. Tubeworms are sessile filter feeders that live in tubes constru cted from sediment from the ocean
floor. Cilia on their tentacles create water currents tha t enable them to filter food from the water.
Figure 5. Left: Clam worm (Nereis). Right: Clam worm (Nereis) anterior end
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Annelids (Biology 2). Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Annelids. Project: The Biology Web. License:
CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 8.5: Reading - Annelids is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418128.6: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles
Adapted from C. Beck and L. Blumer by Staci Forgey, TCC Biology Fa culty
Objective
Design and perform a set of experiments to evaluate whether female bean beetles (Callosobruchus maculatus) discriminate
between suitable species of beans.
Introduction
Bean beetles, Callosobruchus maculatus, are herbivorous pest insects that are found in Afri ca and Asia. Females lay their eggs on
the surface of beans. Eggs are layed singly, and hat ch into larvae (maggots) several days later. The lar va then burrows into the bean
and will form a pupa 21–30 days after the egg was dep osited. They mature 24–36 hours after emergence from the pupa and do not
need to feed.
Adults typically live for 1–2 weeks. Mating and oviposi tion occur during this time period. Females will choo se the best substrate
(bean) to lay their offspring on, since the larvae ca nnot move. By choosing a substrate for oviposition, the female chooses the food
resource available to her offspring (Brown and Downhowe r 1988). This is a critical choice for the female, a s it influences the
growth, survival and future reproductive success of he r offspring (Mitchell, 1975, Wasserman and Futuyma, 19 81). Females can lay
eggs on a wide range of bean species, but very few bean species will result in normal development and the succ essful emergence of
adults. Some species of beans are toxic to larvae (Janze n 1977).
Materials
In class, you will be provided with live cultures of bean beetles containing adults that have been raise d on mung beans (Vigna
radiata).
Female beetles are easily identified in the live cultu res because they have two dark stripes on the posterio r of the abdomen, whereas
the posterior abdomen of males is uniformly light in c olor.
You will also have access to petri dishes and several types of beans.
Experimental Design
Since the oviposition choices of females influences th e survival and future success of their offspring, fema les may be very sensitive
to the species and condition of the beans on which they are depositing eggs.
Each group should design a set of experiments to add ress whether female bean beetles discriminate between suitable species of
beans. We will re-visit the experiment next week and collec t our data set. We will choose one experiment to perform a s a class.
As a group, list several ways we might examine female bea n choice for oviposition. We will pick one experiment from the class to
perform. Write your ideas below.
**Stop here. We will go over ideas for our experiment as a class and c hoose one to perform**
Outline the agreed on experiment using the criteria below.
1. Formulate a hypothesis for this week’s experiment. Be spe cific!
2. We will re-visit the experiment in a week to collect d ata on the number of eggs laid. Formulate a hypothesis for this experiment.
3. Identify the independent variable(s).
4. Identify the dependent variable(s).
5. What variables will you keep standard?
6. What is your control?
7. Design data collection tables for both of your experim ents on a separate sheet of paper.
For this data, it is most useful to perform a Chi Squar e analysis. Chi Square statistical test evaluate wheth er this is a significant
difference between groups of data. The null hypothes is (H) is the hypothesis that states that there is n o difference between the
groups of data. The alternative hypothesis, (H) is the hypothesis you outlined above.
1 R t t H h th i0
a

8.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418121. Restate your H hypothesis.2. H hypothesis.
3. If the null hypothesis is correct, what would we expect to se e?
4. If our alternative hypothesis is correct, what would we e xpect to see?
To do this statistical test, we need to calculate obse rved and expected values for the bean species and fo r our control. Our expected
values are based on our null hypothesis (that there is n o difference).
For example, if we had 40 eggs and four different treatme nt groups, we would expect there to be 10 eggs on each gro up.
Treatment Observed number of eggs Expected number of e ggs
Mung beans 5 10
Pinto beans 25 10
Chick peas 10 10
Control 0 10
Fill in the data table below with our observed (what we actually found) and expe cted values.
Treatment Observed number of eggs Expected number of e ggs

To calculate the chi-square value, or χ, we simply add the square differences, divided by the expected, o f all the observed and
expected. In mathematical terms:
So for our example from the previous sample table, the first
\displaystyle\frac{(O-E)^2}{E} would be
\displaystyle\frac{(5-10)^2}{10}=2.5
We would then add to this value all of the other
\displaystyle\frac{(O-E)^2}{E} in the table and then add to get the
\displaystyle\chi^2 value.
TreatmentObserved number of
eggsExpected number of
eggsObserved-Expected(ObservedExpected)(ObservedExpected) /Expected

Compute the χ value for your data by adding all of the (Observed-Expected)2/Expected values.
In order to find something to compare this number wit h, we need to calculate the degrees of freedom, or th e number of different
comparisons that can be made within the table. The de grees of freedom are the number of columns (M) minus one times the
number of rows (N) minus one.0a
2 2

8.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41812Degrees of freedom = (M − 1)(N − 1)
A B
C D
How many ways can this two by two table be broken into individu al comparisons? Hint: Use the formula above.
Calculate the degrees of freedom in your experiment.
Now we can compare against the Chi distribution for the likelihood that our data is generated by chance. R emember, we are
looking at the column labeled 0.05 for our p value. This means that at this level, we are 95% sure our results are real. The Chi
distribution table gives us a critical value to compare our t est value to.
If test > critical value @ p level, reject null hypothesis
If test < critical value @ alpha level, fail to reject null hypothesis
Compare to the Chi-distribution table. Did your results come about by chance?

8.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41812DF/P 0.995.990 0.975.950.900.750.500.250.100.050.025.010.005
10.0000
4.00016 0.001 0.004 0.016 0.102 0.455 1.323 2.706 3.841 5.024 6.635 7.879
2 0.010 0.020 0.0506 0.103 0.211 0.575 1.386 2.773 4.605 5.99 1 7.378 9.210 10.597
3 0.072 0.115 0.216 0.351 0.584 1.213 2.366 4.108 6.251 7.815 9.348 11.345 12.838
4 0.207 0.297 0.484 0.711 1.064 1.923 3.357 5.385 7.779 9.488 1 1.143 13.277 14.860
5 0.412 0.554 0.831 1.145 1.610 2.675 4.351 6.626 9.236 11.07 0 12.833 15.086 16.750
6 0.676 0.872 1.237 1.635 2.204 3.455 5.348 7.841 10.645 12.5 92 14.449 16.812 18.548
7 0.989 1.239 1.690 2.167 2.833 4.255 6.346 9.037 12.017 14.06 7 16.013 18.475 20.278
8 1.344 1.647 2.180 2.733 3.490 5.071 7.344 10.219 13.362 15. 507 17.535 20.090 21.955
9 1.735 2.088 2.700 3.325 4.168 5.899 8.343 11.389 14.684 16. 919 19.023 21.666 23.589
10 2.156 2.558 3.247 3.940 4.865 6.737 9.342 12.549 15.987 18.3 07 20.483 23.209 25.188
11 2.603 3.053 3.816 4.575 5.578 7.584 10.341 13.701 17.275 19. 675 21.920 24.725 26.757
12 3.074 3.571 4.404 5.226 6.304 8.438 11.340 14.845 18.549 2 1.026 23.337 26.217 28.300
13 3.565 4.107 5.009 5.892 7.042 9.299 12.340 15.984 19.812 22. 362 24.736 27.688 29.819
14 4.075 4.660 5.629 6.571 7.790 10.165 13.339 14.114 21.064 23.685 26.119 29.141 31.319
15 4.601 5.229 6.262 7.261 8.547 11.037 14.339 18.245 22.307 24.996 27.488 30.578 32.801
16 5.142 5.812 6.908 7.962 9.312 11.912 15.339 19.369 23.542 26.296 28.845 32.000 34.267
17 5.697 6.408 7.564 8.672 10.085 12.792 16.338 20.489 24.769 2 7.587 30.191 33.409 35.718
18 6.265 7.015 8.231 9.390 10.865 13.675 17.338 21.605 25.98 9 28.869 31.526 34.805 37.156
19 6.844 7.633 8.907 10.117 11.657 14.562 18.338 22.18 27.20 4 30.144 32.852 36.191 38.582
20 7.434 8.260 9.591 10.851 12.443 15.452 19.337 23.848 28.412 31.410 34.170 37.566 39.997
21 8.034 8.897 10.283 11.591 13.240 16.344 20.337 24.935 29.61 5 32.671 35.479 38.932 41.401
22 8.643 9.542 10.982 12.338 14.041 17.240 21.337 26.039 30. 813 33.924 36.781 40.289 42.796
23 9.260 10.196 11.689 13.091 14.848 18.137 22.337 27.141 32.007 35.172 38.076 41.638 44.181
24 9.886 10.856 12.401 13.848 15.659 19.037 23.337 28.241 33.1 96 36.415 39.364 42.980 45.559
25 10.520 11.524 13.120 14.611 16.473 19.939 24.337 29.339 3 4.382 37.652 40.646 44.314 46.928
26 11.160 12.198 13.844 15.379 17.292 20.843 25.336 30.435 3 5.563 38.885 41.923 45.642 48.290
27 11.808 12.879 14.573 16.151 18.114 21.749 26.336 31.528 36. 741 40.113 43.195 46.963 49.645
28 12.461 13.565 15.308 16.928 18.939 22.657 27.336 32.620 37. 916 41.337 44.461 48.278 50.993
29 13.121 14.256 16.047 17.708 19.768 23.567 28.336 33.711 3 9.087 42.557 45.722 49.588 52.336
30 13.787 14.953 16.791 18.493 20.599 24.478 29.336 34.800 40. 256 43.773 46.979 50.892 53.672
We will now use this data and information to do a lab write up.

8.6.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41812Lab Report Template
The report should be typed and single spaced. See grading rubric for clarity on formatting.
Title Page
Should include Title (a brief, concise, yet descriptive tit le), your name, lab instructor’s name, and lab section.
Note: this is a separate sheet
Body of Report
Identify the different sections of the body of the report with headings.
The report should begin with a brief paragraph (compl ete sentences) that includes a statement of the probl em and your hypothesis.
This should be under the heading of Introduction.
Statement of the problem:
What question are you trying to answer?
Include any preliminary observations or background info rmation about the subject (in this case the bean beetles) such as
reproductive cycle, life span etc. Be sure to cite any sources.
Hypothesis:
Write a possible explanation/prediction for the problem/ question you are asking.
Make sure this possible explanation/prediction is a co mplete sentence and not a question.
Make sure the statement is testable. In other words, can you perform an experiment that will either support or refute y our
prediction. If you cannot not think of a way to test your prediction, then it is not testable.
Next heading should be Materials:
Make a list (this does not need to be in paragraph form) of ALL items used in the experiment and their quantities. Of the
materials used, identify which are dependent and independent variables, constants (standardized v ariable) and control
group (you will lose points if you do not identify ALL dependent and independent variables, constants and controls).
Next heading should be Procedure:
Write a paragraph (complete sentences) which explains what y ou did in the experiment.
Your procedure should be written so that anyone else could repeat the experiment. For instance, what beetle did you u se? How
was your petri dish set up? What beans did you use? That mean s that even some of the most obvious steps need to be stated
so there is no ambiguity.
When designing the procedure, be sure to include replicating the experime nt to ensure data is reproducible and valid.
Next heading should be Results:
Write a paragraph (complete sentences) describing the r esults and observations of your experiment. Here you wil l compare
results for controls and variables and not simply list the numbers.
This section also includes data tables, graphs or charts to illustrate the results of you experiment. Be sure to include calculated
averages of t.
All tables, graphs and charts should be labeled appropria tely (a title, labels for x & y axis, legend etc.) so the reader will be able
to understand.
Next heading should be Conclusions:
Write a paragraph restating your hypothesis and whether yo u accept or reject your hypothesis
In this paragraph, explain why you accepted or rejected your hypothesis using data from the experiment. Include a brief
summary of the data—averages, highest, lowest, etc., to help t he reader understand your results and why you have come to
particular conclusions.
Discuss your thoughts about the possible reasons for your results (for example, if you chose salt water as a variable, gi ve a
possible reason why salt water, in particular, may have gener ated your results).

8.6.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41812Discuss possible errors that could have occurred in the coll ection of the data (experimental errors) and describe how these errors
may have impacted the data.
External Helps
These websites have helpful hints related to scientific wr iting that will help you with your lab report:
The Writing Center: Scientific Reports
Writing a Biology Lab Report
How to write citations:
APA Citation Style
The following rubric will be used to grade these reports:
Excellent
5 pointsSatisfactory
2.5 pointsUnsatisfactory
0 points
Title PageContains title, student name,
instructor name and sectionMissing either instructor name
or sectionNo title page
Formatting: typed, spacing Typed and single spaced Typed, but not single spaced Not typed
Grammar and SpellingNo errors; contains complete
sentences and no misspellingsA few minor errors in grammar
and spellingSeveral major errors in
grammar and spelling
Formatting: headingsEach section has a heading as
described in templateSome sections lack headings No headings
HypothesisPredictions are clearly stated
and written as a testable
statementPredictions/expected outcomes
are not clearly statedNot written as a testable
statement
MaterialsAll equipment and materials
described; identify variables,
controls and constantsMaterials incompletely
describedNo identification of variables,
controls and constants
Procedure Clear step-by step descriptionDescription missing details
making it difficult for another
scientist to repeat experimentDescription missing so much
detail it would be impossible to
repeat
ResultsClearly written description of
results comparing controls and
variablesResults are presented but no
comparison between controls
and variables are madeNo written description of results
Data tables, graphs or chartsEasy to interpret, clear labels,
all data, including calculated
averages, includedDisorganized (not easy to
understand, missing labels) but
all data includedDisorganized and or data clearly
missing
ConclusionClearly explains acceptance or
rejection of hypothesis using
data to support conclusion;
identifies sources of errorAccepts or rejects hypothesis
but does not use data to explain
why; or does not identify
sources of errorDoes not explain conclusion
and does not identify sources of
error
Total ______out of 50 points
Literature Cited
Brown, L. and J.F. Downhower. 1988. Analyses in Behavioral E cology: A Manual for Lab and Field. Sinauer Associates, 194
pages.

8.6.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41812Janzen, D.H. 1977. How southern cowpea weevil larvae (Bruc hidae Callosobruchus maculatus) die on non-host seeds. Ecology
58:921–927.
Mitchell, R. 1975. The evolution of oviposition tactics in the bean weevil, Callosobruchus maculatus F. Ecology 56:696–702.
Wasserman, S.S. and D.J. Futuyma. 1981. Evolution of host plant utilization in laboratory populations of the southern cowpea
weevil, Callosobruchus maculatus Fabricius (Coleoptera: Bruchidae). Evolution 35:605–617.
This page titled 8.6: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418138.7: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Bean Beetles
Side bench: containers of assorted beans: garbanzo bea n, black beans, mung beans, baby lima beans, split gree n peas, black eyed
peas
To share between students: cultures of bean beetles, m ale and female adults. Bean beetles can be purchase d from Carolina
Biological. Information for care of bean beetles to mainta in your own culture can be found here: http://beanbeetles.org/handbook/
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
large Petri dish (experimental chamber) 1 per table
soft forceps 1-2 per table
small paint brush 1-2 per table
hand held lens 1-2 per table
This page titled 8.7: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles (Instru ctor Materials Preparation)* is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Deuterostomes
9.1: Deuterostome Lab
9.2: Deuterostome Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
9.3: Reading- Echinoderms
9.4: Reading- Chordates
This page titled 9: Deuterostomes is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418149.1: Deuterostome Lab
State the phyla of the organisms discussed in the lab acti vities
Use the characteristics of symmetry, coelom, embryo tissue l ayers, and patterns of development to differentiate b etween the
different organisms
Describe the general characteristics of echinoderms
Identify and locate external and internal structures of a starfish
State the common characteristics of all chordates
Be able to identify the chordate characteristics on a m odel or picture
Identify and locate external and internal structures of a frog
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Echinoderms
Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Echinoderms.”
Questions
1. Skip viewing the slide of the different developmental pha ses of the sea stars
2. Dissect the starfish following the directions on the we bsite. Remember the oral end (with mouth) is actually on the underside of
the starfish.
1. On the oral side make sure you find the mouth.
2. Also on the oral side in the center region of each leg l ook for the tube feet. Tube feet are used for locomotion powered by
the water vascular system. How many rows of tube feet does you r starfish have?
3. Try to differentiate between the spines and the skin gills. The spines are longer are used for protection. The ski n gills are
smaller and used for gas exchange.
4. Find the sieve plate/madreporite on the aboral side. This is the water entrance point for the water vascular system used for
movement.
5. The starfish has plates located underneath the skin for protection and support. What material comprises thes e plates?
6. The starfish has a two part stomach, the upper pyloric stomach and the lower cardiac stomach. Can you differentiate
between the two stomachs on your specimen?
7. In the starfish arms you should find both digestive glands and gonads. The digestive glands are brown and typically on top
of the off white gonads. Make sure you can identify both st ructures.
3. The preserved echinoderm specimens will be on display, b ut may differ from the ones directly mentioned in the lab ha ndout.
Please make observations on the available specimens and fil l in the chart below.
Name of Specimen Physical Description

Chordates Learning Objectives

9.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41814Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Chordates.”
Questions
1. There are two groups of invertebrate chordates, the cep halochordates and the urochordates. We don’t have any uro chordate
examples in the lab.
1. View the lancelet slide. The lancelet is an example of a cep halochordate. It contains all four chordate characterist ics. List the
four chordate characteristics below.
2. View the lancelet model. Make sure you can identify all fou r chordate characteristics on the model.
Dissection
Our vertebrate chordate example of today’s lab is the frog. Dissect a frog following the procedure below.
1. External anatomy
1. Place the frog in the dissection pan legs down.
2. Identify the eyes, covered by a nicitating membrane, the external nares (nostrils), and the tympanum located behind each
eye.
1. What is the function of the tympanum?
3. Examine the front and back limbs. How many phalanges a re on the hindfeet? The forefeet? Which pair of limbs i s the
longest? How does this assist the frog in its movement?
2. Mouth
1. Turn the frog over and open the mouth as wide as you ca n. You can cut the hinges of the jaw if necessary. Identif y the
following structures:
1. Two vomerine teeth located in the middle of the roof of the mouth
2. Maxillary teeth (smaller) located on the sides of the upper jaw
3. Tongue
4. Pharynx (located behind the tongue)
5. Esophagus, the opening leading to the stomach
6. Glottis, slit where air passes through to enter the trachea, which leads to the lungs
7. Eustacian tubes (2) openings that lead to the ears. They are located in the a ngle of the jaw.
3. Body Dissection
1. Place the frog belly side up in the dissecting tray. You c an pin down the limbs if necessary.
2. Lift up the skin with forceps midway between the hind legs of the frog. Use scissors to cut the skin along the midl ine of the
frog starting between the hind legs and ending at the neck. Be careful not too cut too deeply.
3. Cut the skin horizontally above the hind legs and be low the front legs creating skin flaps.
4. Pick up a skin flap with forceps and use a scalpel to separate t he skin from the muscle below.
5. Pin the skin flaps to the dissection tray.
6. Repeat the same procedure to cut through the muscles. Cr eate one long incision along the midline of the frog fr om between
the hind legs to the neck. Be careful not to cut too deep ly and damage the internal organs. When you reach the ar ea just
below the front legs of the frog, turn your scissors sideways to cut through the chest bones and avoid damaging the heart and
lungs. Then make horizontal incisions above the rear l egs and between the front legs. Use forceps and a scalpel to separate
the muscle from the tissue below. Then pin the muscle to the d issection tray.
4. Internal Organs
1. The most prominent organ is the liver, dark brown in color, and taking up most of the abdominal c avity
2. Identify the lungs, two small pouches on opposite sides of the frog midline. They may be partially hidden by the liver.
3. Lift up the liver and underneath locate the gallbladder.
4. Identify the heart covered by the protective pericardium. Frogs have a three chambered heart with two atria and one
ventricle. Try to locate these different areas of the fr og heart.

9.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418141. How is it a disadvantage to have a 3 chambered heart?
5. The stomach is a j-shaped organ located underneath the left lobe of th e liver. It connects to the esophagus bringing food
from the mouth and the small intestine used for nutrient absorption.
6. The small intestine connect to the large intestine which carry any undigested material to the cloaca. Frogs have one
opening to the outside environment and the cloaca recei ves materials from the intestine, the urinary system and the
reproductive system.
7. Find the pancreas, a yellow ribbon located between the stomach and the small intestine.
8. Locate the spleen, shaped similarly to a pea and located near the stomach.
9. You will be able to see the yellow, finger like, fat bodies, which the frog uses to store fat.
10. The kidneys of the frog are long and narrow and located along the back body wall.
11. Try to find the mesonephric ducts, thin white tubes that carry urine from the kidney to the cloaca.
12. If your frog is female, the abdominal cavity will b e filled with black and white eggs. The eggs are stored in the ovaries.
13. If you have a male frog, locate the testes. The testes are shaped like a bean and located at the to p of the kidneys. They are
yellow/tan in color.
1. Do you have a male or female frog?
Review Questions
Answer the review questions below. The phyla we viewed today wer e the echinodermata and the chordata.
1. Which phyla observed today were deuterostomes?
2. Which phyla exhibited cephalization?
3. Which phyla were coelomates?
4. What does the name “echinodermata” mean?
5. What type of symmetry does the echinoderm larva display?
6. Give an example of an echinoderm example other than a s tarfish.
7. What unique system does the starfish use for movement?
8. Give an example of a chordate that is not a vertebrate.
9. State the four common characteristics shared by all ch ordates.
10. Name the two types of teeth found in frogs.
11. Frogs have small lungs that are inefficient. What other structure do frogs use for gas exchange?
12. Frogs have one opening to the outside environment, th e cloaca. What three areas transfer material outside thr ough the cloaca?
This page titled 9.1: Deuterostome Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418159.2: Deuterostome Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Echinoderms
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
starfish model 1 per table
example echinoderm organisms
(preserved)variousthese are put on the side bench and can
include sea stars, sea fans, sea urchins, sea
cucumbers
Chordates
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
lancelet slides 1 per table can also be set out on side b ench as a demo
lancelet model 1 per table
frog model 1 per table
Dissection
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
dissection kit 1 per tableshould include scalpel, scissors, forceps,
dissection needles, dissection pins
dissection tray 1 per table
waste disposal container 1 per classdissected organisms should not go in
regular trash
gloves 1 pair per studentlatex and nonlatex (for allergies) in various
sizes
lab coat 1 per student
goggles 1 pair per student
preserved starfish 1 per table
preserved frog 1 per table
This page titled 9.2: Deuterostome Lab (Instructor Materials Preparatio n) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418169.3: Reading- Echinoderms
Phylum: Echinodermata
Reading
Echinoderms are coelomate, and deuterostomes. Echinod erms include sea stars (starfishes), sea urchins, san d dollars, sea
cucumbers, and sea lilies. There are 6,000 species of e chinoderms; they are all marine. Although echinoderm adults have radial
symmetry, they evolved from ancestors that were bilat erally symmetrical. They have free-swimming, bilater al larvae that
metamorphose (change as they mature) into adults with radia l symmetry.
Figure: Restorations of early Deuterostomes and their m odern counterparts. (CC BY-SA 4.0; Nobu Tamura via Wikipedia)
The adult body usually has five-part organization. Th ey possess an internal skeleton (endoskeleton) composed of calcium
carbonate plates just beneath the surface of the ski n. The plates often bear spines that protrude throug h the skin. Echinoderms have
numerous tube feet underneath each arm. The tube feet are connected to a system of pipes referred to as the water vascular
system. Water enters the system by a sieve plate on the aboral surface. Each tube foot has a fleshy bulb or ampulla attached so
that the entire structure looks like an medicine dro pper or pipette. When muscles surrounding the ampulla contract, fluid inside the
bulb moves down into the tube foot, extending it.
Large digestive glands produce enzymes necessary for di gestion. Sexes are separate and gametes are shed into the water. The
gonads are large due to the necessity of releasing large numbers of gametes into the marine environment. Coelomic fluid circulates
substances and carries amoeboid cells that clean up par ticulate wastes. Gas exchange is done with numerous tiny gills that extend
from the surface of the skin.
The nervous system consists of a central nerve ring with nerv e branches extending into the arms. They do not have a brain.
Identify the blastopore. What structure in the adult does this give rise to? Notice that the embryo shows b ilateral symmetry yet the
adult is radial. The ancestral echinoderms were bilateral and bilateral symmetry is maintained in the larval stage.

9.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41816
Figure: Development (various stages)
Sea Star (Class Asteroidea)
Sea stars and their relatives are composed of a cent ral disk, usually with five or a multiple of five arms (rays) extending outward.
They feed on bivalves (clams) by pulling apart the sh ell and lowering their stomach into the mollusk, relea sing enzymes and
digesting the mollusk, then absorbing the digested ma terial into the body of the starfish, where digestive g lands in each arm
continue the process of food breakdown.
Obtain a preserved sea star for dissection. Identify t he oral and aboral surfaces. On the aboral surface, fin d the sieve plate
(madreoporite), a structure that allows water to enter the water vascular system. Notice the spines that prot rude from the skin. The
word “echinoderm” means spiny-skinned.”
On the oral surface, identify the tube feet and mouth.
Figure: Left: Aboral surface. Right: Close-up of the skin of a sea star.
Examine the oral surface of a sea star under a disse cting microscope and observe the spines. Most of the fleshy projections are skin
gills and are used to absorb oxygen. Claw-like projections called pedicellariae function to capture small anim als and protect the
skin gills. A sieve plate (madreporite) located on the ab oral surface allows water to enter the water vascular system.
To examine the internal structures, you will remove t he skin from the aboral surface (see the diagram be low). With scissors or a
scalpel, cut along the side of one arm the entire length of the arm from the tip of the ar m to the point where the arm attaches to the
central disk. As you cut you will notice that there i s a layer of calcium carbonate plates just below the surface of the skin. It will
be necessary to cut through these plates.

9.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41816
Figure
Cut around the tip and then cut along the opposite side of the arm. When you reach the base of the arm, continue cutting to the next
arm and repeat this cutting procedure for this arm and the r est of the arms.
Figure
At this point, you have cut the animal’s skin into two halve s, an upper surface and a lower surface.
Carefully, peel the skin back from the tip of one arm. It will be necessary to use a dissecting needle or a blunt probe to help you lift
the skin while keeping the internal structures from being lifted away and damaged. Repeat this procedure for the remaining 4 arms.
Use extra care to peel the skin away from the central disk of the animal. If your initial cuts along the s ides of the arms were not
sufficient, you may need to cut the side as you peel the skin back.
The stomach of the animal has two parts. The upper par t is called the pyloric stomach and the lower part is called the cardiac
stomach. When feeding, it extends the cardiac stomach out through the mouth and into the shell of a bivalve mo llusk. It secretes
digestive enzymes into the mantle cavity of the biva lve. The enzymes digest the bivalve’s tissue. Digestion is completed within the
pyloric stomach and the digestive glands in the arms (discu ssed below).
Identify the stomach and try to discern the cardiac and pyloric portions.
The digestive gland is the soft, brown material that fills most of the s pace in the arms. Remove or lift the digestive gland f rom one
of the arms. The gonads are lighter in color and located underneath the di gestive gland. They may be much smaller than the
digestive gland. The size of the gonads depends on the stage of the reproductive cycle of the animal and m ay not be evident in
some animals.
Observe the rows of ampullae along each side of the ambulacral ridge. The muscle surrounding these bulb-like structures can
contract and extend the tube feet underneath.

9.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41816
Figure: Left: Internal structures. Middle: Tube feet. Right: Ampullae.
Other Echinoderms
Sea Urchins, Sand Dollars—Class Echinoidea
Brittle Stars—Class Ophiuroidea
Sea Cucumbers—Class Holothuroidea
Sea Lilies—Class Crinoidea
Examine a slide showing different stages of developme nt in sea stars. Find the following stages: single cell, blastula, gastrula, and a
later embryonic stage. Name and describe the type of cleava ge exhibited by deuterostome embryos.
Figure: Sea Urchin (Preserved) Oral Surface
Figure: Sea Urchin Shell, Oral Surface

9.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41816
Figure: Sea Urchin Shell, Aboral Surface
Figure: Sea Cucumber, Preserved
Figure: Brittle Star—aboral surface

9.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41816
Figure: Brittle Star—oral surface
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Echinoderms, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Echinoderms. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 9.3: Reading- Echinoderms is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette
Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418179.4: Reading- Chordates
Chordates
The diagram below shows evolutionary relationships am ong the major clades of chordates but avoids classific ation into subphylum
and classes. For example, the close relationship betwe en Myxini and the rest of the vertebrates can be seen even though there is
uncertainty in the classification of Myxini.
Chordates exhibit bilateral symmetry. Chordates have the following characteristics at some point in their lif e history:
1. a dorsal, hollow nerve cord.
2. a dorsal supporting rod called a notochord. This is replaced by a vertebral column in vertebrates.
3. pharyngeal clefts (pouches). These develop into openi ngs to the exterior (gill slits) in some chordates. Gill sli ts functioned as a
mechanism for filter-feeding in primitive vertebrates. The gills of fish function in gas exchange.
4. a postanal tail. In most other kinds of animals, the di gestive tract extends the entire length of the animal.
Subphylum Urochordata (Tunicates)
Larvae
The larvae of tunicates resemble the ancestral chord ate. It has chordate characteristics and looks like a tadpole. The free-swimming
larva develops into a sessile, filter-feeding adult.
Adult
The adult has a thick-walled body sac and an incurren t siphon and an excurrent siphon. Gill slits are the o nly chordate feature
retained by the adult form. In some tunicates, the adul t form may have been lost. These animals retained the larval form as adults.

9.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41817
Subphylum Cephalochordata (Lancelets)
Examine a slide of a lancelet using a dissecting microscop e.
Although this animal is not a vertebrate, it has all t hree of the chordate characteristics. Identify the notochord, nerve chord, and
pharyngeal gill slits.
Notice the segmented pattern of the muscles, also a chordate ch aracteristic.
When feeding, water enters the mouth and moves into t he pharynx, a chamber posterior to the mouth. The gill slits are openings in
the wall of the pharynx and function to allow water to pass out of the pharynx while filtering particles out of the water. The
particles move into the gut for digestion. After passing through the gill slits, water exits via the atriopore.
Examine a preserved lancelet and observe the segmen ted pattern of muscles and the atriopore located on the ventral surface
posterior to the pharynx.
Craniates
Craniates are chordates with a head. The head contains sensory organs because it is in front of the animal as it moves through the
environment.
The evolution of a head with well-developed sensory o rgans and a corresponding large brain enabled these animals to be active and
to feed by predation or other means that required an ac tive animal.
Hagfishes (Class Myxini)
Hagfishes have a cartilaginous skull but do not have jaws. They do not have vertebrae; their notochord pr ovides the support
necessary for their muscles to produce movement.

9.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41817Subphylum Vertebrata (Vertebrates)
The notochord of vertebrates is generally replaced by a vertebral column composed of numerous small bone s called vertebrae that
are joined together to form a flexible supporting str ucture. In most vertebrates, the vertebrae surround the s pinal cord.
The vertebral column allows the body to flex and pro vides attachment sites for muscles. In addition, it sur rounds and protects the
nerve cord.
They exhibit extreme cephalization and possess complex sense organs (ex: eyes, ears).
Lampreys (Class: Petromyzontida)
Lampreys do not have jaws. Most species of lampreys are parasi tes. They attach to host fish and feed on the blood of t he host.
The larvae are filter feeders that live in freshwate r streams. As they mature, they move downstream to the ocean (or lakes) and
begin a parasitic life style.
The skeleton is cartilage and the notocord persists i n the adult.
Gnathostomes
Gnathostomes are vertebrates with jaws. The evolution of jaws promoted the switch from filter-feeding to pred ation and thus
promoted an active life style. Jaws evolved from the forwa rd gill supports in fish.
The appearance of jaws transformed the worlds ecology due to improved predation and herbivory. As a result, co mplex food chains
evolved.
Filter feeding (gill slits) became less important with the evolution of jaws because jaws allowed the animal to chew larger food
items and to capture prey. Gills became more important i n gas exchange.
Aquatic gnathostomes have a lateral line system. Thi s system is composed of a line of sensory organs on each side of the body. It is
able to detect vibrations in the water.
Cartilaginous Fish (Class: Chondrichthyes)
Chondrichthyes include the sharks, and rays. The cartil age skeleton of sharks is partially hardened with calci um. This type of
skeleton is strong and is more flexible and lighter than a bony skeleton. The bodies of cartilaginous fis h are covered with small
toothlike scales. Their teeth are larger versions of thes e scales.
They do not have a swim bladder but the oil-storing capacity of their livers improves their buoyancy. The shape of the head and
caudal fin also lift the animal as it swims. Sharks must swi m to keep from sinking.
Some sharks are fast-swimming predators; others are filter f eeders.
Reproduction
Fertilization is internal. The pelvic fin is used to trans fer sperm to the female.
Some species are oviparous —they lay eggs that hatch outside the mother’s body; some are ovoviviparous —the eggs are retained
within the body and young are born alive; and a few a re viviparous —they receive some nourishment via a placenta that develops
from the yolk sac of the egg.
The reproductive, digestive and excretory system exit the body through a common opening called a cloaca.
Osteichthyans
Osteichthyans have an ossified (bony) skeleton. The skeleto n is hardened with calcium phosphate.
Characteristics of Aquatic Osteichthyans (Bony Fish)
The gills are covered by an operculum so that the g ill chamber is enclosed and protected. A swim bladder and is used for buoyancy.
It evolved from lungs. The gas content, and thus buoyancy, can be regulated by transfer to and from the blood.
Bony fish have broad, flat scales. The skin contains muc ous secreting glands that reduce friction as the fish swims through the
water. A lateral line system detects vibrations in the water. Most species are oviparous. Bony fish are the larg est group of

9.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41817vertebrates. Approximately 49,000 species have been id entified.
Ray-finned Fishs (Class Actinopterygii)
The fins are supported by spinelike rays. In ray-finne d fishes, the lungs gave rise to the swim bladder which g ives the fish
buoyancy.
Lobe-fins
Lobe-finned fish have fins located on fleshy appenda ges. This group includes coelacanths (class Actinistia), Lungfishes (class
Dipnoi) and tetrapods. Coelacanths were thought to have been extinct for 75 million years until one was capt ured in 1938 off the
southeastern coast of Africa. The first vertebrate ani mals to develop lungs were fish. The lungs developed from a sac-like pocket of
tissue that formed in the pharynx.
Lungfishes are a group of lobe-finned fish that inhab it stagnant fresh water ponds that dry up. Their lung s allow them to gulp
oxygen from the air when it has been depleted from th e water. Their lobe fins enable them to walk under water. The ancestors of
lungfish gave rise to amphibians.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Chordates, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Chordates. Project: The Biology Web.
License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 9.4: Reading- Chordates is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Cardiovascular/Respiratory System and Pig Dissection
10.1: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab
10.2: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab (Instructor Materials Prepar ation)
10.3: Reading- Fetal Pig Dissection
10.4: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab
10.5: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab (Instruct or Materials Preparation)
This page titled 10: Cardiovascular/Respiratory System and Pig Dissection is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4183110.1: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab
Learn about the anatomy of the pig as an example of a verteb rate mammal
Identify structures on the pig and know their functions
Identify structures that are a part of the digestive syst em, respiratory system, circulatory system, reproducti ve system, and
excretory system
Compare pig anatomy to human anatomy
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Procedure
Access the page “Reading: Fetal Pig Dissection.” The pig may or may not be injected with dye. Follow the steps in the handout to
view the external pig anatomy.
Questions
1. Based on the external anatomy is your pig male or female? How can you tell?
2. Can you locate any hair on your pig, a common character istic of mammals? Where is there the most hair?
Follow the steps in the handout to cut open the pig b eginning with the mouth. Make sure you can locate the following structures in
the mouth region:
Glottis
Epiglottis
Hard and soft palate
Pharynx
Trachea
Question
1. What do the hard and soft palate separate?
Cut into the neck region. Make sure you can locate the f ollowing structures:
1. Trachea
2. Thymus
3. Thyroid
4. Esophagus
Question
1. Is the trachea in front of or behind the esophagus?
Cut into the thoracic cavity beneath the rib cage. Mak e sure you can locate the following structures:
1. Heart
2. Lungs
3. Bronchi
4. Diaphragm
Questions
1. How many chambers does the pig heart have?
2. How does the size of the pig lungs compare to the size of the f rog lungs you dissected previously?
3. What role does the diaphragm play in respiration?
4. What cavity contains the lungs?
5. What cavity contains the heart?Learning Objectives

10.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41831Focus next on the abdominal cavity. First look at the dig estive system organs. Make sure you can locate the followin g organs:
1. Stomach
2. Spleen
3. Liver
4. Gallbladder
5. Small intestine
6. Large intestine
7. Pancreas
Questions
1. What is the function of the liver?
2. What is the function of the gallbladder?
3. What type of digestion occurs in the stomach?
4. Name the three sections of the small intestines in orde r.
5. Name one process that occurs in the large intestine.
6. Which digestive organs located in the abdominal cav ity are considered to be accessory organs?
Also in the abdominal cavity you will find the excretor y system organs. Make sure you can locate:
Kidneys
Bladder
Finally in the abdominal cavity are the reproductive organs. If you have a female pig look at another g roup’s male pig and vice
versa. You should be able to find:
Testes (male)
Uterus with horn (female)
Ovary (female)
The arteries and veins are challenging to identify, especially if the pig is not injected with dye. Arter ies carry blood away from the
heart. Veins return blood to the heart. Try to identify th e following:
1. Aorta
2. Pulmonary artery
3. Coronary arteries
4. Jugular vein
5. Carotid artery
6. Renal artery
7. Renal vein
Questions
1. Where does the renal vein transport blood?
2. Where does the pulmonary artery transport blood?
View the human torso model on your bench. Locate the same organs you found above on the fetal pig.
Questions
1. List three similarities between the pig internal anatomy a nd human internal anatomy.
2. List three differences between the pig internal anatomy and human internal anatomy.
This page titled 10.1: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4183210.2: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Pig Dissection
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
preserved pig 1 per tablehelpful to have a few male and a few
female pigs
dissection kit 1 per tableshould include scalpel, scissors, forceps,
dissection needles, dissection pins
dissection tray 1 per table
gloves 1 pair per student latex and non latex options i n various sizes
lab coat 1 per student
goggles 1 pair per student
dissection waste container 1 per classdissection waste should not go in regular
trash
This page titled 10.2: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab (Instructor Materials Prep aration) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4183310.3: Reading- Fetal Pig Dissection
The fetal pig that you will dissect has been injected with a colored latex (rubber) compound. The arteries have been filled with red
latex and the veins with blue. An incision was made on t he side of the neck to enable the injections. The inc ision can be seen in the
first photograph below.
Several different pig dissections were used to obtain t he photographs below. As a result, a structure shown in one photograph may
look different than the same structure shown in another ph otograph.
Click on any of the photographs to view enlargements. Links to high-resolution, unlabeled photographs ar e also provided for many
of the photographs.
Orientation
The following words will be used to help identify the locat ion of structures.
Anterior refers to the head end. If a structure is anterior to another, then it is closer to the head.
Posterior refers to the tail end.
Dorsal refers to the back side. The pig in figure 1 is lying o n its dorsal side.
Ventral is the belly side. It is opposite the dorsal side. The pig i n figure 1 below has its ventral side up.
External Structures
Obtain a fetal pig and identify the structures listed in fig ure 1. Use figures 1–4 below to identify its sex.
Use your pig and also a pig of the opposite sex to iden tify the structures in the photographs below. The word “urogenital” refers to
an opening that serves both the urinary (excretory) and the reproductive systems.
Figure 1. Female: injection site, nipples, umbilical co rd

10.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 2. Female: genital papilla, urogenital opening, anus
Figure 3. Male: scrotum

10.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 4. Male: urogenital opening, penis, anus
Preparation and Initial Cuts
Tie one front leg of the animal with a string that passe s underneath the dissecting pan to the other leg. Repeat t his with the back leg.

10.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 5.
Insert one blade of scissors through the body wall on one side of the umbilical cord and cut posteriorly t o the base of the leg as
shown in figure 6. Continue cutting from the anterior end of this cut so that it resembles an upside-down U. Your finished cut will
be anterior to the navel and along each side of the navel. The flap of body wall that contains the navel can be folded posteriorly to
reveal the internal organs of the abdomen.

10.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

10.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 8.
Extend a single cut along the midline of the ventra l surface of the animal to about 2 cm. from the chin. Cut completely through the
body wall in the abdominal area but keep the cut shallow in t he neck region.
Figure 9.

10.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833A cut is made on the side of the animal from the poi nt just posterior to the diaphragm dorsally. A similar cut is made on the other
side. These two cuts will enable you to spread open the abdominal cavity.
Figure 10.
Mouth and Neck Region
Use a scalpel to cut the sides of the mouth so that the bottom jaw can be opened for easier viewing (see figur e 11). You will need to
cut through the musculature and the joint that holds th e lower jaw to the skull.

10.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 11.
Open the jaw wide enough so that the glottis and epiglottis are exposed. The epiglottis projects up through the soft palate into a
region called the nasopharynx. The hard palate and soft palate separate the nasal and oral cavities. When breathi ng, air passes
through the nasal passages to the pharynx. The pharynx is the space in the posterior portion o f the mouth that both food and air
pass through. From the pharynx, it passes through the gl ottis to the trachea.

10.3.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 12. Hard palate, soft palate, glottis, epiglott is, and tongue.
Carefully, peel the skin away from the incision in the neck region using a blunt probe (a needle or the p oint of scissors will do if a
blunt probe is not available). Use the probe to peel away muscle tissue until the thymus gland on each sid e of the trachea is
exposed.
Use a probe to separate the two lobes of the thymus gl and and to further separate the musculature over th e trachea. The thyroid
gland is darker and lies between the posterior ends of the t wo lobes of the thymus gland.

10.3.10 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 13. Thymus
Figure 14. The surrounding tissues have been separated to reveal the thyroid gland.
Continue separating the tissue with a probe until the trachea and esophagus are exposed. The esophagus is dorsal to the trachea.
The large hard structure attached to the trachea is the larynx. It contains the vocal chords.

10.3.11 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833In the photograph below, the heart and blood vessels of the neck region have been removed so that the tr achea can be seen more
clearly. You should not remove these structures yet bec ause you will need to identify the blood vessels later in the dissection.
Figure 15. Esophagus, larynx, trachea, bronchus, and lu ngs.
Respiratory System
Observe how the diaphragm attaches to the body wall and separates the abdomin al cavity from the lung (pleural) and heart
(pericardial) cavities (figure 16 and 18 below). Contrac tion of the diaphragm forces air into the lungs.
You have already seen the nasopharynx, hard palate, soft palate, epiglottis, glottis, trachea, and lary nx. Follow the trachea to where
it branches into two bronchi and observe that each bronchus leads to a lung. The left lung contains three lobes and the right lun g
contains four. Each lung is located in a body cavity calle d a pleural cavity.

10.3.12 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 16. Diaphragm.
Figure 17. Lungs

10.3.13 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
18. Lungs, diaphragm.
Figure 19. Lungs, diaphragm (cut)

10.3.14 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 20. Esophagus, larynx, trachea, bronchus, and lu ng.
Digestive System
You have already seen how the esophagus leads from the pharynx through the neck region. Using a probe, trace follow th e
esophagus to the stomach. Identify the small intestine and large intestine. Find the posterior part of the large intestine call ed the
rectum and observe that it leads to the anus. Locate the cecum, a blind pouch where the small intestine joins the large inte stine.
Identify the liver. Lift the right lobe and find the gallbladder. This structure stores bile produced by the liver. Find the bile duct
that leads to the small intestine. The pancreas is located dorsal and posterior to the stomach. It extends along the length of the
stomach from the left side of the body (your right) to the point where the stomach joins the small intest ine. Lift the stomach and
identify this light-colored organ.
The spleen is an elongate, flattened, brownish organ that exten ds along the posterior part of the stomach ventral to (above) the
pancreas.
The cecum is a blind pouch where the small intestine joins the large intestine. It houses bacteria used to dig est plant materials such
as cellulose. The cecum is large in herbivores but mu ch of it has been lost during evolution in humans. T he appendix in humans is
the evolutionary remains of a larger cecum in human ance stors.

10.3.15 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 21. Duodenum, gallbladder, liver, lungs, large intestine, pancreas, small intestine, stomach. The live r has been lifted to
reveal the gallbladder.
Figure 22. bile duct, gallbladder, large intestine, l iver, and small intestine. The liver has been lifted t o reveal the gallbladder.

10.3.16 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 23. Large intestine, liver, small intestine, sple en, and stomach.
Figure 24. small intestine, large intestine, pancreas, sp leen, stomach – The spleen has been moved aside to reve al the pancreas.

10.3.17 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 25. The stomach and liver are lifted to show th e pancreas.

10.3.18 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 26. Large intestine, pancreas, small intestine, sp leen, and stomach.
Figure 27. cecum, large intestine, liver, small intesti ne, spleen. The cecum is found at the point where the small intestine joins the
large intestine.

10.3.19 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 28. Large intestine, liver, small intestine, sple en, and stomach.
Circulatory System
Figures 29 and 30 summarize the circulatory system of a ma mmal.
Figure 29. Circulatory system

10.3.20 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 30. Circulatory system
The drawing below shows some of the major arteries tha t carry blood to the body. Blood vessels that branch from the aorta carry
blood to most of the body.
The pulmonary artery is capable of delivering a lar ge amount of blood to the lungs but the lungs are no t needed to oxygenate the
blood of a fetus, so most of the blood is diverted to the aorta. This diagram shows that the ductus arteri osus connects the pulmonary
artery to the aorta and diverts blood that would otherwis e go to the lungs.
Shortly after birth, the ductus arteriosus closes and b lood in the pulmonary artery goes to the lungs instead of t he body.
Blood passes from the left ventricle through the ao rtic arch and aorta to the body. The first branch of the aorta is the
brachiocephalic artery. The second branch is the le ft subclavian artery which goes to the left front le g. The right subvclavian carries
blood to the right front leg and the carotids carry blood to the head.
Figure 31. Major arteries
The pericardium is a membrane that surrounds the hea rt and lines the pericardial cavity. It contains a lub ricating fluid and isolates
the heart from body movements such as the expansion and contraction of the nearby pleural (lung) cavity.
To view details of the aortic arch, ductus arteriosus, and pulmonary artery, it will be helpful to remove t he left lung. With the left
lung removed, the heart can be pushed to the right side t o reveal the aorta and other blood vessels shown in figu res 33–42.

10.3.21 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 32. Diaphragm, heart, lungs, and pericardium
Figure 33. Aortic arch, coronary artery, left atrium, left ventricle, pulmonary artery, right atrium, r ight ventricle.

10.3.22 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 34. Aorta, aortic arch, left atrium, brachioc ephalic artery, ductus arteriosus, lung, pulmonary art ery, pulmonary trunk, left
subclavian artery,
Figure 35. Aorta, aortic arch, left atrium, brachioc ephalic artery, left common carotid artery, right c ommon carotid artery, ductus
arterious, pulmonary artery, pulmonary trunk, left su bclavian artery, right subclavian artery, trachea, l eft ventricle

10.3.23 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 36. Aortic arch, left atrium, brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery, right common c arotid artery, larynx,
pulmonary trunk, left subclavian artery, right subcla vian artery, left ventricle.
Figure 37. Anterior vena cava, coronary artery, lary nx, posterior vena cava, right subclavian vein, trach ea.

10.3.24 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 38. Anterior vena cava, coronary artery, righ t external jugular vein, right internal jugular vei n, larynx, lungs, right
subclavian vein, trachea
Figure 39. Anterior vena cava, posterior vena cava.

10.3.25 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 40. Heart, liver, lung, posterior vena cava, t hymus, thyroid
Figure 41. Aorta, colon, kidney, posterior vena cava, renal artery, renal vein, testicular artery, testis, umbilical artery, ureter, urinary
bladder, vas deferens. The renal artery passes blood fro m the aorta to the kidney. The renal vein returns bl ood from the kidney to
the posterior vena cava.

10.3.26 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 42. Aorta, colon (large intestine), diaphragm, heart, kidney, lung, renal artery, posterior vena c ava, renal vein, small
intestine, spleen, stomach, ureter.
Figure 43. External iliac artery, kidney, large inte stine, posterior vena cava, renal vein, small intestine, testis, umbilical artery,
ureter, urinary bladder.

10.3.27 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 44. Left atrium, brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery, right common carotid artery, coronary artery, external
iliac artery, external iliac vein, posterior vena ca va, pulmonary trunk, renal artery, renal vein, left subclavian artery, right subclavian
artery, umbilical artery, left ventricle.

10.3.28 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833Excretory System
Figure 45. Aorta, colon (large intestine), diaphragm, heart, kidney, lung, renal artery, posterior vena c ava, renal vein, small
intestine, spleen, stomach, ureter.
Figure 46. Aorta, kidney, liver, posterior vena cava, renal artery, renal vein, spleen, ureter, urinary b ladder.

10.3.29 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 47. Kidney, liver, posterior vena cava, renal vein, spleen, ureter, urinary bladder
Reproductive System (Female)
Figure 48. Urogenital papilla, anus

10.3.30 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 49. Colon, horn of uterus, ovary, urinary blad der
Figure 50. Colon, body of uterus, horn of uterus, ovar ies, urethra, urinary bladder, urogenital sinus

10.3.31 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833Reproductive System (Male)
Figure 51. Penis, scrotum, urogenital opening
Figure 52. Seminal vesicle, testis, ureter, urinary blad der, vas deferens

10.3.32 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833
Figure 53. Bulbourethral gland, spermatic cord, testis, urethra, urinary bladder, vas deferens
Figure 54. Path of urine flow

10.3.33 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41833Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Fetal Pig Dissection, Biology 102. Authored by: Michael J. Gregory, Ph.D.. Provided by: LibreTexts. Located at:
bio.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/BioStuff/BIO_102/ Laboratory_Exercises/Fetal_Pig_Dissection. Project: The Biology
Web. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
This page titled 10.3: Reading- Fetal Pig Dissection is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette
Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4183410.4: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab
State the parts of the cardiovascular and respiratory syst ems and give the functions of each part.
Identify the parts of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems on the human torso model and other models.
Explain how the respiratory and cardiovascular systems are interrelated.
Describe the path of the blood through the heart
Test the effects of various factors on heart rate and b reathing rates
Measure various respiratory volumes using a spirometer.
Define the following terms:
nostrils trachea spirometer nasopharynx
bronchi pleura pharynx larynx
forced vital capacity epiglottis lung vital capacity
diaphragm glottis forced expiratory volume intercostal muscles
aorta brachial artery and vein superior vena cava ventr icle
hepatic artery and vein inferior vena cava atrium rena l artery and vein
iliac artery and vein pulmonary artery and vein jugul ar vein systole
diastole coronary artery and vein carotid artery systole
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Activity I: Identifying Structures
Find the following structures on the human torso model and other models.
Nostrils
Trachea
Nasal cavity
Oral cavity
Bronchi
Diaphragm
Pharynx
Pleura
Larynx
Lung
Epiglottis
Intercostal muscles
Glottis
Iliac artery and vein
Carotid arteries
Jugular veins
Right and left ventricle
Right and left atria
Pulmonary artery and vein
Brachial artery and veinLearning Objectives

10.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41834Coronary artery and vein
Renal artery and vein
Hepatic artery and vein
Femoral artery and vein
Superior and inferior vena cava
Use the chart on the next page to help organize your understanding of the different arteries and veins. Fo r each one listed, state
where the blood is traveling to and from.
Artery or Vein Where blood is traveling to and from
Pulmonary Artery
Pulmonary Vein
Coronary Artery
Coronary Vein
Hepatic Artery
Hepatic Vein
Iliac Artery
Iliac Vein
Jugular Vein
Carotid Artery
Brachial Artery
Brachial Vein
Femoral Artery
Femoral Vein
Renal Artery
Renal Vein
Use the heart picture below and label the different at ria and ventricles. Also include the aorta, superior ven a cava and inferior vena
cava.

10.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41834Activity II: Respiratory Volumes and Lung Capacities
Spirometry is the classic pulmonary function test. A spirometer is an instrument used to measure how much air and how q uickly
air is expelled after a deep inhalation. The measure ments can be used to calculate how efficiently and h ow quickly the lungs can be
filled upon inspiration and emptied during expirati on. The most common measurements obtained from a spir ometer are listed in the
table below.
Abbreviation Measurement Description
VC Vital CapacityMaximal amount of air exhaled steadily
from full inspiration to maximal expiration
FVC Forced vital capacityThe total amount of air that you blow out in
one breath
FEV1 Forced expiratory volume in one secondThe amount of air you can blow out in one
second. An individual with normal lungs
and airways can blow out most of the air
from the lungs in the first second
FER Forced expiratory ratio (FEV1/FVC)x100Percentage of the FVC expelled in the first
second of a forced expiration
PEF Peak expiratory flow Peak expiratory flow in liters per minute
The spirometer we will use measures peak expiratory fl ow, a useful indicator of lung function to assess cond itions such as asthma.
Peak flow is achieved by blowing out as fast as possible after taking in as much air as possible.
Directions to Operate Spirometer
1. For best results, stand. If you are unable to stand, sit in a straight and upright position.
2. Move the peak indicator (red internal piece) to the s tart position (all the way on the left).
3. Hold the spirometer in your hand with your thumb and foref inger on the grips and the mouthpiece facing toward you. A void
blocking the vent holes as much as possible and do not allow the fingers to interfere with the red peak indicator.
4. Take as deep a breath as possible filing your lungs c ompletely with air
5. Place your mouth on the mouthpiece, past your teeth, and form a tight seal with your lips. Place your tongue below the
mouthpiece to make sure it is not blocking the opening at any time.
6. Blow out as hard and fast as you can. The red indicator wi ll move indicating your peak flow.
7. Do not reset the peak indicator. Repeat steps 4-6 two mo re times for a total of three. The indicator will automat ically point to
the best of the three efforts.
8. Record your results in the table on the next page.
9. Clean off the spirometer using a paper towel and rubbing alcohol.
10. Have your partner complete the same process.
PEF
My value
My partner
Results
Comparing Your Results to Expected Values
Use the normal predicted average peak expiratory flow tables in the spirometer box and any additional han douts provided by your
instructor to compare your readings to expected values based on an individuals gender, age, ethnicity, and heigh t.
How does your average PEF compare with the value for a person your age and height?

10.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41834What do These Values Mean in the Real World?
Individuals suffering from obstructive pulmonary disease (narrowed airways) have a low FEV1 but a normal FVC. Since the
airways are narrowed less air can be blown out in one se cond. Individuals with obstructive lung disease also h ave a FER less than
70% of the predicted value. Asthma is one condition which causes narrowing of the airways. Spirometry is used to diagnose
asthma and asses the efficiency of treatments.
Individuals can also suffer from restrictive pulmonary disease. These individuals have a normal FEV1 since the airways a re
unobstructed but a lower FVC. The lower FVC is caused by various conditions that affect the lung tissue or th e capacity of the
lungs to expand.
There are some conditions that involve both lung ob struction and restriction, such as cystic fibrous. Individuals with cystic fibrous
secrete excess mucus which narrows the airways and damages the lun g tissue.
Activity III: Investigation
How do different everyday activities affect your circu lation and respiration? You and a partner will work to gether to come up with
and implement a procedure to test the following question:
How does body position (laying down verses sitting verses sta nding) affect your heart rate and your breathing?
In the space below, write a hypothesis and null hypothesi s for the question.
Hypothesis:
Null Hypothesis:
You have the following tools available to test these quest ions:
1. Spirometer
2. Measuring pulse
3. Measuring breathing rate
You need to determine how you can test both respiration a nd circulation. Some points to consider:
How long your experiment should run?
How many trials you should do
How often should you take measurements?
How could you create a control?
Use the space below to write out a procedure to test ea ch question. Make sure that your instructor approves your procedures before
you begin your experiments.
Procedure for Question 1:
Now begin your experiments. Use the space below to record your resu lts. Feel free to make your own tables to organize your d ata.
Use your results to answer the following questions:
1. How did your heart rate change with body position? When wa s it the lowest? Highest?
2. How did your breathing rate change with body position? Wh en was it the lowest? Highest?
3. Why might your heart and breathing rate differ from yo ur partner?
As modified from Piedmont Virginia Community College’ s Biolo gy 102 Circulatory and Respiratory Systems Lab
This page titled 10.4: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4183510.5: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Activity I: Identifying Structures
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
human torso model 1 per table
heart model 1 per table
Activity II: Respiratory Volumes and Lung Capacities
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
spirometer 1-2 per table
alcohol preps 4 per table to clean spirometers in betwe en student use
lung capacity value tables 1-2 per table for students t o compare their values
Activity III: Investigation
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4). Th ey will use the same materials as in part II of the lab ac tivity.
This page titled 10.5: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab (Instru ctor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and
was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Homeostasis
11.1: Homeostasis Lab
11.2: Homeostasis Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
This page titled 11: Homeostasis is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4181911.1: Homeostasis Lab
Learning Objectives
Describe the anatomy of the liver including the path of b lood flow from the intestines, through the liver, and to t he heart
Compare glucose levels in different veins and arteries bef ore and after eating
Describe the anatomy of the kidneys and a nephron includi ng circulation of the blood
Explain the three steps of urine formation and where each st em occurs in the nephron
Predict whether substances will be found in the filtrate or th e urine after kidney function
Explain how the kidneys and the liver contribute to homeo stasis
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
Homeostasis describes the dynamic balance of the body’s internal environment and the effort to maintain a c onstant, stable inside.
There are many body components that contribute to homeost asis. This lab activity will focus on the liver and the kidne ys.
Part I: Liver
The liver is an organ within the digestive system and is responsible for maintaining sugar levels in the blo od as part of homeostasis.
After a large meal, the liver converts extra glucose into glycogen, a polysaccharide that stores glucose. A hormone c alled insulin is
produced by the pancreas stimulates glycogen produc tion. When levels of glucose in the blood drop, the liv er breaks down
glycogen back into glucose for the blood to circula te throughout the body. A hormone called glucagon produced by the pancreas
stimulates this process. All cells of the body require g lucose for cellular respiration to make energy.
The liver receives blood from the small intestines th rough the hepatic portal vein. After a large meal, the hepatic vein would
transport glucose rich blood from the small intestines to the liver. Blood leaves the liver and returns t o the heart through the hepatic
vein. We will conduct a simulation to learn more about t he liver’s role in maintaining blood glucose levels i n relationship to
homeostasis.
The table below describes the blood serums you will test:
Serum Location
A Mesenteric artery (takes blood from aorta to small int estine)
B Hepatic portal vein (transports blood between intestin es and liver)
C Hepatic vein (takes blood form liver to heart)
We will use a test called the Benedict’s test to determine the amount of glucose in each location. The benedicts test ranges in color
from blue (no glucose) to orange/red (lots of glucose). Foll ow the directions below.
Procedure
Glucose levels after eating:
1. Fill the large beaker ½ full with tap water. Place the beake r on top of the hot plate. Turn the hot plate on to create a hot water
bath.

11.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418192. Label three test tubes A1, B1, and C1 with a wax pencil
3. Use the small plastic ruler to mark on the test tube at 1 c m and 2 cm.
4. Fill test tube A1 to the 1 cm mark with serum A1 and to the 2 c m mark with Benedict’s reagent.
5. Fill test tube B1 to the 1 cm mark with serum B1 and to th e 2 cm mark with Benedict’s reagent.
6. Fill test tube C1 to the 1 cm mark with serum C1 and to th e 2 cm mark with Benedict’s reagent.
7. Place all three test tubes into the hot water bath at the s ame time.
8. Heat the tubes for 5 minutes. Observe and record any color changes.
9. Record your results in the table below. Remember that b lue indicates no glucose and red/orange indicates the mo st glucose. A
green color signifies some glucose.
Results
Table 1 Glucose levels after eating
Test tubes in order of color change Source of the serum

Questions
1. Which blood vessel, the mesentery artery, the hepatic po rtal vein, or the hepatic vein contains the most glucose after eating?
2. Explain why the hepatic portal vein contains more gluc ose than the hepatic vein after eating.
Procedure
Glucose levels before eating:
1. Keep your hot water bath from the first procedure
2. Label three test tubes A2, B2, and C2 with a wax pencil
3. Use the small plastic ruler to mark on the test tube at 1 c m and 2 cm.
4. Fill test tube A2 to the 1 cm mark with serum A2 and to the 2 c m mark with Benedict’s reagent.
5. Fill test tube B2 to the 1 cm mark with serum B2 and to th e 2 cm mark with Benedict’s reagent.
6. Fill test tube C2 to the 1 cm mark with serum C2 and to th e 2 cm mark with Benedict’s reagent.
7. Place all three test tubes into the hot water bath at the s ame time.
8. Heat the tubes for 5 minutes. Observe and record any color changes.
9. Record your results in the table below. Remember that b lue indicates no glucose and red/organge indicates the m ost glucose. A
green color signifies some glucose.
Results
Table 2: Glucose levels before eating
Test tubes in order of color change Source of the serum

Questions
1. Which blood vessel, the mesentery artery, the hepatic po rtal vein, or the hepatic vein contains the most glucose before eating?
2. Explain why the hepatic portal vein contains less gluco se than the hepatic vein before eating.
Once you have recorded your results, please clean up the m aterials. Make sure to:

11.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41819Turn off and unplug the hot water bath
Dump the contents of the test tubes down the sink
Wash out the test tubes and place them in the test tube rack to dry
Part II: Kidneys
The kidneys are part of the urinary system. As they produce urine to release nitrogenous wastes from the b ody the kidneys also
maintain homeostasis through pH balance and water-salt b alance in osmoregulation. These bean shaped organs are located along
the dorsal wall of the abdominal cavity.
Observe the kidney models available in the lab. Locat e the outer renal cortex tissue and the more intern al renal medulla. The renal
pelvis is the area that collects the urine. Find the renal a rtery and the renal vein.
The functioning unit of the kidney is called the nephron. Part of the nephron is located in the cortex and pa rt in the medulla. Use
the picture below and the models in the lab to identif y the following components of the nephron.
Glomerulus
Bowman’s capsule
Proximal tubule
Distal tubule
Loop of Henle (descending limb and ascending limb)
Collecting duct
Peritubular capillaries
Questions
1. Which parts of the nephron are located in the renal c ortex?
2. Which components of the nephron are located in the medu lla?
Urine production in the kidney involves four main steps:
1. Filtration: molecules move out of the glomerulus into Bowman’s cap sule. Large molecules like proteins and blood cells are to o
big to be filtered and remain in the blood.
2. Reabsorption: glucose and amino acids move from the proximal tubule bac k into the blood stream through peritubular
capillaries.
3. Secretion: Substances like histamines, H+, and ammonia get secreted in to the nephron from the peritubular capillaries
4. Water reabsorption: both the Loop of Henle and the collecting duct reabsorb wa ter to maintain the blood volume
Label the parts of the nephron on the diagram below and in dicate where the different urine production steps occur.

11.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41819
Focus on Filtration
Blood entering the glomerulus contains cells, protei ns, glucose, amino acids, salts, urea, and water. Fill in the table below
indicating which molecules will leave the glomerulus a nd enter the Bowman’s capsule. Write yes or no for eac h and state why
based on size (small or big).
Substance Enter Bowman’s Capsule? Why?
Cells
Proteins
Glucose
Amino acids
Salts
Urea
Water
Focus on Reabsorption
When the filtrate enters the proximal tubule it cont ains the following molecules: glucose, water, urea, amino acids, and salts. Water
and salts are passively reabsorbed to maintain blood volu me and pH as part of homeostasis.
Questions
1. What would happen to the blood volume over time if wat er were not reabsorbed?
2. How would this lack of water reabsorption affect blood pr essure?
3. Fill in the table below indicating which molecules will b e reabsorbed into the blood.
Substance Reabsorbed? Why?
Glucose
Amino acids
Salts
Urea
Water

11.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41819Kidneys are also important in osmoregulation, maintaing an internal salt/water balance. The kidn ey can produce large amounts of
dilute urine or small amounts of concentrated urine depending on the needs of the body. The pituitary gl ad produces antidiuretic
hormone (ADH) which controls the concentration of urine output. ADH specifically acts on the collecting duct m aking it more or
less permeable to water.
The table below has several different events that wou ld impact osmoregulation. Fill in the chart with eith er “increase” or
“decrease” to explain how the kidney would help maintain ho meostasis.
EventChange in blood
concentrationADH output Water Reabsorption Type of Urine produced
Dehydration due to
sunbathing in the
afternoon and forgetting
your water bottle Scant, concentrated
Drinking large amounts
of water throughout the
day Copious, dilute
Going to the move
theater and eating a large
bucket of salty popcorn
without water to wash it
down Scant, concentrated
Kidneys also play a role in pH balance.
Questions
1. If the blood is more basic than normal, what pH do you thin k the urine will be?
2. If the blood is more acidic than normal, what pH do you thi nk the urine will be?
This page titled 11.1: Homeostasis Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182011.2: Homeostasis Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Part I: Liver
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
human torso models 1 per bench
liver models 1 per bench
Benedicts reagent 1 bottle per bench
test tubes 6 per bench
goggles 1 pair per student
gloves 1 pair per student latex and non latex options i n various sizes
Solution A1 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
Solution B1 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
Solution C1 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
Solution A2 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
Solution B2 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
Solution C2 1 bottle per bench keep refrigerated
hot plate 1 per bench
goggles 1 pair per student
Recipe for Solution A1 (0.25% glucose): Dissolve 1.25g gluc ose/500ml DI water
Recipe for Solution A2 (0.25% glucose): Dissolve 1.25g gluc ose/500ml DI water
Recipe for Solution B1 (3% glucose): Dissolve 15g glucose /500ml DI water
Recipe for Solution B2 (0% glucose): 500 ml DI water
Recipe for Solution C1 (0.5% glucose): Dissolve 2.5g glucose /500ml DI water
Recipe for Solution C2 (0.5% glucose): Dissolve 2.5g glucose /500ml DI water
Part II: Kidneys
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
Kidney model 1 per bench
nephron model 3 per class
This page titled 11.2: Homeostasis Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Food Choice
12.1: Food Choice Lab
12.2: Food Choice Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
This page titled 12: Food Choice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182112.1: Food Choice Lab
Adapted by Staci Forgey, Tidewater Community College b iology faculty, with permission from Niagara University’ s Dr. William
Edwards Food Choice Lab.
Learning Objective
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Identify the basic tenets of Ecology and how they apply to po pulation success.
Foraging is the act of an animal searching for food. An animal’s choice of food should reflect energetic co nsiderations such as
maximizing net energy gain per unit time or net gai n per cost expended in foraging. Animals want the most energy return for their
caloric investment. They seek out food sources that will give them the most energy reward for the least a mount of energy
expended. We will be examining the foraging behavior of b irds in our quad.
Question
1. What factors might influence seed selection in the birds we will be watching? Name three factors and their effects.
Given these factors, we will now form hypotheses and pre dictions that we will test by observing birds in the courtyard area. After,
we will perform a Chi-Square statistical test on our data, an d revise our hypotheses and thought processes to fit the ne w data.
Many birds will visit our feeders and collect seeds. Our feeders are stocked with three types of seeds. The Fea thered Friend black
oil seed is very soft hulled. The Lyric Sunflower gray striped sunflower seeds are large and thick hulled. Gra y safflower seeds are
also small and soft hulled.
Question
1. Look at the three seed types. Feel them and try to break them open. Note the differences you observe between the seed types.
The table below summarizes measurements for the 3 ty pes of seeds. This shows the average kernel (food part of the seed), hull
(outside covering of the seed) and entire seed weigh t. The kernel/hull ratio for each seed type, and the average caloric (energy)
content of the seeds. Use these values and your observ ations to make predictions about optimal foraging b ehavior for various bird
types that visit the feeders.
Table 1: Mass and caloric content of sunflower seed com ponents.
Seed (mg) Kernel (mg) Hull (mg) Entire seed (mg) Kernel/H ull Cal/g Cal/seed
Black oil 28.8 ± 3.8 12.2 ± 1.6 41.0 ± 0.5 2.37 ± 0.3 54 00 ± 240 150
Safflower 26.8 ± 3.9 10.4 ± 3.3 38.3 ± 6.9 2.603 ± 0.1 62 00 ± 240 161
Striped 61.7 ± 4.7 59.1 ± 2.7 120.8 ± 6.0 1.045 ± 0.1 560 0 ± 240 350
Now, take a look at the birds that are commonly found in our area during this time period. You will have a list of birds on your lab
bench.
Your lab group will propose two experimental hypotheses about avian seed choice and discuss these with your i nstructor. Provide a
rationale for your testable hypotheses. Clearly state each of your ideas in the form of an “If... then...” hypothesis. If your
hypothesis is correct, which type of seed do you expect the birds to choose? Why?
Questions
1. Clearly state a testable hypothesis explaining why bir ds will choose or not choose the different seeds.
2. Would this hypothesis change with different birds? Why o r Why not?
3. What is the alternative(s) to your hypothesis? (i.e., i f you are wrong)
4. If your hypothesis is right, what would you predict the bi rds will do at the feeders?
5. If your alternative is right, what would you predict?

12.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41821Check in with your instructor before continuing after this point!
In order to test your hypothesis, we need to think a bit about experimental design. Variables are import ant to consider because they
will help us evaluate our hypothesis. For example, if we were interested in the height at which giraffes ea t their food from, we
might propose a hypothesis that giraffes will eat food from high areas in a tree. Each time the giraffe ate, the height at which the
food was taken from would need to be recorded. This gi ves us two variables: the height at which the mouthful of vegetation came
from and the mouthful height. This height is measurab le. We will look at what is called “categorical” data. Each of our data points
will fit into a category. We will have a bird taking a see d (making a food choice), and the type of seed chosen.
Questions
1. What is the independent variable (what we are manipulat ing)?
2. What is the dependent variable (what we are measuring)?
3. Design a data table to record the species of bird and type of seed each bird selects during our lab time. You can u se hash marks
to record visits. We will be visiting our feeders for a 2 0 minute time span.
Discuss your data sheet with your instructor before you begin collecting data!
When we return, you’ll need to transfer the data from your t able into the following table as totals.
Bird Type Safflower Striped Sunflower Black Oil

TOTALS
Bird Observation
Stay well away from the feeders at all times and keep a s quiet as possible. One noisy or clumsy move can scare all the birds away,
leaving you without any data!
Question
1. Describe the behavior of the birds with the seeds.
2. How long does it take an individual bird (record the spe cies of bird and the type of seed eaten) to eat a seed and ret urn to the
feeder for another? Use your binoculars to follow individ ual birds and record the time from when a bird takes a seed to when it
returns for another. Do the birds do anything unusual with t he seeds?
3. Compare and contrast the seed handling behavior of th e birds visiting the feeders. How do the different birds cra ck each of the
seeds? Do they have difficulty opening any of them?
Statistical Analysis
Using your feeder choice data, perform a chi-square Goo dness of Fit test to determine if the birds show a pref erence for any given
seed.
A Chi-Square test involves testing the probability t hat your categorical data differs from random enough to have confidence that the
data does not come from chance alone. Typically, we a ccept that significance is 0.05 (called alpha). This means that there is only a
1 in 20 chance of the data arising from chance alon e. When doing a chi-square, we typically call the bo ring hypothesis (that all the
birds would randomly select seeds and your hypothesis is wrong) the “null” hypothesis, abbreviated H. The h ypothesis where theO

12.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41821data support your idea is called the alternate hypot hesis, abbreviated H. Note: this is a different type of hypothesis, used to fit
specifically into statistical tests. This may not mat ch perfectly with your description of hypotheses above. A chi-square also doesn’t
tell you exactly where the differences causing signi ficant deviation from the expected. You would need m ore involved statistics for
that. We will visually pick out our differences in data.
First, transfer your choice data into a table like the fol lowing table. We will calculate the expected values from the data.
Add the data for each bird horizontally, then for each seed vertically. The total row and total column shoul d now be filled. These
represent how many birds and seeds by type were actuall y eaten and recorded. Now we will calculate the expecte d values based on
how these would be distributed by random chance. We wi ll take the total for each species, multiply it by the total number of seeds
for that seed type, and divide by the total number of seed s
For example,
\displaystyle\frac{111\times{178}}{532}=37.13
Put the answer into the table. This is how many safflowe r seeds would be expected to be eaten by the chickad ees through chance
alone. Complete your own table.
SAMPLE TABLE
Safflower Striped Black Oil Total
Black-capped chickadee 13 23 75 111
(Expected) 37.13
Tufted titmouse 21 32 23 76
(Expected)
House finch 45 23 43 111
(Expected)
American goldfinch 0 0 0 0
(Expected)
Nuthatches 0 0 0 0
(Expected)
Junco 76 32 32 140
(Expected)
House sparrows 23 27 44 94
(Expected)
TOTALS 178 137 217 532a

12.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41821Bird Type Safflower Striped Black Oil Total

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)

(Expected)
TOTALS
To calculate the chi-square value, or
\displaystyle\chi^2, we simply add the square differences, divided by the expected, of all the
observed and expected. In mathematical terms:
So for our example from the previous sample table, the first
\displaystyle\frac{(O-E)^2}{E} would be
We would then add to this value all of the other
\displaystyle\frac{(O-E)^2}{E} in the table to get the
\displaystyle\chi^2 value.
Question
1. Compute the
\displaystyle\chi^2 value for your data. (Use an extra sheet of paper if neces sary)
In order to find something to compare this number wit h, we need to calculate the degrees of freedom, or th e number of different
comparisons that can be made within the table. The de grees of freedom are the number of columns (M) minus one times the
number of rows (N) minus one. Degrees of freedom = (M–1) (N–1)
Questions
1. How many ways can this two by two table be broken into indivi dual comparisons? Hint: Use the formula above.
A B
C D

12.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418212. Calculate the degrees of freedom in your experiment.
Now we can compare against the Chi distribution for th e likelihood that our data is generated by chance. R emember, we want a
0.05 or less value to say that it’s not chance, but our h ypothesis that’s causing the choices.
Questions
1. Compare to the Chi-distribution table at the end of the l ab with your instructor’s assistance. What is the p value or probability
that your data came out by chance? Is this less than 0.05? Did your results come about by chance?
2. Describe and summarize what you observed in the field. Are some parameters more difficult to measure than others? I f so,
why? Which predictions did your data support? Interpre t you results as they relate to your hypotheses and discu ss your
interpretation.
3. How could you re design your experiment to better measu re energy gains, handling time, and energetic costs of fora ging, and
thus more accurately test the predictions of optimal fora ging theory? Think of other hypotheses regarding seed ch oice by birds?
Propose a follow up study that would allow you to test a relate d idea about avian foraging behavior. Make clear the ways in
which your proposed study is an extension of or improvemen t upon the study on which you report here.
Chi Square Distribution Table:

12.1.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41821DF/P 0.995.990 0.975.950.900.750.500.250.100.050.025.010.005
10.0000
4.00016 0.001 0.004 0.016 0.102 0.455 1.323 2.706 3.841 5.024 6.635 7.879
2 0.010 0.020 0.0506 0.103 0.211 0.575 1.386 2.773 4.605 5.99 1 7.378 9.210 10.597
3 0.072 0.115 0.216 0.351 0.584 1.213 2.366 4.108 6.251 7.815 9.348 11.345 12.838
4 0.207 0.297 0.484 0.711 1.064 1.923 3.357 5.385 7.779 9.488 1 1.143 13.277 14.860
5 0.412 0.554 0.831 1.145 1.610 2.675 4.351 6.626 9.236 11.07 0 12.833 15.086 16.750
6 0.676 0.872 1.237 1.635 2.204 3.455 5.348 7.841 10.645 12.5 92 14.449 16.812 18.548
7 0.989 1.239 1.690 2.167 2.833 4.255 6.346 9.037 12.017 14.06 7 16.013 18.475 20.278
8 1.344 1.647 2.180 2.733 3.490 5.071 7.344 10.219 13.362 15. 507 17.535 20.090 21.955
9 1.735 2.088 2.700 3.325 4.168 5.899 8.343 11.389 14.684 16. 919 19.023 21.666 23.589
10 2.156 2.558 3.247 3.940 4.865 6.737 9.342 12.549 15.987 18.3 07 20.483 23.209 25.188
11 2.603 3.053 3.816 4.575 5.578 7.584 10.341 13.701 17.275 19. 675 21.920 24.725 26.757
12 3.074 3.571 4.404 5.226 6.304 8.438 11.340 14.845 18.549 2 1.026 23.337 26.217 28.300
13 3.565 4.107 5.009 5.892 7.042 9.299 12.340 15.984 19.812 22. 362 24.736 27.688 29.819
14 4.075 4.660 5.629 6.571 7.790 10.165 13.339 14.114 21.064 23.685 26.119 29.141 31.319
15 4.601 5.229 6.262 7.261 8.547 11.037 14.339 18.245 22.307 24.996 27.488 30.578 32.801
16 5.142 5.812 6.908 7.962 9.312 11.912 15.339 19.369 23.542 26.296 28.845 32.000 34.267
17 5.697 6.408 7.564 8.672 10.085 12.792 16.338 20.489 24.769 2 7.587 30.191 33.409 35.718
18 6.265 7.015 8.231 9.390 10.865 13.675 17.338 21.605 25.98 9 28.869 31.526 34.805 37.156
19 6.844 7.633 8.907 10.117 11.657 14.562 18.338 22.18 27.20 4 30.144 32.852 36.191 38.582
20 7.434 8.260 9.591 10.851 12.443 15.452 19.337 23.848 28.412 31.410 34.170 37.566 39.997
21 8.034 8.897 10.283 11.591 13.240 16.344 20.337 24.935 29.61 5 32.671 35.479 38.932 41.401
22 8.643 9.542 10.982 12.338 14.041 17.240 21.337 26.039 30. 813 33.924 36.781 40.289 42.796
23 9.260 10.196 11.689 13.091 14.848 18.137 22.337 27.141 32.007 35.172 38.076 41.638 44.181
24 9.886 10.856 12.401 13.848 15.659 19.037 23.337 28.241 33.1 96 36.415 39.364 42.980 45.559
25 10.520 11.524 13.120 14.611 16.473 19.939 24.337 29.339 3 4.382 37.652 40.646 44.314 46.928
26 11.160 12.198 13.844 15.379 17.292 20.843 25.336 30.435 3 5.563 38.885 41.923 45.642 48.290
27 11.808 12.879 14.573 16.151 18.114 21.749 26.336 31.528 36. 741 40.113 43.195 46.963 49.645
28 12.461 13.565 15.308 16.928 18.939 22.657 27.336 32.620 37. 916 41.337 44.461 48.278 50.993
29 13.121 14.256 16.047 17.708 19.768 23.567 28.336 33.711 3 9.087 42.557 45.722 49.588 52.336
30 13.787 14.953 16.791 18.493 20.599 24.478 29.336 34.800 40. 256 43.773 46.979 50.892 53.672

12.1.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41821Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Biology 102 Labs. Authored by: Lynette Hauser. Provided by: Tidewater Community College. Located at:
http://www.tcc.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Food Choice Lab. Authored by: Dr. William Edwards. Provided by: Niagara University. Located at: http://www.niagara.edu.
License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 12.1: Food Choice Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182212.2: Food Choice Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
One week in advance fill three separate bird feeders, on e with black oil seeds, one with sunflower seeds, and o ne with safflower
seeds. Place the bird feeders in the same tree in close proximi ty to one another. Leave feeders until experiment begins.
Bird Observation
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
metal clipboards 1 per pair of students
binoculars 1 per pair of students
bird book or identification key for local
birds1 per pair of students
Black oil, sunflower, and safflower seed
samples in Petri dishes1 sample of each seed type per table
Statistical Analysis
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
calculators 1 per pair of students
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Instructor Materials Preparation. Authored by: Lynette Hauser. Provided by: Tidewater Community College. Located at:
http://www.tcc.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Food Choice Lab. Authored by: Dr. William Edwards. Provided by: Niagara University. Located at:
https://www.niagara.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 12.2: Food Choice Lab (Instructor Materials Preparati on)* is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: Succession Lab
13.1: Community Ecology Lab
13.2: Community Ecology Lab (Instructor Materials Prepa ration)*
This page titled 13: Succession Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

13.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182313.1: Community Ecology Lab
Describe the processes of primary succession and second ary succession
Explain what makes a community and an ecosystem different
Describe the differences between abiotic and biotic fa ctors
Explain why disturbances play an important role in the pr ogression of succession
Define a climax community
Describe why most areas will not make it to a climax commu nity
Describe the plant communities present after glacial su ccession and how they change the environment
Explain the stages of succession of milk
Describe how pH changes as milk goes through successional st ages
Explain the difference between gram negative and posit ive bacteria
Draw and describe the shapes of bacteria
Formulate a hypothesis based on background data
Ecological Succession of Bacteria in Milk
The communities within ecosystems develop over time, f rom very simple species assemblages, to complex, rich ecosystems. In this
process, called succession, each succeeding species facilitates changes in environment which all ow new species to come into the
ecosystem. As the community becomes more and more compl ex, the biodiversity of the ecosystem also increases. Both biotic and
abiotic processes can reset the succession process. T hat is, events cause by both the community itself, an d outside events can return
the community to an earlier succession state. The gr adual changes in the community are both orderly and predictable in many
ecosystems. The peak or most complex, advanced commu nity that can develop in any abiotic environment is called the climax
community. The picture below describes the developin g communities as a series of steps, each of which can be driven against the
succession process by disturbances:
Question
1. What types of events could “reset” a succession proc ess? Name at least one biotic and one abiotic disturbance.
One example of a severe disturbance, reducing the lan d to bare ground, is the passage of a glacier. Though glaciers have not
covered this part of North America for ten thousand ye ars, there are parts of the continent that are even n ow becoming uncovered
by receding glaciers. One area is the pacific northwes t. From Juneau to Glacier Bay, many glaciers which have previously fallen
directly into the ocean are now leaving bare soil whic h has not been exposed for more than fifty thousand years. Because the
glaciers retreat very slowly, we can watch communities c hange across time in a single snap shot. Take the glac iers of Glacier Bay
National Park, midway between Juneau and Anchorage, Alaska. The glaciers there have been retreating since the explorer
Vancouver’s first expedition in 1794. Since then, the retreat has covered over 100 km, including new coastl ine, meadows and
mountains:Learning Objectives

13.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41823
Question
1. Explain how this retreat will result in different communi ties along the glacier’s retreat, though in similar envi ronments. Hint:
what is the difference between exposed soil at point A and point B.
As the glacier retreats, it leaves nutrient poor soil which can only support simple plants such as liverworts, lichens, and other
primitive plants. As they photosynthesize and die, we se e them enter the decomposer pathway and increase the quality of the soil
for later plants. However, this slow glacier retreat is a unique situation. To set up an experiment to test our understanding of
succession would require hundreds of years, longer than a scientists lifetime. However, some organisms and comm unities proceed
at a much faster rate, within your own refrigerators. The process of milk decomposition from a community of bacteria can test the
same processes and theories in a much more reasonable time frame. This substitution of a simpler and faste r community for
experimental purposes is called a ‘model’ system.
Milk is a highly nutritious food containing carbohyd rates (lactose, or milk sugar), proteins (casein, or curd), and lipids (butterfat).
This high level of nutrition makes milk an excellent medium for the growth of bacteria. Pasteurizing milk does not sterilize it
(sterilizing kills all bacteria) but merely destroys pathogenic bacteria, le aving many bacteria that can multiply and these bac teria
will begin to grow and bring about milk spoilage. Bio logists have discovered that as milk ages, changing c onditions in the milk
bring about a predictable, orderly succession of microorg anism communities.
In this laboratory exercise, you will observe successi onal patterns in several types of milk. You will rec ord changes in the
environmental conditions of the types of milk as the y age. These changes are a result of changes in the b acterial communities. Here
are some of the major bacteria found at various stages.
Stages of Milk Succession
1. Psuedomonas and Achromobacter (gram-negative rods) digest butterfat and give milk a put rid smell
2. Lactobacillus (gram-positive rod) and Streptococcus (gram-positive coccus) ferment lactose to lactic acid and acetic acid.
3. Acidity sours milk and converts casein to curd.

13.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418234. Yeast (fungi) thrive in acidic conditions and metaboli ze the acids into non-acidic compounds.
5. Bacillus metabolize proteins into ammonia products and raise the milk’s pH. Spoiled milk odor is very noticeable at thi s stage.
Questions
1. What are some advantages to using bacteria as opposed to plants in this experiment?
2. What factors might speed or delay a successional proces s? Apply your example to succession in milk.
Locate the milk samples available in the lab. Take a look at the samples and form two conditions you would l ike to study. Develop
a short design for studying the first condition, state the dependent and independent variable, control an d experimental group, the
hypothesis and any variables which have been controlle d. Then develop a short design for studying the secon d condition, state the
dependent and independent variable, control and experim ental group, the hypothesis and any variables which hav e been controlled.
Just as in any of our experiments, you must use effecti ve scientific method. Develop hypotheses (at least 2—one with different
milk types and one with either temperature or time a s an independent variable) that you can test in the process of the milk
community succession.
We will be performing a gram stain on our milk sample s. Remember from our microbiology section that bacte ria can be either
gram negative (pink) or gram positive (purple). We will also look at these bacteria under a microscope t o identify their shapes.
Recall that bacteria can be cocci, bacilli, or spirillu m.
Questions
1. What hypotheses are you testing? List both here.
2. What information led you to ask these hypotheses?
3. Make predictions about your hypotheses. i.e. How will you know i f the data supports or refutes your hypotheses?
4. Be sure to identify the variables you will test, and those you will control for each experiment.
5. Prepare a table for data collection. You will be rec ording the pH, smell, consistency, and bacteria shapes and co lors present in
your milk samples.
On each lab bench are several small beakers. You will obtain a sample of the milk samples you need for your experimental design
and test the pH, color, consistency, smell and other chara cteristics of each sample. For each milk sample:
1. Using the Vernier, take the pH of each flask. Record your results.
2. Record the color, odor (sour, putrid), and consistency (coagulation slight, moderate, chunky) for the milk in e ach flask.
3. Perform Gram Staining as outlined below. Note: We will be using chemicals and open flames. Exercise caution when
performing this portion of the lab.
Materials
Microscope slide
Bunsen burner and tubing
Crystal violet (primary stain)
Iodine solution/Gram’s Iodine (mordant that fixes crystal violet to cell wall)
Decolorizer (e.g. ethanol)
Safranin (secondary stain)
Water (preferably in a squirt bottle)
Procedure
1. Make a slide with your milk sample to be stained. Heat fix the sample to the slide by carefully passing the slide wi th a drop or
small piece of sample on it through a Bunsen burner thr ee times.
2. Add the primary stain (crystal violet) to the sample/sli de and let sit for 15 seconds. Rinse slide with a gentle stream of water for
a maximum of 5 seconds to remove unbound crystal violet.
3. Add Gram’s iodine for 15 seconds – this is an agent that fix es the crystal violet to the bacterial cell wall.
4. Rinse sample/slide with acetone or alcohol for ~3 second s and rinse with a gentle stream of water. The alcohol will
decolorize the sample if it is Gram negative, removing the crystal violet. However, if the alcohol remains on the sample for
too long, it may also decolorize Gram positive cells.

13.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418235. Add the secondary stain, safranin, to the slide and inc ubate for 15 seconds. Wash with a gentle stream of water fo r a maximum
of 5 seconds. If the bacteria is Gram positive, it will retain the primary stain (crystal violet) and not take the seco ndary stain
(safranin), causing it to look violet/purple under a mic roscope. If the bacteria is Gram negative, it will lose the pri mary stain and
take the secondary stain, causing it to appear red when viewed under a microscope.
Questions
1. Describe the changing sequence of organisms and corre sponding environmental changes during succession in th e milk samples.
Which bacteria are in each of your milk samples?
2. Describe the changing sequence of organisms and corre sponding environmental changes during succession in ch ocolate milk.
Do the results of your investigation match your hypothes is?
3. Compare succession in one or more types milk. Propose reaso ns for differences.
4. Propose another experiment to test the environmental f actors and/or organisms changing in your proposed scenario for milk
succession.
5. How could you improve your test of the hypotheses? Be spec ific!
6. Identify what happened to the pH of the milk as time passed.
7. Infer what the change in pH means about the populations of m icroorganisms in the milk.
This page titled 13.1: Community Ecology Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Staci Forgey,
James Holden, William Edwards, & William Edwards via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

13.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182413.2: Community Ecology Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)*
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Ecological Succession of Bacteria in Milk
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
clean microscope slides 1 box
coverslips 1 box
Bunsen Burner 1 per table
tubing for Bunsen Burners 1 per table
wire loop 1 per table
50 ml beaker 3 per table
pH probe 1 per table can use pH paper as an alternative
compound light microscope 1-2 per table
clothespins 2 per table to hold slides for gram staining procedure
gram staining kit 1 per tableincludes Safranin, Crystal violet, Iodine and
ethanol
Bunsen striker 1 per table
squirt bottle of DI water 1 per table
Side bench for students to share: empty milk container s with nutritional information: whole milk, 2%, 1%, ski m, chocolate, whole
buttermilk and reduce fat buttermilk
Side bench for students to share: 1L beaker of 10% bleach s olution (to disinfect slides are staining)
1 week prior to lab purchase the following:
Whole milk: 1 gallon (red tape)
2% milk: 1/2 gallon (white tape)
1% milk: 1/2 gallon (green tape)
Skim milk: 1/2 gallon (blue tape)
Chocolate milk; 1/2 gallon (brown tape)
Whole buttermilk: 1/2 gallon (yellow tape)
Reduced fat buttermilk: 1/2 gallon (orange tape)
Milk set up:
1. Label seven 300 ml clear bottles with colors listed above.
2. Pour 100 ml of each milk type intwo their respective bot tles
3. Place bottles on a cart in the prep area until the first lab
4. Repeat steps 1-3 each day until the last day of the lab
5. At the end of the two week there should be a total of 70 lab eld bottles
Milk in incubator (should be set at 37 C)
1. Obtain one 300 ml clear glass bottl

13.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41824g
2. Pour 100 ml of whole milk into the bottl and place in the incubator (whole milk is the only type to go in the incuba tor)
3. Repeat steps 1-2 each day until the last day of this lab
4. At the end of the two week period there should be a total of 1 0 labeled bottles
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Instructor Materials Preparation. Authored by: Lynette Hauser. Provided by: Tidewater Community College. Located at:
http://www.tcc.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Community Ecology Lab. Authored by: Dr. William Edwards. Provided by: Niagara University. Located at:
https://www.niagara.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
This page titled 13.2: Community Ecology Lab (Instructor Materials Pre paration)* is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
14: Ecosystem Lab
14.1: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab
14.2: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab (Instructor Materi als Preparation)
This page titled 14: Ecosystem Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

14.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182514.1: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab
Define eutrophication and explain how human behaviors lead to eutrophication.
Explain how algae blooms are detrimental to aquatic ecos ystems.
Explain how zooplankton might impact algae blooms caused by cultural eutrophication.
Predict the effects of changes in an aquatic ecosystem using a computer model
Download a PDF of the lab to print.
An ecosystem is defined as an association of life and the physic al environment. Ecosystems take into account both li ving
organisms and the nonliving components like water, soi l, light, etc. Ecosystems can be either terrestrial (dessert, forest, grassland)
or aquatic (coral reef, pond, estuary).
Within ecosystems scientists study energy transformations. Energy typically enters the ecosystem from the su n, is transferred to
photosynthetic organisms (primary producers) and then to organisms that need to eat others for energy, th e consumers or
heterotrophs. An ecosystem will typically have several levels of consumers. The transfer of energy from org anism to organism can
be illustrated through trophic levels. A trophic level includes all organisms the same number of transfer steps away from the
energy input into an ecosystem. A simple trophic leve l diagram for a forest ecosystem is illustrated belo w. Notice the
photosynthetic organisms like plants are on the fir st trophic level, one step away from the energy sour ce. The squirrel is a primary
consumer (eating plants directly) but on the second tropic level two steps away from the primary energy s ource. At each step along
the pathway some energy is lost as heat. Therefore at higher tropic levels there are fewer organisms (as noted by the pyramid
shape) and most ecosystems support no more than four or fi ve total trophic levels.
Figure: Thompsma. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Trophiclevels. jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Ecosystems are changing due to human behaviors. Human s negatively impact natural ecosystems through activ ities such as
deforestation, hunting, and pollution. Today’s lab fo cuses on the impact of eutrophication on aquatic ecosystems. Through
eutrophication bodies of water acquire extremely hig h concentrations of nutrients. The source of these nu trients can be natural or
artificial. Humans cause cultural eutrophication thr ough behaviors like run off from agricultural fields, wastewater from sewageLearning Objectives

14.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41825treatment plants, and excel detergents running into b odies of water. The excess nutrients fuel photosynthe sis causing an increased
growth in algae, a photosynthetic primary producer p rotist, and an algae bloom. During the bloom the alga e cover the surface of the
water. When the algae die, decomposers in the ecosyst em break down the protists using up the oxygen availab le in the aquatic
environment through respiration. As oxygen levels decr ease (hypoxia), fish die, and the balance of the ecosystem is destroyed.
In an effort to understand ecosystems and human impac t on ecosystems scientists often use models. Modeling o f ecosystems serves
two main functions. First, the model represents scient ist’s best understanding of the relationships/functi ons that define the
ecosystem. Second, models allow scientists to investigate qu estions that would be impossible to pursue in reality.
Ecosystem models fall into two categories, analytical models and simulation models. Analytical models use mat h to explain simple
linear relationships. Simulation models, more widely u sed, are used to illustrate complex non linear relat ionships in ecosystems.
Since the natural ecosystem has numerous interactions between living and non living components ecosystem models must simplify
this real world situation. Models incorporate only the m ost important components or group similar components in an effort to
effectively represent the ecosystem in a straightforward fashion.
Silver Springs
This lab will utilize the Silver Spring model, an analyt ical model, developed by H. T. Odum in 1957. Silver Spri ngs is a real aquatic
ecosystem located in central Florida. Odum developed hi s model to illustrate energy flow through the differe nt trophic levels. The
main organisms in Sliver Sping organized by trophic leve l are:
First trophic level: Eelgrass and algae are the main photosynthetic organi sms.
Second trophic level: Invertebrates, turtles, and fish are the herbivores.
Third tropic level: Both fish and invertebrates are carnivores and prey up on the herbivores.
Fourth tropic level: The top carnivores consist of gar and bass, which eat the other fish species at lower trophic levels.
Decomposers: Bacteria and crayfish are the main decomposers.
The Silver Springs model is on Blackboard as an Excel f ile. The general model structure is pictured on the n ext page. Odum’s
model contains five state variables representing ener gy inputs into the four tropic levels and the decompo sers. Flux rates describe
the addition/removal of energy to/from the various p arts of the system and the rate of transfer of energ y between the components of
the system. In the Excel file you can change the in itial values (X) of any or all of the state variables and coefficie nts (P), and
control the length of time simulated. Following a sim ulation “run” you will be easily able to view graphs of the state variables or
community respiration versus time. To change the init ial values, simply type over the current value and p ress return. Use the model
to investigate the scenarios below:
We will use the model in two different scenarios in to day’s lab, to understand eutrophication and to determ ine the impact of bread
on the ecosystem.

14.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41825
Figure: Odum’s Silver Spring Model. Sholto Maud. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Silver_Spring_ Model.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Activity I
To understand more about eutrophication, you will co nduct a laboratory experiment (Part 1) and use the Sil ver Springs computer
model (Part 2)
Part 1
One potential way to decrease cultural eutrophication is by having higher trophic level organisms consume the algae. We will
investigate this possibility using Daphnia, a zooplankton that feeds on green algae, and an al ga species called Chorella. Although
the information we gain from this activity is useful, i t is an over simplification as to what might really occur in the aquatic
environment.
We will use a colorimeter to measure the algae population. A colorimeter mea sures absorbance, the amount of light that is
absorbed by a solution rather than the amount of li ght that can pass through. As the algae population inc reases (number of algae
cells), the absorbance will also increase. It is a direct rela tionship.
Procedure
1. Obtain two cuvettes and a transfer pipette.
2. Fill one cuvette with distilled water. This cuvette is t he blank
3. Place the blank into the colorimeter and zero it. This p rovides a baseline measure for the experiment. Save the blan k cuvette for
later use.
4. Using the disposable pipette, fill the second cuvette wi th the Chorella algae. Use the pipette to try and disperse the algae evenly
throughout the cuvette.
5. Add 10 daphnia to the cuvette and immediately measure the absorbance u sing the colorimeter. Record your reading in the table
below.
6. Remove the cuvette from the colorimeter and allow it to sit, undisturbed for 30 minutes.
7. After 30 minutes, place the blank cuvette (with distilled water) back into the colorimeter. Use the blank to re-zero the machine.
8. Remove the blank cuvette and put the algae/ Daphnia cuvette into the colorimeter. Measure the absorbance and record your
reading in the table below.

14.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41825Table 1: Colorimeter data of Daphnia feeding on Chorella
Absorbance value
Before feeding (time zero)
Questions
1. How did the absorbance change from time 0 to time 30 minu tes? Did the absorbance increase, decrease, or stay the sa me?
2. What does the absorbance value change tell you about th e concentration of the Chorella? Did it increase, decrease, or stay the
same?
3. What does the absorbance value chance tell you about t he behavior of the Daphnia? Did they consume Chorella? How do you
know?
4. In a real aquatic ecosystem, do you think zooplankton could decrease the impact of cultural eutrophication and algae blooms?
Explain why or why not.
Part 2
Now that you have observed trophic interactions and c ultural eutrophication in a lab experiment, apply th at knowledge to the
computer model. Use the model to analyze the sensitivity of the Silve r Springs ecosystem to cultural eutrophication. Remem ber
that alga is a photosynthetic producer on the first t rophic level. The Daphnia would be one of the herbivores in the environment o n
the second trophic level. Change the levels in the model to simulate a eutrophication situation. View th e graphs to see how the
different trophic level populations change through the simulation.
Questions
Based on your findings with the model, answer the following que stions:
1. What is the maximum number of producers the ecosystem can support before higher trophic levels begin to decli ne?
2. What happens to community respiration in the simula ted algae bloom? Does it increase, decrease, or stay the sa me?
3. What happens to the decomposer population in the simul ated algae bloom? Does it increase, decrease, or stay the same? Why?
4. Which group of carnivores (which trophic level) is more greatly impacted by the algae bloom? Why do you think this is the
case?
Activity II
Eutrophication is not the only way that human activi ties affect aquatic ecosystems. Tourism in the Silver Sp ring area has grown
lately as a result of more of vacationers visiting Ce ntral Florida. When visiting Silver Spring, tourists enj oy feeding the ducks. But,
the ducks are gaining weight and becoming dependent on the tourists as a food source disrupting the normal food chain in the
environment. Some environmental organizations have v oiced displeasure regarding the dependence of ducks on bread handouts
from visitors to the lake. Is it feasible to stop fe eding the ducks or have they become too reliant on t he tourists and the bread
handouts?
Task
Use the model to analyze the sensitivity of long-term duck populations to an increase or decrease in brea d input. There is a separate
variable for bread and the ducks would be on the seco nd trophic level as herbivores. View the graphs to see how the different
trophic level populations change through the simulation.
Questions
Based on your findings with the model, answer the following que stions:
1. Is an elimination of bread feasible? Why or why not?
2. How would the system respond to increasing levels of touri sm, assuming bread levels also increased? What trophic lev els are
most impacted by increased levels of bread?
3. What is the role of bread in the system, and how does its presence or absence impact the ecology of Silver Spri ngs?

14.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/418254. What would be your suggestion to the managing board of Silver Springs? Should they completely eliminate the tou rists feeding
the ducks? Why or why not?
This page titled 14.1: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

14.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182614.2: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation)
Lab Materials
This is the prep for one section of 24 students.
Activity I
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
colorimeter 1 per bench
cuvettes 2 per bench
live Daphnia 1-2 vials can be shared by all lab sections
Chorella algae 1-2 vials can be shared by all lab sections
Activity II
Students will do this part in table teams (groups of 4).
Materials Quantity Notes
laptop computers 1 per pair of students

This page titled 14.2: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab (Instructor Mat erials Preparation) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
15: Sample Lab Report
15.1: Sample Lab Report- Sugar Size and Diffusion Through a Mock-Cell Membrane
15.2: Rubric
This page titled 15: Sample Lab Report is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

15.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182715.1: Sample Lab Report- Sugar Size and Diffusion Through a Mock-Cell Membrane
BIO 101L
Instructor: L. Hauser
Introduction
Diffusion is the process in which a substance moves fro m an area of high concentration to an area of lower concentration. It is
important for membranes to be semi-permeable. If mem branes were universally permeable, they would not leg itimately serve their
purpose as membranes; certain substances need to be k ept out of a cell, and others kept in. If membranes were not at all permeable,
there would be no interface between the cell and its environment – effectively starving the cell. Membran es, being selectively
permeable, allow in nutrients and other necessary substance s, and also provide for the purging of cell waste.
This experiment investigates the permeability of cell membranes to various types of sugars: polysaccharides, disaccharides, and
polysaccharides. Dialysis tubing is used to simulate a cell membrane; it is permeable to small molecules a nd water, but not to larger
molecules.
Given the generally larger size of polysaccharides, it is hypothesized that starch will not pass through th e dialysis tubing, and that
iodine will pass through the membrane due to the sma ll size of its molecules. Based on the trouble that so me people have digesting
lactose, it is predicted that it is a polysaccharide or d isaccharide and will yield diffusion results similar to sta rch.
Methods
I) Permeability of cell model to starch
The 100ml graduated cylinder was used to measure out 50ml of tap water; the water was poured into a 250ml be aker. One teaspoon
of corn starch was added to the beaker and stirred wit h a spoon. A 50ml beaker was filled with 50ml of tap water. A piece of
dialysis tubing was placed into the beaker of water u ntil it became soft and pliable. The tubing was then extracted from the beaker;
one end was tied closed with dental floss, using a double -knot. The other end of the dialysis tubing was open ed; a pipette was used
to fill the dialysis tubing with the starch solution. Another piece of dental floss was used to tie the end of the dialysis tubing closed.
A second 250ml beaker was filled halfway with tap water. Another pipette was used to add 15 drops of iodine t o the beaker; the
solution was mixed with a spoon. The filled dialysis tube was placed into the 250ml beaker so that the co rnstarch mixture was
submerged in the iodine water mixture. After 15 minutes h ad passed, results were observed and recorded.
II) Permeability of cell model to lactose
Part I: Determining the type of sugar being tested
The 100ml graduated cylinder was used to measure out 100ml of tap water; the water was poured into a 250ml beaker. Two
teaspoons of the lactose was added to the water, and t he solution was stirred with a spoon for thorough mixi ng. 50ml of the
resultant solution was measured out using the 100ml gradua ted cylinder, and was reserved for Part II.
Twenty drops of Benedict’s reagent were placed in a c lean, empty test tube. Twenty drops of the lactose sol ution were added to the
same test tube, and the solution was heated in a boilin g water bath for 2 minutes. The results were then interpret ed.
Twenty drops of Barfoed’s reagent were placed in a cle an, empty test tube. Twenty drops of lactose solutio n were added to the
same test tube. The resultant solution was headed in a b oiling water bath for 3.5 minutes. The results were then i nterpreted.
Part II: Permeability of cell model
This method is based on the premise of the unknown sugar being a disaccharide.
A 50ml beaker was filled with 50 ml tap water. A piece of dialysis tubing was placed in the beaker of water a nd left to soak until it
became soft and pliable. The dialysis tubing was then r emoved from the beaker, and one end tied closed with a double-knotted
piece of dental floss. The other end of the dialysis tubing was opened. The tubing was filled with lactose so lution (set aside from
Part I); a pipette was used to transfer the solution from the graduated cylinder to the tubing. A second piece of dental floss was used
to tie the other end of the dialysis tubing closed. A sec ond 250ml beaker was filled halfway full with tap water.

15.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182715 drops of iodine were added to the tap water in the beaker. The resulting solution was swirled with a spoo n to mix it; the colors of
the baggie solution and the beaker solution were not ed. The dialysis tubing baggie was placed in the 250m l beaker so that the
lactose solution was submerged in the beaker solution, and left to sit undisturbed for 15 minutes. The c olor of the baggie solution
was noted.
The baggie was removed from the beaker and samples of t he beaker solution were transferred to separate, appro priately marked test
tubes. 20 drops of Bendict’s reagent were added to on e test tube, and the tube heated for 2 minutes. The color of the resulting
solution was noted. 20 drops of Barfoed’s reagent were a dded to the second test tube, and the tube heated fo r 3.5 minutes. The
color of the resulting solution was noted.
Results
Table 1: Starch experiment results
Solution in baggie Solution in Beaker
Starting color Murky white Clear yellow
Color after 15 minutes Dark purple yellow
In the starch experiment as seen in Table 1, the starc h solution inside of the dialysis baggie was initially a murky white color. The
solution in the beaker, external to the baggie was a clear yellow color. After 15 minutes of submersion in the beaker solution, the
baggie had turned a dark purple color. The beaker solut ion remained clear and yellow.
In Part I of the lactose experiment, the lactose solut ion was initially a dark brown color. Benedict’s reage nt is pale blue in color.
Lactose, mixed and heated with the Benedict’s reagent, yielded a solution of a murky yellow-brown color. Bar foed’s reagent, like
Benedict’s reagent, is pale blue in color. Lactose, mixed an d heated with the Barfoed’s reagent, yielded a pale blue solu tion.
Table 2: Lactose experiment results
Solution in baggie Solution in Beaker
Starting color brown yellow
Color after 15 minutes yellow (? Not given)
In Part II of the lactose experiment, as seen in Table 2, the lactose solution inside of the dialysis bagg ie was initially dark brown in
coloration. The iodine and water solution in the bea ker was a clear yellow color. A Benedict’s test on the beaker solution after the
experiment yielded a dark brown liquid; a Barfoed’s test on the beaker solution after the experiment resulted in a clear blue liquid.
Discussion
Permeability of cell model to starch
The starch solution inside of the dialysis baggie went from a murky white color to dark purple; iodine fro m the beaker solution
must have diffused into the dialysis baggie, reacting with the starch solution and producing the “positive ” dark-purple result,
confirming the presence of a polysaccharide inside o f the baggie. The beaker solution remained a clear y ellow color throughout the
experiment; it can hence be inferred that no polysa ccharide was present in the beaker solution at the end of the experiment, and in
turn, that no starch diffused out of the baggie and into t he beaker solution during the 15-minute soaking.
The experimental hypothesis for this section was cor rect; starch was unable to diffuse through the cell model, however, iodine was
able to diffuse through the cell model. The discrepa ncy in permeability is due to the difference in the sizes of iodine and starch
molecules.
Permeability of cell model to lactose
The Benedict’s test control on lactose yielded a solu tion that was a murky yellow-brown color; this indicate d the presence of a
mono- or di- saccharide. The Barfoed’s test control on lactose yielded a solution that was pale blue in c olor, without any red
precipitate; this indicates that no monosaccharaide s were present, and in turn, that lactose is a disaccha ride. The solution inside of

15.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/41827the dialysis tubing changed color in the course of t he experiment; this implies that iodine diffused into the dialysis tubing and
reacted with the lactose solution. The resulting cle ar yellow color indicates that there were no polysacch arides present inside of the
dialysis tubing.
A negative Benedict’s test is of blue coloration; a t est on the beaker solution after the experiment is a very dark red-orange-brown
color that looks similar to the original lactose in t he tubing. A Barfoed’s test on the post-experiment be aker solution was a clear
light blue; no monosaccharaides diffused out into th e beaker solution, but this result was irrelevant. Th e Benedict’s test revealed
that lactose was able to diffuse out of the dialysis ba ggie, into the beaker solution. If the cell model is reliable, it appears that
lactose is able to diffuse in and out of cells.
The experimental hypothesis for this section appears to have been wrong; the cell model was permeable to lactose.
Overall, the cell model has demonstrated impermeability to large molecules such as polysaccharides, and perm eability to smaller
molecules such as disaccharides and iodine molecules. Since the model was permeable to a disaccharide, it wo uld be reasonable to
infer that the model will be permeable to monosaccha raides, as they are even smaller in size than disacc harides. Further testing
with a variety of disaccharides should be done, to det ermine whether lactose is unique or whether the cell m odel is permeable to all
disaccharides.
This page titled 15.1: Sample Lab Report- Sugar Size and Diffusion Thro ugh a Mock-Cell Membrane is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and
was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

15.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4182815.2: Rubric
The following rubric will be used to grade the lab reports:
Excellent
5 pointsSatisfactory
2.5 pointsUnsatisfactory
0 points
Title PageContains title, student name,
instructor name and sectionMissing either instructor name
or sectionNo title page
Formatting: typed, spacing Typed and single spaced Typed, but not single spaced Not typed
Grammar and SpellingNo errors; contains complete
sentences and no misspellingsA few minor errors in grammar
and spellingSeveral major errors in
grammar and spelling
Formatting: headingsEach section has a heading as
described in templateSome sections lack headings No headings
HypothesisPredictions are clearly stated
and written as a testable
statementPredictions/expected outcomes
are not clearly statedNot written as a testable
statement
MaterialsAll equipment and materials
described; identify variables,
controls and constantsMaterials incompletely
describedNo identification of variables,
controls and constants
Procedure Clear step-by step descriptionDescription missing details
making it difficult for another
scientist to repeat experimentDescription missing so much
detail it would be impossible to
repeat
ResultsClearly written description of
results comparing controls and
variablesResults are presented but no
comparison between controls
and variables are madeNo written description of results
Data tables, graphs or chartsEasy to interpret, clear labels,
all data, including calculated
averages, includedDisorganized (not easy to
understand, missing labels) but
all data includedDisorganized and or data clearly
missing
ConclusionClearly explains acceptance or
rejection of hypothesis using
data to support conclusion;
identifies sources of errorAccepts or rejects hypothesis
but does not use data to explain
why; or does not identify
sources of errorDoes not explain conclusion
and does not identify sources of
error
Total ______out of 50 points
This page titled 15.2: Rubric is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lynette Hauser via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/132979Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Biology II Laboratory Manual (Lumen)
Webpages: 78
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 94.9% (74 pages)
Undeclared: 2.6% (2 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 2.6% (2 pages)
By Page
Biology II Laboratory Manual (Lumen) - CC BY 4.0
Front Matter - CC BY 4.0
TitlePage - CC BY 4.0
InfoPage - CC BY 4.0
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - CC BY 4.0
1: Safety and Viruses - CC BY 4.0
1.1: Lab Safety Contract - CC BY 4.0
1.2: Viruses Lab - CC BY 4.0
1.3: Viruses Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) CC BY 4.0
1.4: Dolphin Case Study - CC BY 4.0
1.5: Dolphin Case Study (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
2: Microbiology - CC BY 4.0
2.1: Microbiology and Protista Lab - CC BY 4.0
2.2: Microbiology and Protista Lab (Instructor
Materials Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
2.3: Reading- Prokaryotes - CC BY 4.0
2.4: Reading- Protists - CC BY 4.0
3: Fungi - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Fungi Lab - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Fungi Lab (Instructor Materials Preparation) CC BY 4.0
3.3: Reading- Fungi - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.4: Case Study- Amphibian Die Off, Chytrid Fungi CC BY 4.0
4: Seedless Plants - CC BY 4.0
4.1: Seedless Plant Lab - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Seedless Plant Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
4.3: Reading- Seedless Plants - CC BY 4.0
5: Seed Plants - CC BY 4.05.1: Seed Plants Lab - CC BY 4.0
5.2: Seed Plants Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
5.3: Reading- Seed Plants - CC BY 4.0
6: Plant Organization - CC BY 4.0
6.1: Plant Organization Lab - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Plant Organization Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
7: Invertebrate I - CC BY 4.0
7.1: Invertebrate Lab I - CC BY 4.0
7.2: Invertebrate Lab I (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Reading- Sponges - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Reading- Cnidarians - CC BY 4.0
7.5: Reading- Roundworms - CC BY 4.0
7.6: Reading- Arthropods - CC BY 4.0
8: Invertebrate II - CC BY 4.0
8.1: Invertebrate Lab II - CC BY 4.0
8.2: Invertebrate Lab II (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Reading- Flatworms - CC BY 4.0
8.4: Reading- Mollusks - CC BY 4.0
8.5: Reading - Annelids - CC BY 4.0
8.6: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles - CC
BY 4.0
8.7: Natal Bean Discrimination by Bean Beetles
(Instructor Materials Preparation)* - CC BY 4.0
9: Deuterostomes - CC BY 4.0
9.1: Deuterostome Lab - CC BY 4.0
9.2: Deuterostome Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
9.3: Reading- Echinoderms - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
9.4: Reading- Chordates - CC BY 4.0

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/13297910: Cardiovascular/Respiratory System and Pig
Dissection - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab - CC BY 4.0
10.2: Fetal Pig Dissection Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
10.3: Reading- Fetal Pig Dissection - CC BY 4.0
10.4: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab CC BY 4.0
10.5: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems Lab
(Instructor Materials Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
11: Homeostasis - CC BY 4.0
11.1: Homeostasis Lab - CC BY 4.0
11.2: Homeostasis Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
12: Food Choice - CC BY 4.0
12.1: Food Choice Lab - CC BY 4.0
12.2: Food Choice Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation)* - CC BY 4.013: Succession Lab - CC BY 4.0
13.1: Community Ecology Lab - CC BY 4.0
13.2: Community Ecology Lab (Instructor Materials
Preparation)* - CC BY 4.0
14: Ecosystem Lab - CC BY 4.0
14.1: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab - CC BY 4.0
14.2: Ecosystem and Eutrophication Lab (Instructor
Materials Preparation) - CC BY 4.0
15: Sample Lab Report - CC BY 4.0
15.1: Sample Lab Report- Sugar Size and Diffusion
Through a Mock-Cell Membrane - CC BY 4.0
15.2: Rubric - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - CC BY 4.0
Index - CC BY 4.0
Glossary - CC BY 4.0
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared