GSU-TM-PHYSICS II
Taha Mzoughi
Georgia State University

GSU-TM-Physics II (2212)

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/87803TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Fabric of Physics
Licensing
Licensing
1: Introduction to Physics, Measurements and Mathematics Tools
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
1.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant Figures
1.4: Units and Standards
1.5: Unit Conversion
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
1.8: Vectors
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
1.9: Math Review of Other Topics
1.9.1: Geometrical Shapes
1.9.2: Triangles
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using The Substitution Method
1.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Elimination Method
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
1.9.11: Functions
1.9.12: Basic Functions
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
1.9.15: Derivatives
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and Minima,
Optimization
1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals
1.9.21: Integrals
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/878031.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia
1.9.25: Table of Integrals
1.9.26: Further Vector Topics
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equations
2: Electrostatics - Charges, Forces and Fields
2.1: Unit Learning Outcomes
2.2: Electrical Charge
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
2.5: Electric Field
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
2.7: Electric Flux
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
2.11: Summary
2.12: Practice
2.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer)
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
3.1: Electric Potential Energy
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
3.E: Practice
3.S: Summary
4: Current and Resistance
4.1: Electrical Current
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
4.4: Ohm's Law
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
4.6: Superconductors
4.7: Practice
4.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
4.S: Summary
5: Resistive Networks
5.1: Electromotive Force
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/878035.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
5.6: RC Circuits
5.7: Practice
5.S: Summary
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and Fields
6.1: Introduction to Magnetism
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
6.6: Ampère’s Law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
6.12: The Hall Effect
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
6.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary)
1.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary)
7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
7.2: Motional Emf
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
7.6: Inductance
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
7.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
7.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers)
7.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies (Exercise)
7.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary)
8: Electromagnetic Waves
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
8.3: Polarization
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
8.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
8.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
8.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/878039: Geometrical Optics
9.1: The Propagation of Light
9.2: The Law of Reflection
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
9.4: Refraction
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
9.7: Optical Instruments
9.8: The Eye
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.3: Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
9.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
9.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
9.8.8: Biology of vision
9.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
9.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
9.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)
10: Physical Optics
10.1: Interference and Diffraction
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
10.5: Interference in Thin Films
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction
10.11: Holography
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
10.A: Interference (Answers)
1.A: Diffraction (Answers)
10.E: Interference (Exercises)
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
10.S: Interference (Summary)
1.S: Diffraction (Summary)

5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8780311: Nuclear Physics
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
11.3: Radioactive Decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
11.5: Fission
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
11.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
11.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
11.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)
12: Atomic Structure
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
12.3: Electron Spin
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
12.6: Lasers
12.A: Atomic Structure (Answers)
12.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises)
12.S: Atomic Structure (Summary)
Some Equations and Constants
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing
Detailed Licensing
Index
Glossary

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76268The Fabric of Physics
This book is currently being developed by adapting c ontent from the https://libretexts.org library of books and resources. Its first
version was put to use on January 2023. Please expect n umerous errors in the presentation of the material. W hen you meet any
error, please help out by reporting it.
The goal of this book is to streamline the content to the essential content, the Fabric, for the Introducto ry Calculus Based Physics
course. In addition to the concepts, numerous worked out examples will be provided. Historical context and pr ogression will be
used only within examples when appropriate. Similarly, appl ications and proofs will be limited to examples when app ropriate.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88037Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76269Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Introduction to Physics, Measurements and Mathematics Tools
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
1.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant Figures
1.4: Units and Standards
1.5: Unit Conversion
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
1.8: Vectors
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
1.9: Math Review of Other Topics
1.9.1: Geometrical Shapes
1.9.2: Triangles
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using The Substitu tion Method
1.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Eliminat ion Method
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's R ule
1.9.11: Functions
1.9.12: Basic Functions
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
1.9.15: Derivatives
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear Approximatio n, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and Minima, Optimization
1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals
1.9.21: Integrals
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia
1.9.25: Table of Integrals

21.9.26: Further Vector Topics
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equations
1: Introduction to Physics, Measurements and Mathematics Tools is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094751.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
Describe the scope of physics.
Calculate the order of magnitude of a quantity.
Compare measurable length, mass, and timescales quantitati vely.
Describe the relationships among models, theories, and la ws.
Like all sciences, physics is devoted to the understan ding natural phenomena. In particular, in physics, we try to understand all
physical phenomena from the world of the very small invisible subatomic particles to stars, galaxies and the entire universe.
Scientific findings whether they are just verified obse rvations, laws or theories are just attempts to describ e nature. Anyone can and
should challenge and improve these findings by performing experiments and collecting evidence.
1.1.1 The Scope of Physics
Figure: One of the first images captured by the James W ebb Space Telescope (JWST), shows a group of five galaxi es called
the Stephan's Quintet. The image reveals that two of t he galaxies are currently merging with each other, g iving us insights into
galactic interactions.
Take a look at the image of Stephan's Quintet in Figur e. Each of the Galaxies contains billions of individua l stars as well as
huge clouds of gas and dust. This pair of galaxies li es a staggering 290 million light-years away (1.7 x 1 0 mi) from our
own Milky Way galaxy. The stars and planets that make up each of t hese galaxies might seem to be the furthest thing f rom most
people’s everyday lives, but the forces that cause the Galaxies to act as they do are thought to be the sam e forces we contend with
here on Earth. The gravity that causes the stars of a Ga laxy to rotate and revolve is thought to be the same as what causes water to
flow over hydroelectric dams here on Earth. Through a study of physics, you gain a greater understanding of the
interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in t his universe.
Think, now, about all the technological devices you u se on a regular basis. Computers, smartphones, global pos itioning systems
(GPSs), MP3 players, and satellite radio might come to mi nd. Then, think about the most exciting modern technol ogies you have
heard about in the news, such as trains that levitate a bove tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light ar ound them, and microscopic
robots that fight cancer cells in our bodies. All these groundbreaking advances, commonplace or unbelievabl e, rely on the
principles of physics. Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians,
physical therapists, electricians, and computer pro grammers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For example, a pilot must
understand how wind forces affect a flight path; a phy sical therapist must understand how the muscles in the body experience
forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this t ext, the principles of physics are propelling new, ex citing technologies, and
these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
The underlying order of nature makes science in gene ral, and physics in particular, interesting and enjo yable to study. For example,
what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in com mon? Both contain energy that can be converted to o ther forms. The law of
conservation of energy (which says that energy can cha nge form but is never lost) ties together such topic s as food calories,
batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understandi ng this law makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes andLearning Objectives

1.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109475how they relate to one another. Apparently unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable phy sical laws, permitting an
understanding beyond just the memorization of lists of facts.
Science consists of theories and laws that are the gener al truths of nature, as well as the body of knowledge they encompass.
Scientists are continuously trying to expand this bo dy of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the laws that describe it.
Physics, which comes from the Greek phúsis, meaning “nature,” is concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter,
space, and time to uncover the fundamental mechanis ms that underlie every phenomenon. This concern for d escribing the basic
phenomena in nature essentially defines the scope of physics.
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level. It emphasizes the use of a small n umber of quantitative
laws to do this, which can be useful to other fields pu shing the performance boundaries of existing technol ogies. Consider a
smartphone (Figure). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various circuits inside the devic e. This knowledge
helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building a smartphone. Knowledge of the physics
underlying these devices is required to shrink their size or increase their processing speed. Or, think about a GPS. Physics describes
the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, and the time it takes t o travel that distance. When
you use a GPS in a vehicle, it relies on physics equations to determine the travel time from one location to another.
Figure: The Apple iPhone is a common smartphone with a GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows
through the circuits of this device. Engineers use thei r knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with fea tures that consumers
will enjoy. One specific feature of an iPhone is the GPS function. A GPS uses physics equations to determine th e drive time
between two locations on a map.
Figure: (a) Using a scanning tunneling microscope, scie ntists can see the individual atoms (diameters around 10 m) that
compose this sheet of gold. (b) Tiny phytoplankton swim among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They ran ge from a few
micrometers (1 μm is 10 m) to as much as 2 mm (1 mm is 1 0 m) in length. (c) These two colliding galaxies, kno wn as NGC
4676A (right) and NGC 4676B (left), are nicknamed “ The Mice” because of the tail of gas emanating from e ach one. They are
located 300 million light-years from Earth in the co nstellation Coma Berenices. Eventually, these two gala xies will merge into one.
(credit a: modification of work by Erwinrossen; credi t b: modification of work by Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University;
NOAA Corps Collections; credit c: modification of wor k by NASA, H. Ford (JHU), G. Illingworth (UCSC/LO), M. Clampin
(STScI), G. Hartig (STScI), the ACS Science Team, and E SA)
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you understand how
microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into t hem, and why they might affect pacemakers. Physics all ows you to
understand the hazards of radiation and to evaluate these hazards rationally and more easily. Physics al so explains the reason why a
black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it explains why a white roof helps keep the insid e of a house cool.
Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition system as well as the transmission of electrical signals throug hout our body’s nervous
system are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of basic physics.–10
–6 –2

1.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109475Physics is a key element of many important discipline s and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for example—since it deals
with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has clo se ties to atomic and molecular physics. Most branches o f engineering are
concerned with designing new technologies, processes, or s tructures within the constraints set by the laws of p hysics. In
architecture, physics is at the heart of structural st ability and is involved in the acoustics, heating, l ighting, and cooling of buildings.
Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as radi oactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer within Earth.
Some disciplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hyb rids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological scienc es. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the prop erties of cells and their
environments. On the macroscopic level, it explains the heat, work, and power associated with the human body a nd its various
organ systems. Physics is involved in medical diagnosti cs, such as radiographs, magnetic resonance imaging, an d ultrasonic blood
flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes involves p hysics directly; for example, cancer radiotherapy use s ionizing
radiation. Physics also explains sensory phenomena, s uch as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and
how lasers transmit information.
It is not necessary to study all applications of phys ics formally. What is most useful is knowing the basic laws of physics and
developing skills in the analytical methods for appl ying them. The study of physics also can improve your problem-solving skills.
Furthermore, physics retains the most basic aspects of s cience, so it is used by all the sciences, and the stu dy of physics makes
other sciences easier to understand.
To accomplish your goals in any of the various field s within the natural sciences and engineering, a thoro ugh grounding in the laws
of physics is necessary. The reason for this is simply that the laws of physics govern everything in the obse rvable universe at all
measurable scales of length, mass, and time. Now, that is easy enough to say, but to come to grips with what it really means, we
need to get a little bit quantitative.
1.1.2 Laws, Models and Theories
In science discussions, you will encounter terms lik e hypothesis, law, model and theory. These are tools th at humans have
developed in our quest to understand nature. Laws and theories are human statements of the underlying laws or rules that all natural
processes follow. Laws and theories are intrinsic to th e universe; humans did not create them and cannot cha nge them. We can only
discover and understand them. Their discovery is a v ery human endeavor, with all the elements of mystery, imagination, struggle,
triumph, and disappointment inherent in any creative effort. The cornerstone of discovering natural laws or theories is
observation and data; scientists must describe the universe as it is, not as we imagine it to be.
A hypothesis is an educated guess about an observation, finding, or data that that can be tested. It can be a propos ed answer to a
scientific question, a prediction about the outcome of a n experiment or an explanation for a natural phenomeno n.
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pat tern in nature supported by scientific evidence and repeated experiments.
Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single ma thematical equation. Laws and theories are similar in that they are both
scientific statements that result from a tested hyp othesis and are supported by scientific evidence. Howe ver, the designation law is
usually reserved for a concise and very general stat ement that describes phenomena in nature, such as th e law that energy is
conserved during any process, or Newton’s second law of m otion, which relates force (F), mass (m), and accelerati on (a) by the
simple equation F = ma. More limited statements are usually called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is
applicable only in fluids), but the distinction between la ws and principles often is not made carefully.
The word theory means something different to scientists than what is o ften meant when the word is used in everyday conversa tion.
In particular, to a scientist a theory is not the s ame as a “guess” or an “idea” or even a “hypothesis.” The phrase “it’s just a theory”
seems meaningless and silly to scientists because scien ce is founded on the notion of theories. To a scienti st, a theory is a testable
explanation for patterns in nature supported by scie ntific evidence and verified multiple times by vari ous groups of researchers.
Some theories include models to help visualize pheno mena whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does
not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. The kinetic theory of gases,
on the other hand, is a model in which a gas is viewed as being composed of atoms and molecules. Atoms and mol ecules are too
small to be observed directly with our senses—thus, we picture them mentally to understand what the instrume nts tell us about the
behavior of gases. A theory should describe all aspe cts of any system that falls within its domain of app licability. In particular, any
experimentally testable implication of a theory shou ld be verified. If an experiment ever shows an implic ation of a theory to be

1.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109475false, then the theory is either thrown out or modifie d suitably (for example, by limiting its domain of ap plicability). The biggest
difference between a law and a theory is that a theor y is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action whereas
a theory explains an entire group of related phenomena.
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. Althou gh a model is justified
by experimental tests, it is only accurate in describing ce rtain aspects of a physical system. An example is the Bohr model of singleelectron atoms, in which the electron is pictured as o rbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets or bit the Sun (Figure).
We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the m ental image helps explain some of the observations we can make, such as the
emission of light from hot gases (atomic spectra). Howeve r, other observations show that the picture in the Bo hr model is not really
what atoms look like. The model is “wrong,” but is still useful for some purposes. Physicists use models for a v ariety of purposes.
For example, models can help physicists analyze a scenari o and perform a calculation or models can be used t o represent a situation
in the form of a computer simulation. Ultimately, howe ver, the results of these calculations and simulations need to be doublechecked by other means—namely, observation and experi mentation. Moreover, due to various types of limitati ons or requirements,
we often use simple models to help describe intricate phenomena. For example, when investigating the traject ory of a basket ball,
for most practical purposes, it is sufficient to use a model that ignores the effects of air resistance.
Figure: What is a model? The Bohr model of a single-e lectron atom shows the electron orbiting the nucleus i n one of several
possible circular orbits. Like all models, it captures so me, but not all, aspects of the physical system.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply t he existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet unobserved.
These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tribut es to the power of science. It is the underlying ord er in the universe that
enables scientists to make such spectacular predictio ns. However, if experimentation does not verify our pr edictions, then the
theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or conven ient it is. Laws can never be known with absolute certa inty because it is
impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm a law for every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the
assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid until a counterexample is observed. If a good- quality, verifiable
experiment contradicts a well-established law or theory, then the law or theory must be modified or overthr own completely. The
study of science in general, and physics in particul ar, is an adventure much like the exploration of an uncharted ocean. Discoveries
are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; an d the beauty of the physical universe is made more su blime for the insights
gained.
Read the following statement then determine whether or n ot it is scientific.
Heaven is Hotter than Hell!
Published in Applied Optics II, A14 (1972) & Random Walk in Science
The temperature of Heaven can be rather accurately c omputed from available data. Our authority is the Bibl e: Isaiah 30:26
reads, Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the l ight of the Sun and the light of the Sun shall be seve nfold, as the light of
seven days. Thus Heaven receives from the Moon as much radiation as we do from the Sun and in addition seven times seven
(forty-nine) times as much as the Earth does from the Sun, or fifty times in all. The light we receive from t he Moon is a tenthousandth of the light we receive from the Sun, so we c an ignore that. With these data we can compute the t emperature of
Heaven. The radiation falling on Heaven will heat it t o the point where the heat lost by radiation is just e qual to the heat
received by radiation. In other words, Heaven loses fi fty times as much heat as the Earth by radiation. Using the StefanBoltzmann fourth-power law for radiationExample

1.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109475where E is the absolute temperature of the Earth-300K. This gives H as 798 K (525º C).
The exact temperature of Hell cannot be computed but it must be less than 444.6º C, the temperature at whic h brimstone or
sulfur changes from a liquid to a gas. Revelations 2 1: 8: But the fearful, and unbelieving... shall have t heir part in the lake
which burneth with fire and brimstone. A lake of molten brimstone means that its temperature must be below t he boiling point,
which is 444.60C. (Above this point it would be a vapor, not a lake.)
We have, then, temperature of Heaven, 525º C. Temperature of Hell, less than 445º C. Therefore, Heaven is hotter than He ll.
Solution
Think of the sources and data discussed in the article. Is any of them available for anyone, at anytime to verif y?
Answer: No, it is not scientific since it does nto rely on data that can easily be verified.
1.1.3 Major Characteristics of scientific knowledge
Science is what humanity has developed and continue to develop in its quest to understand nature. Here are some of the
characteristics of science:
Verifiable – Based on data
Objective – avoid biases, prejudices, wishes, and beliefs
Reproducible/Reliable – the same results/findings can be reproduced.
Precise and Accurate – as apposed to social sciences which are not as easily quantifiable leading to less precise resu lts
Universally Replicable
Universally observable
Malleable – evolves and changes based on new evidence
1.1.4 How Science Evolves
What was once believed to be true in science can be adjusted o r rejected based on new evidence.
New findings cannot be rejected because it does not conf orm to current knowledge
A new finding is deemed valid only after thorough assessm ent.
Additional studies are needed following new to provide for a broad assessment of where the weight of evidence falls.
Over time, as additional data is gathered and verified,
Theories don't become laws and laws don't become theories
The following two images were posted in the media duri ng the Covid epidemic. They are accusing Dr. Anthony Fau ci of flipflopping when discussing preventive measures to avoid Covid.Example

1.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109475
Solution
The red line goes through the points C and F, so the li ne is.
Answer:
1.1.5 Science is a Collective Human Endeavor
Science evolves - new technologies allow for new data t hat can confirm or dispute prior knowledge. New knowledge also allows us
to revisit some of our current understanding.
Scientific knowledge is a collective human endeavor. Individual scientist contributions cannot happen (wou ld have not happened)
without the contribution of contemporary and prior s cientists. In other words, Newton's findings or Einstein's f indings would have
been found even if Einstein and Newton did not exist. While both were exceptional scientists, the evolutio n of scientific knowledge
would have happened with or without them.
Science is based on data and only data. Both laws and theories are supported by extensive reproducible da ta. If you cannot test it, it
is not science.
This page titled 1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.
1.1: Science and the Scientific Method by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0.
Original source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094761.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
Fighting Intuition
It is important to remember to fight one’s intuition when applying the scientific method. Certain theori es, such as Quantum
Mechanics, are very counter-intuitive. For example, in Qu antum Mechanics, an object can be described as bein g in two locations at
the same time. In the Theory of Special Relativity, i t is possible for two people to disagree on whether two events occurred at the
same time. These particular predictions from these t heories have not been invalidated by any experiment.
There is no requirement in science that a theory be “pretty” or intuitive. The only requirement is that a theory describe experimental
data. One should then take care in not forcing one’s p reconceived notions into interpreting a theory. For example, Quantum
Mechanics does not actually predict that objects can be in two locations at once, only that objects behav e as if they were in two
locations at once. A famous example is Schrödinger’s ca t, which can be modeled as being both alive and dead at the same time.
However, just because we model it that way does not mean that it really is alive and dead at the same time.
Thinking Like a Physicist
In a sense, physics can be thought of as the most funda mental of the sciences, as it describes the interactio ns of the smallest
constituents of matter. In principle, if one can prec isely describe how protons, neutrons, and electrons intera ct, then one can
completely describe how a human brain thinks. In prac tice, the theories of particle physics lead to equat ions that are too difficult to
solve for systems that include as many particles as a human brain. In fact, they are too difficult to sol ve exactly for even rather
small systems of particles such as atoms bigger than helium (containing several protons, neutrons and electrons).
We have a number of other fields of science to cover complex systems of particles interacting. Chemistry c an be used to describe
what happens to systems consisting of many atoms and molecules. In a living being, it is too difficult to k eep track of systems of
atoms and molecules, so we use Biology to describe livin g systems.
One of the key qualities required to be an effective physicist is an ability to understand how to apply a theory and develop a model
to describe a phenomenon. Just like any other skill, it takes practice to become good at developing mod els. Students that graduate
with a physics degree are thus often sought for jobs t hat require critical thinking and the ability to de velop quantitative models,
which covers many fields from outside of physics such as fi nance or Big Data.
This page titled 1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Howard
Martin revised by Alan Ng.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.
1.3: Fighting Intuition by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.
1.5: Thinking Like a Physicist by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original
source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094771.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant Figures
Determine the correct number of significant figures for the resul t of a computation.
Describe the relationship between the concepts of accuracy, precision, uncertainty, and discrepancy.
Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement, given it s value and its uncertainty.
Determine the uncertainty of the result of a computation invol ving quantities with given uncertainties.
Science is based on data. That is evidence obtained from observation and experiments. Thus, it is important to have a clear, universal, thorough process and rules that we use when
collecting data —that is, when making measurements and whe n reporting those results.
1.3.1 Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Accuracy is how close a measurement is to the accepted reference v alue for that measurement. For example, let’s say we want t o measure the length of standard printer paper. The
packaging in which we purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 in. long. We then measure the length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements: 1 1.1 in., 11.2 in.,
and 10.9 in. These measurements are quite accurate bec ause they are very close to the reference value of 11.0 in. In contrast, if we had obtained a measurement of 12 in., our
measurement would not be very accurate. Notice that the conce pt of accuracy requires that an accepted reference value be given.
Figure: A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the ce nter of the bull’s-eye. The red dots represent each at tempt to pinpoint the location of the restaurant. For the image on the left,
the dots are spread out quite far apart from one anot her, but they are rather close to the actual location of the restaurant, indicating high accuracy. For the image on the right dots are
spread out rather far away from the actual location o f the restaurant, indicating low accuracy.
Let’s consider an example of a GPS attempting to locate the position of a restaurant in a city. Think of the res taurant location as existing at the center of a bull’ s-eye target and think of
each GPS attempt to locate the restaurant as a red dot. On th e left of Figure, we see the GPS measurements are spread out fa r apart from each other, but they are all relatively clos e
to the actual location of the restaurant at the center of the target. This indicates a high-accuracy measuremen t. However, in the image on the right, the GPS measurement s are
concentrated closer to one another, but they are far away fro m the target location. This indicates a low-accuracy meas uring system.
The precision of measurements refers to how close the agreement is between repeated independent measurements (which are repeated un der the same conditions). Consider the example
of the paper measurements. The precision of the measuremen ts refers to the spread of the measured values. One way to analyze the precision of the measurements is to determi ne the
range, or difference, between the lowest and the highest measured values. In this case, the lowest value was 10.9 in. and the highest value was 11.2 in. Thus, the mea sured values
deviated from each other by, at most, 0.3 in. These measure ments were relatively precise because they did not vary too much in value. However, if the measured values had been 10.9
in., 11.1 in., and 11.9 in., then the measurements would no t be very precise because there would be significant varia tion from one measurement to another. Notice that the c oncept of
precision depends only on the actual measurements acquired and does not depend on an accepted reference value.
The measurements in the paper example are both accurate and precise, but in some cases, measurements are accura te but not precise, or they are precise but not accurate. Referring back
to the GPS example, on the left of Figure in this case, we see the GPS measurements clustered close to each other, whi le far away from the target location. This indicates a hi ghprecision measurement even though the accuracy is low. For the image on the right, the GPS measurements are spread fu rther apart from one another, they are still far away from th e
target location. This indicates a low-precision and also a l ow-accuracy measurement.
Figure: A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the ce nter of the bull’s-eye. The red dots represent each at tempt to pinpoint the location of the restaurant. For the image on the left,
the dots are spread out quite close to one another, ind icating high precision. For the image on the right, the dots are spread out apart to one another, indicating l ow precision.
The precision of a measuring system is related to the uncertainty in the measurements whereas the accuracy is related to th e discrepancy from the accepted reference value. uncertainty
is a quantitative measure of how much your measured valu es deviate from one another. Discrepancy is the differenc e between the measured value and a given standard or expected
value. If the measurements are not very precise, then the uncert ainty of the values is high. If the measurements are not very accu rate, then the discrepancy of the values is high.
Recall our example of measuring paper length; we obtain ed measurements of 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in., and the accepted value was 11.0 in. We might average the thre e
measurements to say our best guess is 11.1 in.; in this case, our discrepancy is 11.1 – 11.0 = 0.1 in., which prov ides a quantitative measure of accuracy. We might calcu late the
uncertainty in our best guess by using the range of our measured values: 0.3 in. Then we would say the length of t he paper is 11.1 in. plus or minus 0.3 in. The uncertai nty in a
measurement, A, is often denoted as A (read “delta A”), so th e measurement result would be recorded as A ± A. Returnin g to our paper example, the measured length of the p aper
could be expressed as 11.1 ± 0.3 in. Since the discrep ancy of 0.1 in. is less than the uncertainty of 0.3 in., we might say the measured value agrees with the accepted reference value to
within experimental uncertainty.Learning Objectives

1.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477Some factors that contribute to uncertainty in a measureme nt include the following:
Limitations of the measuring device
The skill of the person taking the measurement
Irregularities in the object being measured
Any other factors that affect the outcome (highly dependent on the situation)
In our example, such factors contributing to the uncertai nty could be the smallest division on the ruler is 1/ 16 in., the person using the ruler has bad eyesight, the ruler is worn down on
one end, or one side of the paper is slightly longer tha n the other. At any rate, the uncertainty in a measureme nt must be calculated to quantify its precision. If a reference value is known,
it makes sense to calculate the discrepancy as well to q uantify its accuracy.
1.3.2 Significant Figures
When we express measured values, we can only list as man y digits as we measured initially with our measuring to ol. For example, if we use a standard ruler to measure the length of a
stick, we may measure it to be 36.7 cm. We can’t express t his value as 36.71 cm because our measuring tool is no t precise enough to measure a hundredth of a centimeter. It should be
noted that the last digit in a measured value has bee n estimated in some way by the person performing the mea surement. For example, the person measuring the length of a stick with a
ruler notices the stick length seems to be somewhere in between 36.6 cm and 36.7 cm, and he or she must estimat e the value of the last digit. Using the method of significant figures,
the rule is that the last digit written down in a measurement is the first digit with some unc ertainty. To determine the number of significant digits in a va lue, start with the first
measured value at the left and count the number of digits through the last digit written on the right. For example, t he measured value 36.7 cm has three digits, or three signi ficant figures.
Rules for Determining the number of significant figures
Here are some general rules for determining the number of signifi cant figures:
For experimental data the uncertainty in a quantity defi nes how many figures are significant.
In general, the uncertainty in a measurement is equal to the estimated standard deviation for that measurement.
The reading uncertainty is an estimate made by the exp erimenter
In the case where the reading uncertainty in a measurement is larger than the estimated standard deviation, the read ing uncertainty is the uncertainty in each individual
measurement.
The reading uncertainty almost by definition has one and o nly one significant figure.
Thus uncertainties are specified to one or at most two digits.
Express the following quantities to the correct number of si gnificant figures:
(a) 29.625 ± 2.345
(b) 74 ± 7.136
(c) 84.26351 ± 3
Strategy
First, remember that the uncertainty should be specified to one or at the most two digits.
Second, express the quantity with the same precision as the uncerta inty.
Solution
Rounding the uncertainty to one digit:
(a) 29.625 ± 2
(b) 74 ± 7
(c) 84.26351 ± 3
Rounding the quantity to the same precision as the uncer tainty:
(a) 30 ± 2
(b) 74 ± 7
(c) 84 ± 3
Rules for Zeroes
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.053 are not significa nt because they are placeholders that locate the deci mal point. There
are two significant figures in 0.053. The zeros in 10.053 a re not placeholders; they are significant. This number h as five significant figures. The zeros in 1300 may or ma y not be
significant, depending on the style of writing numbers. T hey could mean the number is known to the last digit or they could be placeholders. So 1300 could have two, t hree, or four
significant figures. To avoid this ambiguity, we should wri te 1300 in scientific notation as 1.3 x 10, 1.30 x 10, or 1.300 x 10, depending on whether it has two, three, or four
significant figures. Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placeholders
When combining measurements with different degrees of p recision, the number of significant digits in the final answer can be no greater than the number of significant digits in
the least-precise measured value. Here are the rules:
Rules for Manipulating Numbers
Rule 1: When multiplying or dividing, report the result with the same number of significant figures as the least certain va lue. For example:
11.5 x 2.1 = 24
11.5 ÷ 2.1 = 5.5 Example
3 3 3

1.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477because 2.1 has only two significant figures.
Rule 2: When adding or subtracting, the number of decimal places in the result should equal the smallest number of decimal places in any of the given terms. For example:
12.34+2.006-8.9=5.4
because 8.9 has only one decimal place.
Rule 3: Numbers that are not measured may be considered exact. Irra tional numbers such as π and e are known to many signifi cant figures and do not limit your results. For
example:
(1/3)(4.56 π) = 4.78
is reported to three significant figures because neither 3 nor π is measured, and our answer is limited only by the th ree significant figures of 4.56.
Rule 4: It is best to use scientific notation because a zero t hat acts as a placeholder is not necessarily a significa nt figure. For example, h = 120 m may have two or three s ignificant
figures. To avoid that ambiguity, you may add a decim al point; for example, h = 120. m has three significa nt figures. A better way to clarify the number of signific ant figures is to
use scientific notation: h = 1.20 x 10 m has three signific ant figures, and h = 1.2 x 10 m has two significant figures.
Rule 5: You should keep extra significant figures in intermed iate steps when making a calculation, but you should ro und the final answer to the correct number of significant
figures. The extra significant figures in an intermediate result help avoid introducing an error due to rounding a number up or down. This step is particularly important if an
intermediate result is a number ending in 5
1.3.3 Precision of Measuring Tools and Significant Figures
As mentioned in the previous sections, an important fa ctor in the precision of measurements involves the p recision of the measuring tool. In general, a precise measuring tool is one that
can measure values in very small increments. For example, a standard ruler can measure length to the nearest millime ter whereas a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01 mm.
The caliper is a more precise measuring tool because it can m easure extremely small differences in length. The more pre cise the measuring tool, the more precise the measuremen ts.
The result of a single measurement should be reported in th e format
The estimate is your best guess for the true value, while the measurement uncertainty states the range where the true value might lie. By co nvention, the estimate and measurement
uncertainty follow these rules:
1. The measurement uncertainty has one or two significant figures. We will use just one for the rest o f this chapter.
2. The estimate has the same precision as the measuremen t uncertainty.
Suppose you use a digital multimeter to measure the current in a circuit, and the readout is stable (i.e., not fluctuating). Then you should report a result like this:

Why? According to the readout, the value is between (rou nded up to) and (which is rounded down). So the measuremen t uncertainty is. Note that
the estimate is reported as to have the same precision as the u ncertainty.
When using a device with hatch marks, such as a ruler or analog oscilloscope display, the measurement uncertai nty is determined by the smallest markings. For example, if the smallest
markings on a ruler have spacing, the measurement uncertainty is, so a reading should be reported like this:
In more complicated situations, you must exercise you r judgment. For instance, suppose you have a digital mu ltimeter reading that is not stable: the last digit cha nges constantly, so that
the reading fluctuates between,, and. The value is between and, which is a range of. Since we use one signi ficant figure for uncertainty, the
result is reported like this:
Alternatively, suppose the last digit is changing so fast that you can’t make out its values at all. Then you can report the result like this:
Measurement uncertainties can also come from other aspect s of an experiment. Suppose you use a ruler to measure th e distance to an object, but the object wobbles by, larger
than the hatch marks of the ruler. In that case, you should report a measurement uncertainty of, not.
1.3.4 Uncertainties in Calculations/Propagation of uncertainty of Precision
Often we have two or more measured quantities that we combi ne arithmetically to get some result. Examples includ e dividing a distance by a time to get a speed, or ad ding two lengths
to get a total length. Now that we have learned how to d etermine the uncertainty in the directly measured quanti ties we need to learn how these uncertainty propagate to an uncertainty
in the result.
We assume that the two directly measured quantities are and Y, with uncertainty and respectively.
The measurements and must be independent of each other.
The fractional uncertainty is the value of the uncertainty divided by the value of the quantity:. The fractional uncertaint y multiplied by 100 is the percentage uncertainty. Everything
is this section assumes that the uncertainty is "small" comp ared to the value itself, i.e. that the fractional uncertain ty is much less than one.
For many situations, we can find the uncertainty in the result using three simple rules:
1.3.4.1 Rule 1
If: or
then:2 2

1.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477In words, this says that the uncertainty in the result of an addition or subtraction is the square root of the su m of the squares of the uncertainty in the quantities bei ng added or subtracted.
This mathematical procedure, also used in Pythagoras' th eorem about right triangles, is called quadrature.
1.3.4.2 Rule 2
If: or
then:
In this case also the uncertainty are combined in qu adrature, but this time it is the fractional uncertainty, i.e. the uncertainty in the quantity divided by th e value of the quantity, that are
combined. Sometimes the fractional uncertainty is called the relative uncertainty.
1.3.4.3 Rule 3
If:
then:
or equivalently:
For the square of a quantity,, you might reason that thi s is just times and use Rule 2. This is wrong because Rules 1 and 2 are only for when the two quantities being combined,
and, are independent of each other. Here there is only one measurement of one quan tity.
Calculate (1.23 ± 0.03) +. (is the irrational number 3.1 4159265…)
Strategy
Rational numbers are considered precise. Thus, they don't affe ct the uncertainty in the reading.
Solution
(1.23 ± 0.03) + =((1.23+) ± 0.03)=((1.23+3.14159265) ± 0.03)=((4. 37159265) ± 0.03)=(4.37 ± 0.03)
Calculate (1.23 ± 0.03) ×.
Strategy
We are essentially multiplying by a constant.
Solution
(1.23 ± 0.03) =((1.23) ± 0.03))=((3.864) ± 0.0942)=(3.86 ± 0.09)
You may have noticed a useful property of quadrature whil e doing the above questions. Say one quantity has an uncertainty of 2 and the other quantity has an uncertai nty of 1. Then the
uncertainty in the combination is the square root of 4 + 1 = 5, which to one significant figure is just 2. Thus if any uncertainty is equal to or less than one half of some other uncertainty,
it may be ignored in all uncertainty calculations. This a pplies for both direct uncertainty such as used in Rule 1 and for fractional or relative uncertainty such as in Rule 2.
Thus in many situations you do not have to do any uncertainty calculations at all if you take a look at the data and its uncertainty first.
1.3.5 Using Derivatives to Calculate Uncertainty
The three rules above handle most simple cases. The gene ral case is where. For Rule 1 the function is addition or subtraction, while for Rule 2 it is mult iplication or division.
Regardless of what is, the uncertainty in is given by:
In the next example, we look at how differentials can be used to estimate the uncertainty in calculating the volume of a box if we assume the measurement of the side length is made
with a certain amount of accuracy.
Suppose the side length of a cube is measured to be cm with an accuracy of cm.
a. Use differentials to estimate the uncertainty in the c omputed volume of the cube.
b. Compute the volume of the cube if the side length is (i) cm and (ii) cm to compare the estimated uncertainty wit h the actual potential uncertainty.
Solution
a. The measurement of the side length is accurate to within cm. T herefore,
The volume of a cube is given by, which leads toExample
Example
Example: Volume of a Cube

1.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477Using the measured side length of cm, we can estimate that
Therefore,
b. If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of th e cube is
If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of the cu be is
Therefore, the actual volume of the cube is between and. Since the side length is measured to be 5 cm, the c omputed volume is Therefore,
the uncertainty in the computed volume is
That is,
We see the estimated uncertainty is relatively close to the actual potential uncertainty in the computed volume.
Estimate the uncertainty in the computed volume of a cu be if the side length is measured to be cm with an accurac y of cm.
Hint
Answer
The volume measurement is accurate to within.
The above formula is also used to find the uncertainty for transce ndental functions. For example:
Find the uncertainty for:
Answer
Find the uncertainty for:
Answer
Note that in the above example must be in radian s.
The measurement uncertainty and the propagated uncertainty are absolute uncertainty.
Sometimes, we are interested in the size of an uncertainty relative to the size of the quantity being measured or calculated. Given an absolute uncertainty for a partic ular quantity, we
define the relative uncertainty as, where is the actual value of the quant ity. The percentage uncertainty is the relative uncertainty expressed as a percentage. For example, if we
measure the height of a ladder to be in. when the actua l height is in., the absolute uncertainty is 1 in. but the relative uncertainty is, or. By comparison, if we
measure the width of a piece of cardboard to be in. when the actual width is in., our absolute uncertainty is in., whereas the relative uncertainty is, or Therefore,
the percentage uncertainty in the measurement of the cardboa rd is larger, even though in. is less than in.
An astronaut using a camera measures the radius of Earth as mi with an uncertainty of mi. Let’s use different ials to estimate the relative and percentage uncertain ty of
using this radius measurement to calculate the volume of Eart h, assuming the planet is a perfect sphere.
Solution:
If the measurement of the radius is accurate to within we have
Since the volume of a sphere is given by we haveExample
Example
Example
Example: Relative and Percentage uncertainty

1.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477Using the measured radius of mi, we can estimate
To estimate the relative uncertainty, consider. Since we do not know the exact value of the volume, use the measured radius mi to estimate. We obtain
. Therefore the relative uncertainty satisfies
which simplifies to
The relative uncertainty is and the percentage uncerta inty is.
Determine the percentage uncertainty if the radius of Earth is measured to be mi with an uncertainty of mi.
Hint
Use the fact that to find.
Answer
When, the uncertainty in is given by:
If is a function of three or more variables,, then:
1.3.6 The uncertainty in the Mean
We have seen that when the data have uncertainty of precisio n we may only estimate the value of the mean. We are now ready to fi nd the uncertainty in this estimate of the mean.
Recall that to calculate the estimated mean we use:
Each individual measurement has the same uncertainty,, which is usually the estimated standard deviation.
To calculate the uncertainty in the numerator of the abo ve equation, we use Rule 1 to write:
In words, we are combining quantities in quadrature, whose resu lt is the square root of times.
When we divide the numerator by the denominator, Rule 2 tells us how to propagate those uncertainty. The denom inator has an uncertainty of zero, and we have just calc ulated the
uncertainty in the numerator. Applying Rule 2, then, giv es:
In words, the uncertainty in the estimated mean is e qual to the uncertainty in each individual measuremen t divided by the square root of the number of times th e measurement
was repeated. Sometimes is called the standard uncertainty of the mean.
Here is an example. We repeat the measurement of some quan tity 4 times and get:
The estimated mean of these measurements is numerically 1.4950000 and the estimated standard deviation is numerically 0.0903696 (by numerically we mean the number that is
displayed by the calculator). Thus the uncertainty in th e estimated mean is 0.0903696 divided by the square root of the number of repeated me asurements, the square root of 4, which is
numerically 0.0451848. So we get:
Value = 1.495 ± 0.045
or:
Value = 1.50 ± 0.05
The fact that the uncertainty in the estimated mean go es down as we repeat the measurements is exactly what s hould happen. If the uncertainty did not go down as N increases there is
no point in repeating the measurements at all since we are not learning anything about X, i.e. we are not reducing its uncertainty.
If you repeat a measurement 4 times, you reduce the uncert ainty by a factor of two. Repeating the measurement 9 times reduces the uncertainty by a factor of three. To re duce the
uncertainty by a factor of four you would have to repeat t he measurement 16 times. Thus there is a point of "diminish ing returns" in repeating measurements. In simple situation s,
repeating a measurement 5 or 10 times is usually sufficie nt.Example
est

1.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109477You are determining the period of oscillation of a pendu lum. One procedure would be to measure the time for 20 osc illations, t20, and repeat the measurement 5 times. Ano ther
procedure would be to measure the time for 5 oscillations, t5, and repeat the measurement 20 times. Assume, reason ably, that the uncertainty in the determination of the time for 20
oscillations is the same as the uncertainty in the det ermination of the time for 5 oscillations. Calculate th e uncertainty in the period for both procedures to det ermine which will give
the smallest uncertainty in the value of the period?
Strategy
First, observe that the average value of the bag’s weight, A, is 5.1 lb. The uncertainty in this value, A, is 0.3 lb. W e can use the following equation to determine the perce nt
uncertainty of the weight:
Solution
Substitute the values into the equation:
1.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant Figures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Li breTexts.
1.7: Significant Figures by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
1.1: Measurement Error by Y. D. Chong is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: http://www1.spms.ntu.edu.sg/~ydchong/teaching.html.
4.2: Linear Approximations and Differentials by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.Example

1.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094781.4: Units and Standards
Describe how SI base units are defined.
Describe how derived units are created from base units.
Express quantities given in SI units using metric prefixes.
1.4.1 Order of Magnitude
The order of magnitude of a number is the power of 10 that most closely app roximates it. Thus, the order of magnitude refers to
the scale (or size) of a value. Each power of 10 repre sents a different order of magnitude. For example, 10, 1 0, 10, and so forth,
are all different orders of magnitude, as are 10 = 1, 10, 10, and 10. To find the order of magnitude of a number, take the
base-10 logarithm of the number and round it to the nearest integer, then the order of magnitude of th e number is simply the
resulting power of 10. For example, the order of magnit ude of 800 is 10 because log 800 ≈ 2.903, which rounds to 3. Similarly,
the order of magnitude of 450 is 10 because log 450 ≈ 2.653, which rounds to 3 as well. Thus, we say the num bers 800 and 450
are of the same order of magnitude: 10. However, the order of magnitude of 250 is 10 because log 250 ≈ 2.3 97, which rounds to
2.
An equivalent but quicker way to find the order of ma gnitude of a number is first to write it in scientific notation and then check to
see whether the first factor is greater than or less than = 10 ≈ 3. The idea is that = 10 is halfway bet ween 1 = 10 and
10 = 10 on a log base-10 scale. Thus, if the first f actor is less than, then we round it down to 1 and the order of magnitude is
simply whatever power of 10 is required to write the n umber in scientific notation. On the other hand, if t he first factor is greater
than, then we round it up to 10 and the order of ma gnitude is one power of 10 higher than the power need ed to write the
number in scientific notation. For example, the number 800 can be written in scientific notation as 8 x 10. Because 8 is bigger than
≈ 3, we say the order of magnitude of 800 is 10 = 1 0. The number 450 can be written as 4.5 x 10, so its order of
magnitude is also 10 because 4.5 is greater than 3. Howe ver, 250 written in scientific notation is 2.5 x 10 a nd 2.5 is less than 3, so
its order of magnitude is 10.
The order of magnitude of a number is designed to be a ballpark estimate for the scale (or size) of its value. It is simply a way of
rounding numbers consistently to the nearest power o f 10. This makes doing rough mental math with very big and very small
numbers easier. For example, the diameter of a hydrogen atom is on the order of 10 m, whereas the diameter o f the Sun is on the
order of 10 m, so it would take roughly 10 /10 = 10 hyd rogen atoms to stretch across the diameter of the Su n. This is much
easier to do in your head than using the more precis e values of 1.06 x 10 m for a hydrogen atom diameter a nd 1.39 x 10 m for
the Sun’s diameter, to find that it would take 1.31 x 1 0 hydrogen atoms to stretch across the Sun’s diameter. In addition to being
easier, the rough estimate is also nearly as informative as the precise calculation.
1.4.2 Known Ranges of Length, Mass, and Time
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over wh ich physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of examples of known
lengths, masses, and times (given as orders of magnitu de) in Figure. Examining this table will give you a feeling for the range
of possible topics in physics and numerical values. A good way to appreciate the vastness of the ranges o f values in Figure is
to try to answer some simple comparative questions, such as t he following:
a. How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across th e diameter of the Sun?
b. How many protons are there in a bacterium?
c. How many floating-point operations can a supercompute r do in 1 day?
Answer a
10 m/10 m = 10 hydrogen atoms
Answer bLearning Objectives
1 2 3
0 −1 −2 −3
3 210
0.5 0.5 0
2 + 1 3 2
3 2
−10
9 9 −10 19
−10 9
Exercise
9 –10 19

1.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10947810 kg/10 kg = 10 protons
Answer c
10 s/10 s = 10 floating-point operations
In studying Figure, take some time to come up with si milar questions that interest you and then try answer ing them. Doing
this can breathe some life into almost any table of number s.
Figure: This table shows the orders of magnitude of len gth, mass, and time.
The range of objects and phenomena studied in physic s is immense. From the incredibly short lifetime of a nucleus to the age of
Earth, from the tiny sizes of subnuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges of the known universe, from the force exerted by
a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are enough factors of 10 to challenge the ima gination of even the most
experienced scientist. Giving numerical values for phy sical quantities and equations for physical principl es allows us to understand
nature much more deeply than qualitative descriptio ns alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must also have accepted units in
which to express them. We shall find that even in th e potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilogram s, and seconds, a profound
simplicity of nature appears: all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base physical qu antities.
1.4.3 Units and Standards
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other measurements.
For example, we might define distance and time by speci fying methods for measuring them, such as using a met er stick and a
stopwatch. Then, we could define average speed by sta ting that it is calculated as the total distance trav eled divided by time of
travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units, which are standardized values. For example, the length of a
race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed i n units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers (for distance runners). Without
standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and compare measured values i n a meaningful way
(Figure).–15 –27 12
5 –17 22

1.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109478
Figure: Distances given in unknown units are maddening ly useless.
Two major systems of units are used in the world: SI units (for the French Système International d’Unités), also known as the
metric system, and English units (also known as the customary or imperial system). English units were historically used in
nations once ruled by the British Empire and are st ill widely used in the United States. English units may a lso be referred to as the
foot–pound–second (fps) system, as opposed to the centimeter–gram–second (cgs) system. You may also encounter the term
SAE units, named after the Society of Automotive Engineers. Produ cts such as fasteners and automotive tools (for exampl e,
wrenches) that are measured in inches rather than metric units are referred to as SAE fasteners or SAE wrenches.
Virtually every other country in the world (except t he United States) now uses SI units as the standard. The m etric system is also
the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathem aticians.
1.4.4 SI Units: Base and Derived Units
In any system of units, the units for some physical qu antities must be defined through a measurement proce ss. These are called the
base quantities for that system and their units are the system’s base units. All other physical quantities can then be expressed as
algebraic combinations of the base quantities. Each of these physical quantities is then known as a derived quantity and each unit
is called a derived unit. The choice of base quantities is somewhat arbitrary, as long as they are independent of each other and all
other quantities can be derived from them. Typically, the goal is to choose physical quantities that can be measured accurately to a
high precision as the base quantities. The reason for this is simple. Since the derived units can be expresse d as algebraic
combinations of the base units, they can only be as accurat e and precise as the base units from which they are der ived.
Based on such considerations, the International Standa rds Organization recommends using seven base quantiti es, which form the
International System of Quantities (ISQ). These are the ba se quantities used to define the SI base units. Table l ists these seven
ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units.
Table: ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Length meter (m)
Mass kilogram (kg)
Time second (s)
Electrical Current ampere (A)
Thermodynamic Temperature kelvin (K)
Amount of Substance mole (mol)
Luminous Intensity candela (cd)
You are probably already familiar with some derived quantities that can be formed from the base quantiti es in Table. For
example, the geometric concept of area is always cal culated as the product of two lengths. Thus, area is a derived quantity that can
be expressed in terms of SI base units using square me ters (m x m = m). Similarly, volume is a derived quant ity that can be
expressed in cubic meters (m). Speed is length per tim e; so in terms of SI base units, we could measure it in meters per second
(m/s). V olume mass density (or just density) is mass p er volume, which is expressed in terms of SI base units s uch as kilograms per2

1.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109478cubic meter (kg/m). Angles can also be thought of as derived quantities because they can be defined as the ratio of the arc length
subtended by two radii of a circle to the radius of the circle. This is how the radian is defined. Dependi ng on your background and
interests, you may be able to come up with other deriv ed quantities, such as the mass flow rate (kg/s) or vo lume flow rate (m /s) of
a fluid, electric charge (A • s), mass flux density [k g/(m • s)], and so on. We will see many more examples thr oughout this text. For
now, the point is that every physical quantity can be derived from the seven base quantities in Table, and the units of every
physical quantity can be derived from the seven SI base u nits.
For the most part, we use SI units in this text. Non-SI un its are used in a few applications in which they are in very common use,
such as the measurement of temperature in degrees Ce lsius (°C), the measurement of fluid volume in liter s (L), and the
measurement of energies of elementary particles in electron-volts (eV). Whenever non-SI units are discusse d, they are tied to SI
units through conversions. For example, 1 L is 10 m.
Check out a comprehensive source of information on SI units at the National Institute of Standards and Tec hnology (NIST)
Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty.
1.4.5 Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The initial chapters in this textmap are concerned with mechanics, fluids, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent physical
quantities can be expressed in terms of the base uni ts of length, mass, and time. Therefore, we now turn t o a discussion of these
three base units, leaving discussion of the others until th ey are needed later.
1.4.5.1 The Second
The SI unit for time, the second (abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years i t was defined as 1/86,400 of a mean solar day.
More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain grea ter accuracy and to define the second in terms of a nonvarying or constant
physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getti ng longer as a result of the very gradual slowing of Earth’s rotation). Cesium
atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, a nd these vibrations can be readily observed and coun ted. In 1967, the second
was redefined as the time required for 9,192,631,770 of these vibrations to occur (Figure). Note that this may seem like more
precision than you would ever need, but it isn’t—GPSs rel y on the precision of atomic clocks to be able to gi ve you turn-by-turn
directions on the surface of Earth, far from the satellit es broadcasting their location.
Figure: An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrat ions of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of bet ter than a
microsecond per year. The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image looks down from the top of an
atomic fountain nearly 30 feet tall. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
1.4.5.2 The Meter
The SI unit for length is the meter (abbreviated m); its definition has also changed ove r time to become more precise. The meter
was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the dista nce from the equator to the North Pole. This measuremen t was improved in
1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance bet ween two engraved lines on a platinum–iridium bar now k ept near Paris. By
1960, it had become possible to define the meter eve n more accurately in terms of the wavelength of light, so it was again redefined
as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was given its curren t definition (in part
for greater accuracy) as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second (Figure). T his change came after
knowing the speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s. The length of the meter will change if the spee d of light is someday
measured with greater accuracy.3
−3 3

1.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109478
Figure: The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Di stance traveled is
speed multiplied by time.
1.4.5.3 The Kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); From 1795–2018 it was defined to b e the mass of a platinum–iridium
cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the Int ernational Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. Howeve r, this cylinder
has lost roughly 50 micrograms since it was created. B ecause this is the standard, this has shifted how we defi ned a kilogram.
Therefore, a new definition was adopted in May 2019 bas ed on the Planck constant and other constants which will never change in
value. We will study Planck’s constant in quantum mecha nics, which is an area of physics that describes how t he smallest pieces of
the universe work. The kilogram is measured on a Kibbl e balance (see). When a weight is placed on a Kibble balance, an
electrical current is produced that is proportional to Planck’s constant. Since Planck’s constant is defined, the exact current
measurements in the balance define the kilogram.
Figure: Redefining the SI unit of mass. The U.S. Nati onal Institute of Standards and Technology’s Kibble ba lance is a
machine that balances the weight of a test mass with th e resulting electrical current needed for a force to balance it.
1.4.6 Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of the metric system, which is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the units are
categorized by factors of 10. Table lists the metri c prefixes and symbols used to denote various factor s of 10 in SI units. For
example, a centimeter is one-hundredth of a meter (in symbols, 1 cm = 10 m) and a kilometer is a thousa nd meters (1 km = 10
m). Similarly, a megagram is a million grams (1 Mg = 10 g), a nanosecond is a billionth of a second (1 ns = 1 0 s), and a
terameter is a trillion meters (1 Tm = 10 m).
Table: Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and Their Sy mbols–2 3
6 –9

1.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109478Prefix Symbol Meaning Prefix Symbol Meaning
yotta- Y 10 yocto- Y 10
zetta- Z 10 zepto- Z 10
exa- E 10 atto- E 10
peta- P 10 femto- P 10
tera- T 10 pico- T 10
giga- G 10 nano- G 10
mega- M 10 micro- M 10
kilo- k 10 milli- k 10
hecto- h 10 centi- h 10
deka- da 10 deci- da 10
The only rule when using metric prefixes is that you ca nnot “double them up.” For example, if you have measur ements in
petameters (1 Pm = 10 m), it is not proper to talk ab out megagigameters, although 10 x 10 = 10. In pract ice, the only time this
becomes a bit confusing is when discussing masses. As we have seen, the base SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg), but metric
prefixes need to be applied to the gram (g), because we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes. Thus, a thousand kilograms (10
kg) is written as a megagram (1 Mg) since
Incidentally, 10 kg is also called a metric ton, abbreviated t. This is one of the units outside t he SI system considered acceptable
for use with SI units.
As we see in the next section, metric systems have the a dvantage that conversions of units involve only powe rs of 10. There are
100 cm in 1 m, 1000 m in 1 km, and so on. In nonmetri c systems, such as the English system of units, the rela tionships are not as
simple—there are 12 in in 1 ft, 5280 ft in 1 mi, and so o n.
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of val ues simply by scaling it
with an appropriate metric prefix. The prefix is chose n by the order of magnitude of physical quantities c ommonly found in the task
at hand. For example, distances in meters are suitable in construction, whereas distances in kilometers are ap propriate for air travel,
and nanometers are convenient in optical design. With the metric system there is no need to invent new uni ts for particular
applications. Instead, we rescale the units with which we ar e already familiar.
Restate the mass 1.93 x 10 kg using a metric prefix such that the resulting numerical value is bigger th an one but less than
1000.
Strategy
Since we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes, we fi rst need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the prefix symbol k
with a factor of 10 (Table). Then, we should see which two prefixes in Table are closest to the resulting power of 10
when the number is written in scientific notation. We use whichever of these two prefixes gives us a number b etween one and
1000.
Solution
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 10, we find tha t24 -24
21 -21
18 -18
15 -15
12 -12
9 -9
6 -6
3 -3
2 -2
1 -1
15 6 9 15
Example: Using Metric Prefixes

1.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109478From Table, we see that 10 is between “peta-” (10) an d “exa-” (10). If we use the “peta-” prefix, then we f ind
that 1.93 × 10 g = 1.93 × 10 Pg, since 16 = 1 + 15. Alt ernatively, if we use the “exa-” prefix we find that 1.93 x 10 g =
1.93 x 10 Eg, since 16 = −2 + 18. Because the problem asks for the numerical value between one and 1000, we u se the
“peta-” prefix and the answer is 19.3 Pg.
Significance
It is easy to make silly arithmetic errors when switchi ng from one prefix to another, so it is always a good idea to check that
our final answer matches the number we started with. An ea sy way to do this is to put both numbers in scientific notation
and count powers of 10, including the ones hidden in prefixes. If we did not make a mistake, the powers of 1 0 should match
up. In this problem, we started with 1.93 x 10 kg, so we have 13 + 3 = 16 powers of 10. Our final answer in sci entific
notation is 1.93 x 10 Pg, so we have 1 + 15 = 16 powers of 10. So, everything checks out.
If this mass arose from a calculation, we would also wan t to check to determine whether a mass this large mak es any sense
in the context of the problem. For this, Figure 1.4 might be he lpful.
Restate 4.79 x 10 kg using a metric prefix such that the r esulting number is bigger than one but less than 1000.
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.
This page titled 1.4: Units and Standards is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: Units and Standards by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.16 15 18
16 1 16
−2
Exercises

1.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094791.5: Unit Conversion
Use conversion factors to express the value of a given q uantity in different units.
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to ano ther. For example, if you are reading a European cookb ook, some quantities
may be expressed in units of liters and you need to c onvert them to cups. Or perhaps you are reading walkin g directions from one
location to another and you are interested in how man y miles you will be walking. In this case, you may need to convert units of
feet or meters to miles.
1.5.1 Dimensional Homogeneity
All theoretically derived equations that describe phys ical phenomena must be dimensionally homogeneous. An equation is
dimensionally homogeneous if the dimensions of both sides of the equation are t he same and all additive terms have the same
dimensions.
1.5.2 Converting Units
The most common errors in using units occur when conver ting a physical quantity from one set of units to an other set. When you
convert units you are not changing the size of the physical quantity, only the numerical value associa ted with the units in which it is
measured.
The relationship between two units for the same dimen sion are typically found in a handbook as an equivalence relation, such as
. Note again that the unit symbols are mathematical entit ies and cannot be neglected.
The key to converting units is to recall that multi plying a mathematical expression by unity (1) does not change the magnitude of
the mathematical expression. A unit conversion factor equals unity and can be constructed from an equival ence relation. Example
B.1 shows how to convert equivalence statements into unit c onversion factors.
Convert the given equivalence relations into unit conve rsion factors.
Solution
The left-hand column shows the equivalence relations f rom a handbook and the right-hand column shows the re sulting unit
conversion factors. Notice how it would be mathematically in correct to just drop the unit symbols.
The following Example illustrates how to perform a si mple unit conversion for pressure, now that we have the unit conversion
factors.
Given a pressure of, (a) convert the pressure to. (b) Now con vert the pressure value to.
Solution
a)Learning Objectives
Example
Example

1.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109479b)
If done, correctly the intermediate units should cancel. Check this out by drawing lines through the units that ca ncel.
Let’s consider a simple example of how to convert uni ts. Suppose we want to convert 80 m to kilometers. The first thing to do is to
list the units you have and the units to which you wan t to convert. In this case, we have units in meters and we want to convert to
kilometers. Next, we need to determine a conversion f actor relating meters to kilometers. A conversion factor is a ratio that
expresses how many of one unit are equal to another u nit. For example, there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 1609 m in 1 mi, 100 cm in 1 m, 60 s
in 1 min, and so on. In this case, we know that there ar e 1000 m in 1 km. Now we can set up our unit conversion. We write the units
we have and then multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel out, as shown:
Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels, leaving onl y the desired kilometer unit. You can use this method to convert between any
type of unit. Now, the conversion of 80 m to kilomete rs is simply the use of a metric prefix, as we saw in the preceding section, so
we can get the same answer just as easily by noting that
since “kilo-” means 10 and 1 = −2 + 3. However, using c onversion factors is handy when converting between uni ts that are not
metric or when converting between derived units, as the following examples illustrate.
The distance from the university to home is 10 mi an d it usually takes 20 min to drive this distance. C alculate the average
speed in meters per second (m/s). (Note: Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given u nits, then we can get the average speed into the desi red units by
picking the correct conversion factors and multiplyi ng by them. The correct conversion factors are those th at cancel the
unwanted units and leave the desired units in their place. In this case, we want to convert miles to meters, so we need to
know the fact that there are 1609 m in 1 mi. We also want to convert minutes to seconds, so we use the conver sion of 60 s
in 1 min.
Solution
Calculate average speed. Average speed is distance travel ed divided by time of travel. (Take this definition as a given for
now. Average speed and other motion concepts are covered i n later chapters.) In equation form,
Substitute the given values for distance and time:
Convert miles per minute to meters per second by multiplying by the conversion factor that cancels miles and leave m eters,
and also by the conversion factor that cancels minutes an d leave seconds:3
Example: Converting Nonmetric Units to Metric

1.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109479Significance
Check the answer in the following ways:
Be sure the units in the unit conversion cancel correct ly. If the unit conversion factor was written upside down, the uni ts do
not cancel correctly in the equation. We see the “mil es” in the numerator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “mile ” in the
denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the “ min” in the denominator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “min ” in the
numerator in the second conversion factor. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The proble m asked
us to solve for average speed in units of meters per seco nd and, after the cancelations, the only units left are a m eter (m) in
the numerator and a second (s) in the denominator, so we have in deed obtained these units.
The density of iron is 7.86 g/cm under standard conditio ns. Convert this to kg/m.
Strategy
We need to convert grams to kilograms and cubic cen timeters to cubic meters. The conversion factors we nee d are 1 kg =
10 g and 1 cm = 10 m. However, we are dealing with cubic centimeters (cm = cm x cm x cm), so we have to use the
second conversion factor three times (that is, we ne ed to cube it). The idea is still to multiply by the conversion factors in
such a way that they cancel the units we want to get rid of an d introduce the units we want to keep.
Solution
Significance
Remember, it’s always important to check the answer.
Be sure to cancel the units in the unit conversion correc tly. We see that the gram (“g”) in the numerator in 7.86 g/cm
cancels the “g” in the denominator in the first conversi on factor. Also, the three factors of “cm” in the denominat or in 7.86
g/cm cancel with the three factors of “cm” in the numerato r that we get by cubing the second conversion factor. Che ck that
the units of the final answer are the desired units. The p roblem asked for us to convert to kilograms per cubic met er. After
the cancelations just described, we see the only units we ha ve left are “kg” in the numerator and three factors of “m ” in the
denominator (that is, one factor of “m” cubed, or “m ”). Th erefore, the units on the final answer are correct.
Unit conversions may not seem very interesting, but n ot doing them can be costly. One famous example of thi s situation was seen
with the Mars Climate Orbiter. This probe was launched by NASA on December 11, 1998. On September 23, 1999, while
attempting to guide the probe into its planned orbi t around Mars, NASA lost contact with it. Subsequent invest igations showed a
piece of software called SM_FORCES (or “small forces”) was r ecording thruster performance data in the English unit s of poundseconds (lb • s). However, other pieces of software that u sed these values for course corrections expected them to be recorded in the
SI units of newton-seconds (N • s), as dictated in the so ftware interface protocols. This error caused the probe to follow a very
different trajectory from what NASA thought it was follo wing, which most likely caused the probe either to burn up in the Martian
atmosphere or to shoot out into space. This failure to pay attention to unit conversions cost hundreds of millions of dollars, not to
mention all the time invested by the scientists and engin eers who worked on the project.
Given that 1 lb (pound) is 4.45 N, were the numbers being outpu t by SM_FORCES too big or too small?Example: Converting between Metric Units
3 3
3 −2 3
Exercise

1.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109479A tank contains of an ideal gas. The pressure in th e tank is and the volume of the tank is. The idea l gas
constant is. Determine the temperature of the gas in th e tank.
Strategy
Again, the check is to see if the appropriate units cance l out.
1.5.3 Weight and Mass
People frequently confuse the terms weight and mass. Th e weight of an object is the force exerted by the ear th's gravitational field
on the object. Mathematically,, where is the mass of the object and is the local gravitational field st rength. The local
gravitational field strength is also referred to as th e local acceleration of gravity.
Standard values for the local gravitational field stre ngth are
Standard values for the local acceleration of gravity a re
TEST YOURSELF: Why do these two interpretations for come up wi th similar numbers but different units?
Much of the confusion about mass and weight can be dir ectly attributed to the fact that the mass and force units in the American
Engineering System are both called "pounds." To elimin ate this problem, it is highly recommended that you only talk about poundforce or a pound-mass. You would never confuse a ne wton with a kilogram, but then they have different nam es.
Unfortunately, you will still find "pound" and " " used frequently to mean both mass and weight. Always approac h "pounds" with
caution when doing calculations. Remember that the wei ght of an object is always a function of the local gr avitational field
strength, but its mass is independent of the gravitatio nal field.
This page titled 1.5: Unit Conversion is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.4: Unit Conversion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
9.2: Appendix B- Dimensions and Units has no license indicated.Example

1.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094801.6: Dimensional Analysis
Find the dimensions of a mathematical expression involving physical quantities.
Determine whether an equation involving physical quantit ies is dimensionally consistent.
The dimension of any physical quantity expresses its dependence on the base quantities as a product of symbols (or powers of
symbols) representing the base quantities. Table li sts the base quantities and the symbols used for thei r dimension. For
example, a measurement of length is said to have dim ension L or L, a measurement of mass has dimension M or M, and a
measurement of time has dimension T or T. Like unit s, dimensions obey the rules of algebra. Thus, area is t he product of two
lengths and so has dimension L, or length squared. Sim ilarly, volume is the product of three lengths and ha s dimension L, or
length cubed. Speed has dimension length over time, L/ T or LT. V olumetric mass density has dimension M/L or ML, or mass
over length cubed. In general, the dimension of any phys ical quantity can be written as
for some powers a, b, c, d, e, f, and g. We can write t he dimensions of a length in this form with a = 1 an d the remaining six powers
all set equal to zero:
Any quantity with a dimension that can be written so t hat all seven powers are zero (that is, its dimension is) is
called dimensionless (or sometimes “of dimension 1,” because anything rais ed to the zero power is one). Physicists often call
dimensionless quantities pure numbers.
Table: Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Length L
Mass M
Time T
Current I
Thermodynamic Temperature
Amount of Substance N
Luminous Intensity J
Physicists often use square brackets around the symbol for a physical quantity to represent the dimensions o f that quantity. For
example, if r is the radius of a cylinder and h is it s height, then we write [r] = L and [h] = L to indicat e the dimensions of the radius
and height are both those of length, or L. Similarly, if we use the symbol A for the surface area of a cyli nder and V for its volume,
then [A] = L and [V] = L. If we use the symbol m for th e mass of the cylinder and for the density of the ma terial from which the
cylinder is made, then [m] = M and [] = ML.
The importance of the concept of dimension arises f rom the fact that any mathematical equation relatin g physical quantities must
be dimensionally consistent, which means the equation must obey the following rules:
Every term in an expression must have the same dimensions; it does not make sense to add or subtract quantities of d iffering
dimension (think of the old saying: “You can’t add appl es and oranges”). In particular, the expressions on each side o f the
equality in an equation must have the same dimensions.
The arguments of any of the standard mathematical funct ions such as trigonometric functions (such as sine and cosine),
logarithms, or exponential functions that appear in the equa tion must be dimensionless. These functions require pure n umbersLearning Objectives
1 1
2 3
–1 3 –3
2 3
−3

1.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109480as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs.
If either of these rules is violated, an equation is not dimensionally consistent and cannot possibly be a correc t statement of physical
law. This simple fact can be used to check for typos or algebra mistakes, to help remember the various laws of physics, and even to
suggest the form that new laws of physics might take. This last use of dimensions is beyond the scope of th is text, but is something
you will undoubtedly learn later in your academic career.
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle fo r some computation. Like many people who learned geo metry too long
ago to recall with any certainty, two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of circles: and. On e expression
is the circumference of a circle of radius r and the othe r is its area. But which is which?
Strategy
One natural strategy is to look it up, but this could take time to find information from a reputable sourc e. Besides, even if
we think the source is reputable, we shouldn’t trust ev erything we read. It is nice to have a way to double-ch eck just by
thinking about it. Also, we might be in a situation i n which we cannot look things up (such as during a te st). Thus, the
strategy is to find the dimensions of both expressio ns by making use of the fact that dimensions follow th e rules of algebra.
If either expression does not have the same dimension s as area, then it cannot possibly be the correct equa tion for the area
of a circle.
Solution
We know the dimension of area is L. Now, the dimension of the ex pression is
since the constant is a pure number and the radius r is a length. Therefore, has the dimension of area. Similarly, the
dimension of the expression is
since the constants 2 and are both dimensionless an d the radius r is a length. We see that has the dim ension of
length, which means it cannot possibly be an area.
We rule out because it is not dimensionally consiste nt with being an area. We see that is dimensionally
consistent with being an area, so if we have to choose between these two expressions, is the one to choose.
Significance
This may seem like kind of a silly example, but the i deas are very general. As long as we know the dimensions o f the
individual physical quantities that appear in an equ ation, we can check to see whether the equation is dim ensionally
consistent. On the other hand, knowing that true equat ions are dimensionally consistent, we can match expres sions from
our imperfect memories to the quantities for which t hey might be expressions. Doing this will not help us remember
dimensionless factors that appear in the equations (for example, if you had accidentally conflated the two expressions
from the example into, then dimensional analysis is no help), but it does help us remember the correct b asic form
of equations.
Consider the physical quantities s, v, a, and t with di mensions [s] = L, [v] = LT, [a] = LT, and [t] = T. Determ ine whether
each of the following equations is dimensionally consiste nt:
a. s = vt + 0.5at;
b. s = vt + 0.5at; and
c. v = sin ().Example: Using Dimensions to Remember an Equation
Example: Checking Equations for Dimensional Consistency
−1 −2

1.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109480Strategy
By the definition of dimensional consistency, we need t o check that each term in a given equation has the same dimensions
as the other terms in that equation and that the argument s of any standard mathematical functions are dimensionle ss.
Solution
a. There are no trigonometric, logarithmic, or exponentia l functions to worry about in this equation, so we need onl y
look at the dimensions of each term appearing in the equ ation. There are three terms, one in the left expression and
two in the expression on the right, so we look at each in t urn:
b. Again, there are no trigonometric, exponential, or logar ithmic functions, so we only need to look at the dimensions
of each of the three terms appearing in the equation:
None of the three terms has the same dimension as any o ther, so this is about as far from being dimensionally c onsistent
as you can get. The technical term for an equation lik e this is nonsense.
c. This equation has a trigonometric function in it, so f irst we should check that the argument of the sine functio n is
dimensionless:
The argument is dimensionless. So far, so good. Now we need to check the dimensions of each of the two terms (t hat is,
the left expression and the right expression) in the equati on:
The two terms have different dimensions—meaning, the e quation is not dimensionally consistent. This equation is
another example of “nonsense.”
Significance
If we are trusting people, these types of dimensional ch ecks might seem unnecessary. But, rest assured, any text book on
a quantitative subject such as physics (including this one) almost certainly contains some equations with t ypos.
Checking equations routinely by dimensional analysis s ave us the embarrassment of using an incorrect equat ion. Also,
checking the dimensions of an equation we obtain thro ugh algebraic manipulation is a great way to make sur e we did
not make a mistake (or to spot a mistake, if we made one).
One further point that needs to be mentioned is the ef fect of the operations of calculus on dimensions. We have seen that
dimensions obey the rules of algebra, just like unit s, but what happens when we take the derivative of one physical quantity with
respect to another or integrate a physical quantity over another? The derivative of a function is just the slope of the line tangent to
its graph and slopes are ratios, so for physical quanti ties v and t, we have that the dimension of the deriv ative of v with respect to t
is just the ratio of the dimension of v over that of t:

1.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109480Similarly, since integrals are just sums of products, the dimension of the integral of v with respect to t is simply the dimension of v
times the dimension of t:
By the same reasoning, analogous rules hold for the un its of physical quantities derived from other quantit ies by integration or
differentiation.
This page titled 1.6: Dimensional Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.5: Dimensional Analysis by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

1.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094811.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
Describe the process for developing a problem-solving strategy.
Explain how to find the numerical solution to a problem.
Summarize the process for assessing the significance of t he numerical solution to a problem.
Problem-solving skills are clearly essential to success in a quantitative course in physics. More important, th e ability to apply broad
physical principles—usually represented by equations— to specific situations is a very powerful form of knowl edge. It is much
more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analyti cal skills and problem-solving abilities can be appli ed to new situations
whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contai n every possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are u seful both for
solving problems in this text and for applying physics in e veryday life.
As you are probably well aware, a certain amount of cre ativity and insight is required to solve problems. No rigid procedure works
every time. Creativity and insight grow with experien ce. With practice, the basics of problem solving beco me almost automatic.
One way to get practice is to work out the text’s exam ples for yourself as you read. Another is to work as m any end-of-section
problems as possible, starting with the easiest to build confidence and then progressing to the more difficu lt. After you become
involved in physics, you will see it all around you, and you can begin to apply it to situations you enc ounter outside the classroom,
just as is done in many of the applications in this text.
Although there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem, the following processes facil itates problem solving
and make it more meaningful. Two approaches are provided:
Physics Approach
For this approach, a three-stage process is usedl. The three stages are strategy, solution, and significan ce. This process is used in
examples throughout the book. Here, we look at each stage of the process in turn.
1.7.1 Strategy
Strategy is the beginning stage of solving a problem. The idea is to figure out exactly what the problem i s and then develop a
strategy for solving it. Some general advice for this stage is as follows:
Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involve d. It often helps to draw a simple sketch at the
outset. You often need to decide which direction is posit ive and note that on your sketch. When you have identifi ed the physical
principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equatio ns representing those principles. Although finding the correct equation
is essential, keep in mind that equations represent phys ical principles, laws of nature, and relationships among phy sical
quantities. Without a conceptual understanding of a pr oblem, a numerical solution is meaningless.
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as state d (identify the “knowns”). Many problems are
stated very succinctly and require some inspection to det ermine what is known. Drawing a sketch be very useful at thi s point as
well. Formally identifying the knowns is of particular impo rtance in applying physics to real-world situations. For exam ple, the
word stopped means the velocity is zero at that instant. Also, we can often take initial time and position as zero by the
appropriate choice of coordinate system.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). In complex problems, especially, it
is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what seque nce. Making a list can help identify the unknowns.
Determine which physical principles can help you solve the problem. Since physical principles tend to be expressed in the
form of mathematical equations, a list of knowns and unkn owns can help here. It is easiest if you can find equations that contain
only one unknown—that is, all the other variables are known—so you can solve for the unknown easily. If the equation
contains more than one unknown, then additional equations ar e needed to solve the problem. In some problems, several
unknowns must be determined to get at the one needed most. In such problems it is especially important to keep phy sical
principles in mind to avoid going astray in a sea of equation s. You may have to use two (or more) different equations to get the
final answer.Learning Objectives

1.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094811.7.2 Solution
The solution stage is when you do the math. Substitute the knowns (along with their units) into the appropriate equation a nd
obtain numerical solutions complete with units. That is, do the algebra, calculus, geometry, or arith metic necessary to find the
unknown from the knowns, being sure to carry the units through the calculations. This step is clearly impor tant because it produces
the numerical answer, along with its units. Notice, however, tha t this stage is only one-third of the overall problem-sol ving process.
1.7.3 Significance
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving, it is tempting to think you are don e. But, always remember
that physics is not math. Rather, in doing physics, we use mathematics as a tool to help us understand natu re. So, after you obtain a
numerical answer, you should always assess its significance:
Check your units. If the units of the answer are incorrect, then an error ha s been made and you should go back over your
previous steps to find it. One way to find the mistake is to check all the equations you derived for dimensional consi stency.
However, be warned that correct units do not guarantee the n umerical part of the answer is also correct.
Check the answer to see whether it is reasonable. Does it make sense? This step is extremely important: –the goal of physic s
is to describe nature accurately. To determine whether the answer is reasonable, check both its magnitude and its sign, in
addition to its units. The magnitude should be consisten t with a rough estimate of what it should be. It should also compare
reasonably with magnitudes of other quantities of the sa me type. The sign usually tells you about direction and should be
consistent with your prior expectations. Your judgment will improve as you solve more physics problems, and it will b ecome
possible for you to make finer judgments regarding whethe r nature is described adequately by the answer to a problem. This
step brings the problem back to its conceptual meaning. If you can judge whether the answer is reasonable, you hav e a deeper
understanding of physics than just being able to solve a problem mechanically.
Check to see whether the answer tells you something interesting. What does it mean? This is the flip side of the question:
Does it make sense? Ultimately, physics is about understand ing nature, and we solve physics problems to learn a litt le
something about how nature operates. Therefore, assuming the answer does make sense, you should always take a moment t o
see if it tells you something about the world that you find interesting. Even if the answer to this particular problem is not very
interesting to you, what about the method you used to solv e it? Could the method be adapted to answer a question tha t you do
find interesting? In many ways, it is in answering question s such as these science that progresses.
Engineering Approach
The engineering approach is not fundamentally diffe rent from the approach described above. In other wor ds, either approach
works.
Engineering problem solving is based on the study of m odels that describe real systems. In every case, the r eal system must be
modeled by making simplifying assumptions before any mathematical or empirical analysis can be performed. Realistic and useful
answers can only be obtained if the modeling assumpti ons "catch" the important features of the problem. T he behavior of any
model is constrained by the physical laws it incorporat es and the modeling assumptions used in its developme nt. Two different
models for the same system may behave in entirely di fferent ways. The engineers' job is to develop the " best" model for the
problem at hand.
Because most mistakes are made in the process of deve loping the model it is essential that you learn to solve problems in a
methodical fashion that documents your solution proce ss including your modeling assumptions. Engineering ca lculations are part
of the archival record of any engineering project a nd are frequently referred to years after the origin al work is completed. Many a
junior engineer begins a new job by reviewing engineering calculations performed by others.
To help you develop your engineering problem solving skills, a multi-step process is proposed to help you (1) organize your
thoughts, (2) document your solution, and (3) improve your ability to solve new problems. A summary of the steps is presented in
Figure A-1. A sample problem showing the format can be found at the end of this appendix. As with any heurist ic, this one does not
guarantee a solution; however, its usefulness has been pro ven so frequently that we want you to use it in this cour se.
Figure A-1

1.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109481SUMMARY OF PROBLEM SOLVING STEPS
KNOWN: In your own words, state briefly what is known. (Step #1)
FIND: State concisely what you are trying to find. (Step #2)
GIVEN: Translate the problem word statement into sketch es and symbolic notation. All pertinent information g iven explicitly in the
problem statement should be listed here. (Step #3)
ANALYSIS: Develop a model and solve for desired informati on.
Develop a strategy. (STRATEGY) (Step #4)
Make modeling assumptions. (Clearly identified.) (Step #5)
Develop and solve the model. (Step #6)
Develop symbolic solutions.
Calculate numerical values.
Check the reasonableness of your answers.
COMMENT: Discuss your results. (Step #7)
A more detailed discussion of each step is presented i n the following sections. (Based on material in Fundamentals of Engineering
Thermodynamics by M. J. Moran and H. N. Shapiro, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1988.)
KNOWN: In your own words, state briefly what is known. Read the problem statement and think about what it says. Do not j ust
blindly copy the problem statement over again or li st every detail of the problem. Construct a short s entence that summarizes the
situation.
FIND: State concisely what you are trying to find. (If you don't know what you are looking for, how do you know when you've
found it?) Do not just copy (a)...., (b)...., etc. from t he problem and do not assume that you must find thi ngs in the order implied in
the problem statement.
GIVEN: Translate the word statement of the problem into en gineering sketches and symbolic notation. When complet ed, you
should be able to throw away the original problem stateme nt because you have recorded all of the pertinent informat ion.
Draw and label a sketch of the physical system or device. (If you cannot visualize the problem, you probably c an't solve it!) If you
anticipate using a conservation or accounting princi ple, identify the boundaries (control surfaces) of th e system you select for your
analysis and identify the interactions between this system and the surroundings, e.g. forces, work, mass flow, etc.
Define symbols for the important variables and param eters of the problem. Record the numerical values giv en for the important
variables and parameters.
Label the diagram with all relevant information from the problem statement. This is where you record all of the information
explicitly given in the problem statement.
Be especially wary of making implicit assumptions as you prepare this section. Recognize the difference between information that
is given explicitly in the problem and your interpretatio n of the information.
ANALYSIS: It is in this section that an appropriate mathemati cal model is developed and used to find the desired information. As
you prepare this section, carefully annotate your sol ution with words that describe what you are doing. This commentary is
invaluable in exposing your thought processes and if nee d be in recreating it at a later time.
Develop a strategy. Every solution should include some initial statements t hat reveal your plan for solving the problem. As a
starting point, clearly state what you believe to be the phy sical laws or concepts that will be important in solving this pro blem.
What's the property to be counted? What’s the appropr iate system? What's the appropriate time period? What co nstitutive
relationships may be required?
Your initial strategy may not be the best approach or th e only approach. It may not even be correct approach, bu t as you proceed
through the analysis process your plans may change. As t hey do just document them.
To stress the importance of consciously thinking about th e problem, every analysis section should start with a brief subsection
labeled STRATEGY.
Make modeling assumptions. Every problem solution requires that you make modelin g assumptions. These assumptions are
based on the information given in the problem statement, y our interpretation of the given information, and your understanding

1.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109481of the underlying phenomena. Every model begins with un iversally accepted natural laws, and the assumptions provid e the
traceable link between the fundamental laws and problem-sp ecific model you have developed. All assumptions should be
clearly identified as they are applied. You should be able to give a logical reason for every m odeling assumption you make. If
you cannot, it probably is an incorrect assumption.
Some problem solving formats call for a separate section li sting all assumptions before you begin your analysis. T here are two
problems with this approach. First, experience shows that it i s often difficult to know exactly what assumptions to make until
you are building the model. Secondly, separating the ass umptions from their application in the model tends to hide how they
influence the modeling process. If a summary list is desired, it should be prepared after the analysis is completed.
Develop symbolic solutions. Symbolic solutions are critical in engineering analysi s and should always be developed and
examined before you insert numerical values. The physics is in the s ymbolic solution, not the numerical answer. If the symbol ic
solution is incorrect, there’s no hope for the numbers. If po ssible, solve an equation for the unknown quantity and isola te it on
one side of the equal sign. It is desirable to work with symbolic equations as long as possib le before substituting in numbers for
many reasons. Symbolic solutions are especially useful when you are lookin g for errors, for solving parametric problems where
certain parameters change, and are much easier to modify as your model develops. Look for groups of terms or ways t o
rearrange you symbolic answer that simplify the equation a nd allow you to check for dimensional consistency. Groups of terms
with physical meaning or logical intermediate values shou ld be assigned a unique symbol. Numerical values for the se
intermediate answers can then be calculated and checked separately.
Calculate numerical values. Examine your symbolic solution and see if it makes sense. Once you are satisfied with the
symbolic solution, substitute in the numbers and calculate th e numerical answer. It is good practice to identify the source, e.g.
table, chart, or book, of all numerical data used in the solu tion, especially if it is not common knowledge. It is also good
practice to calculate intermediate or partial numerica l answers when you are faced with a very long computation or complicated
equation. This prevents calculator errors from creeping i nto a problem and gives you an opportunity to check the answers
against your physical intuition.
Check the reasonableness of your answers. Once you have a numerical answer, consider the magnitude and sign of all values
and decide whether they are reasonable. One way to do this i s to compare your answer against the results of a simpler mode l or
models that would be expected to bracket your answer. T ry different units for the answer, say gallons per minute in stead of liters
per second, to match your experience.
As you prepare the analysis, do not waste time recopying the solution over again if you reach a dead end or make a mistake. Just
cross out the error, clearly identify the mistake, a nd keep going. Textbook examples and professors' note s give the mistaken
impression that problem solving is a linear process t hat follows a single path with no mistakes and no side trips. Everyone makes
mistakes, takes unexpected side trips, and forgets to make an important assumption.
Successful problem solvers acknowledge these diversions and learn from them. You should never start a problem more than once;
however, your solution may take several turns before y ou are satisfied with the answer. The record of your j ourney is important.
Don't "clean up" the solution. Clean up your standar d problem solving method because a sloppy solution i s usually the result of
sloppy thinking. Get in the habit of attacking every problem in the same way. Scrap paper is meant for dood les, not engineering
calculations.
COMMENTS: Discuss your results briefly. Comment on what you learn ed, identify key aspects of the solution, and indicate how
your model might be improved by changing assumption s. Consciously check the validity of your answer by consi dering simpler
models. Don't wait for someone else (like your boss or instructor) to find an error in your work by performin g a five-minute "backof-the-envelope" calculation you could have performe d before submitting your answer.
This page titled 1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.8: Solving Problems in Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

1.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094819.1: Appendix A- Solving Engineering Problems - A Problem- Solving Heuristic has no license indicated.

1.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094821.8: Vectors
You might well wonder why we start off a physics book wit h a chapter on mathematics. The thing is, the mathe matics covered in
this chapter is mathematics you are supposed to alre ady know. The problem is that you might be a little bit rusty with it. We don’t
want that rust to get in the way of your learning of t he physics. So, we try to knock the rust off of the math ematics that you are
supposed to already know, so that you can concentrate on the physics. As much as we emphasize that this is a p hysics course rather
than a mathematics course, there is no doubt that you will advance your mathematical knowledge if you take this course seriously.
You will use mathematics as a tool, and as with any tool, the more you use it the better you get at using it.
The goal of this chapter and the next chapter is th ree prong: it is intended (a) to help you review con tent you know (b) introduce
some of the topics that are needed for this course, and (c) serve as a reference resources that you can g o back to whenever the
content is used in the course.
Some of the mathematics in this chapter is expected to be new to you. Some will be needed right away, some will not be needed
until later in the course. We will focus initially on th e content that is needed for the beginning of the course.
Even though you might have taken physics and calculu s before, this course will assume that you are not fami liar with any of the
content. If you have already taken calculus, physics, o r both, then you have a well earned advantage. Don't be complacent though
since we will cover the concepts more thoroughly.
Two points of emphasis regarding the mathematical co mponent of your solutions to physics problems that h ave a mathematical
component are in order:
1. You are required to present a clear and complete analy tical solution to each problem. This means that you will be manipulating
symbols (letters) rather than numbers.
2. For any physical quantity, you are required to use the symbol which is conventionally used by physicists, and/or a symbol
chosen to add clarity to your solution. In other words, it i s not okay to use the symbol x to represent every unknown.
Aside from the calculus, here are some of the kinds of m athematical problems you have to be able to solve: The reciprocal of
is not. Try it in the case of some simple numbers. Sup pose and. Then, and the
reciprocal of is which is clearly not 6 (which is what you obtain if you take the reciprocal of to be). So what is the
reciprocal of? The reciprocal of is.
This chapter does not cover all the non-calculus mat hematics you will encounter in this course. If you m aster the concepts in this
chapter (or re-master them if you already mastered them) you will be on your way to mastering all the no n-calculus mathematics
you need for this course. Regarding reading it all: B y the time you complete your physics course, you are supposed to have read
this book from cover to cover. Reading physics materia l that is new to you is supposed to be slow going. By the word reading in
this context, we really mean reading with understanding. Reading a physics text involves not only reading but taking the time to
make sense of diagrams, taking the time to make sen se of mathematical developments, and taking the time to make sense of the
words themselves. It involves rereading. The method I use is to push my way through a chapter once, all th e way through at a
novel-reading pace, picking up as much as I can on th e way but not allowing myself to slow down. Then, I reall y read it. On the
second time through I pause and ponder, study diagra ms, and ponder over phrases, looking up words in the di ctionary and working
through examples with pencil and paper as I go. I tr y not to go on to the next paragraph until I really understand what is being said
in the paragraph at hand. That first read, while of lit tle value all by itself, is of great benefit in answe ring the question, “Where is
the author going with this?”, while I am carrying out the se cond read.
This book is a physics book, not a mathematics book. One o f your goals in taking a physics course is to become more proficient
at solving physics problems, both conceptual problems involving little to no math, and problems involving some mathematics.
In a typical physics problem you are given a descript ion about something that is taking place in the unive rse and you are
supposed to figure out and write something very specif ic about what happens as a result of what is taking p lace. More
importantly, you are supposed to communicate clearly, co mpletely, and effectively, how, based on the descripti on and basic
principles of physics, you arrived at your conclusion. T o solve a typical physics problem you have to: (1) fo rm a picture based Note

1.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109482on the given description, quite often a moving picture, in your mind, (2) concoct an appropriate mathematical problem based
on the picture, (3) solve the mathematical problem, and (4) interpret the solution of the mathematical problem. The physics
occurs in steps 1, 2, and 4. The mathematics occurs in step 3. It only represents about 25% of the solution to a typical physics
problem.
1.8: Vectors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
1A: Mathematical Prelude by Jeffrey W. Schnick is licensed CC BY-SA 2.5. Original source: http://www.cbphysics.org.

1.8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094831.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
Convert angle measures between degrees and radians.
Recognize the triangular and circular definitions of the basic trigonometric functions.
Write the basic trigonometric identities.
Identify the graphs and periods of the trigonometric funct ions.
Describe the shift of a sine or cosine graph from the eq uation of the function.
Trigonometric functions are used to model many phen omena, including sound waves, vibrations of strings, alte rnating electrical
current, and the motion of pendulums. In fact, almost any repetitive, or cyclical, motion can be modeled by some combination of
trigonometric functions. In this section, we define the six basic trigonometric functions and look at som e of the main identities
involving these functions.
Radian Measure
To use trigonometric functions, we first must understa nd how to measure the angles. Although we can use both ra dians and
degrees, radians are a more natural measurement because they are rel ated directly to the unit circle, a circle with radi us 1.
Moreove, radian is the SI unit for angles. The radian m easure of an angle is defined as follows. Given an angl e, let be the length
of the corresponding arc on the unit circle (Figure). We say the angle corresponding to the arc of length 1 has radian measure
1.
Figure: The radian measure of an angle is the arc le ngth of the associated arc on the unit circle.
Since an angle of corresponds to the circumference o f a circle, or an arc of length, we conclude that a n angle with a degree
measure of has a radian measure of. Similarly, we see that is equivalent to radians. Table shows the
relationship between common degree and radian values.
Table: Common Angles Expressed in Degrees and Radians
Degrees Radians Degrees Radians
0 0 120
30 135
45 150
60 180
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
SolutionLearning Objectives
Converting between Radians and Degrees

1.8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483SolutionUse the fact that ° is equivalent to radians as a conversion factor (Table):
a.
b. rad = ⋅ = °
The Six Basic Trigonometric Functions
Trigonometric functions allow us to use angle measure s, in radians or degrees, to find the coordinates of a point on any circle—not
only on a unit circle—or to find an angle given a p oint on a circle. They also define the relationship between the sides and angles of
a triangle.
To define the trigonometric functions, first consider the unit circle centered at the origin and a point on the unit circle.
Let be an angle with an initial side that lies alon g the positive -axis and with a terminal side that is t he line segment. An
angle in this position is said to be in standard posit ion (Figure). We can then define the values of the si x trigonometric
functions for in terms of the coordinates and.
Figure: The angle is in standard position. The values of the trigonometric functions for are defined in t erms of the
coordinates and.
Let be a point on the unit circle centered at the origin. Let be an angle with an initial side along the positive axis and a terminal side given by the line segment. The trigonometric functions are then defined as
If and are undefined. If, then and are undefined.
We can see that for a point on a circle of radius with a corresponding angle, the coordinates and satisfy
and
The values of the other trigonometric functions can be expressed in terms of, and (Figure).Definition: Trigonometric functions

1.8.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483
Figure: For a point on a circle of radius, the coor dinates and satisfy and.
Table shows the values of sine and cosine at the majo r angles in the first quadrant. From this table, we c an determine the
values of sine and cosine at the corresponding angles in the other quadrants. The values of the other trigo nometric functions are
calculated easily from the values of and
Table: Values of and at Major Angles in the First Quadrant
0 0 1
1 0
Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a) On the unit circle, the angle corresponds to the po int. Therefore,Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions

1.8.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483
b) An angle corresponds to a revolution in the negative di rection, as shown. Therefore,
c) An angle = = +. Therefore, this angle corresponds to more than one revolution, as shown. Knowing the fact th at
an angle of corresponds to the point, we can conclude th at
As mentioned earlier, the ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle can be expressed in terms of the t rigonometric functions
evaluated at either of the acute angles of the trian gle. Let be one of the acute angles. Let be the l ength of the adjacent leg, be

1.8.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483the length of the opposite leg, and be the length o f the hypotenuse. By inscribing the triangle into a circle of radius, as shown
in Figure, we see that, and satisfy the following relation ships with:
Figure: By inscribing a right triangle in a circle, we can express the ratios of the side lengths in terms of the trigonometric
functions evaluated at.
A wooden ramp is to be built with one end on the groun d and the other end at the top of a short staircase. I f the top of the
staircase is ft from the ground and the angle betwe en the ground and the ramp is to be °, how long does the ramp need to
be?
Solution
Let denote the length of the ramp. In the following image, we see that needs to satisfy the equation.
Solving this equation for, we see that ≈ ft.
Trigonometric Identities
A trigonometric identity is an equation involving trigonometric functions t hat is true for all angles for which the functions a re
defined. We can use the identities to help us solve or si mplify equations. The main trigonometric identities are listed next.
Reciprocal identitiesExample: Constructing a Wooden Ramp
Trigonometric Identities

1.8.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483Pythagorean identities
Addition and subtraction formulas
Double-angle formulas
For each of the following equations, use a trigonometric identity to find all solutions.
a.
b.
Solution
a) Using the double-angle formula for, we see that is a so lution of
if and only if
which is true if and only if
To solve this equation, it is important to note that we need to factor the left-hand side and not divide bo th sides of the
equation by. The problem with dividing by is that i t is possible that is zero. In fact, if we did divide
both sides of the equation by, we would miss some of t he solutions of the original equation. Factoring the lefthand side of the equation, we see that is a solution of this equation if and only if
Since when
and when
we conclude that the set of solutions to this equation i s
andExample: Solving Trigonometric Equations

1.8.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483b) Using the double-angle formula for and the reciproca l identity for, the equation can be written as
To solve this equation, we multiply both sides by to eliminate the denominator, and say that if satisfi es this
equation, then satisfies the equation
However, we need to be a little careful here. Even if satisfies this new equation, it may not satisfy the or iginal
equation because, to satisfy the original equation, we would need to be able to divide both sides of the e quation by
. However, if, we cannot divide both sides of the equat ion by. Therefore, it is possible that we may
arrive at extraneous solutions. So, at the end, it is important to check for extraneous solutions. Returning to the
equation, it is important that we factor out of both terms on the left-hand side instead of dividing bot h sides of
the equation by. Factoring the left-hand side of the equa tion, we can rewrite this equation as
Therefore, the solutions are given by the angles such that. The solutions of the first equation
are The solutions of the second equation are After c hecking for
extraneous solutions, the set of solutions to the equatio n is
and
with
Prove the trigonometric identity
Solution
We start with the Pythagorean identity (Equation)
Dividing both sides of this equation by we obtain
Since and, we conclude that
Graphs and Periods of the Trigonometric Functions
We have seen that as we travel around the unit circl e, the values of the trigonometric functions repeat. We can see this pattern in the
graphs of the functions. Let be a point on the uni t circle and let θ be the corresponding angle. Since the angle and
correspond to the same point, the values of the tr igonometric functions at and at are the same. Conseq uently, the
trigonometric functions are periodic functions. The period of a function is defined to be the smal lest positive value p such that
for all values in the domain of. The sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have a period of. Since the
tangent and cotangent functions repeat on an interval of length, their period is (Figure).Example: Proving a Trigonometric Identity

1.8.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483
Figure: The six trigonometric functions are periodic.
Just as with algebraic functions, we can apply transform ations to trigonometric functions. In particular, consi der the following
function:
In Figure, the constant causes a horizontal or phase shift. The factor changes the period. This transfor med sine function
will have a period. The factor results in a vertic al stretch by a factor of. We say is the “amplitude of.” The
constant causes a vertical shift.
Figure: A graph of a general sine function.
Notice in Figure that the graph of is the graph of shifted to the left units. Therefore, we can write
Similarly, we can view the graph of as the graph of sh ifted right units, and state that

1.8.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483A shifted sine curve arises naturally when graphing the number of hours of daylight in a given location as a function of the day of
the year. For example, suppose a city reports that June 2 1 is the longest day of the year with 15.7 hours and December 21 is the
shortest day of the year with 8.3 hours. It can be shown that the function
is a model for the number of hours of daylight as a func tion of day of the year (Figure).
Figure: The hours of daylight as a function of day of the year can be modeled by a shifted sine curve.
Sketch a graph of
Solution
This graph is a phase shift of to the right by uni ts, followed by a horizontal compression by a factor o f 2, a
vertical stretch by a factor of 3, and then a vertical shi ft by 1 unit. The period of is.
Key Concepts
Radian measure is defined such that the angle associate d with the arc of length 1 on the unit circle has radian mea sure 1. An
angle with a degree measure of ° has a radian measure of rad.Example: Sketching the Graph of a Transformed Sine Curve

1.8.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483For acute angles,the values of the trigonometric functio ns are defined as ratios of two sides of a right triangle in wh ich one of
the acute angles is.
For a general angle, let be a point on a circle of radi us corresponding to this angle. The trigonometric f unctions can
be written as ratios involving,, and.
The trigonometric functions are periodic. The sine, c osine, secant, and cosecant functions have period. The tangent and
cotangent functions have period.

1.8.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483Trigonometric Identities
Pythagorean Identities
Even-Odd Identities
Cofunction Identities
Fundamental Identities
Sum and Difference Identities
Double-Angle Formulas
Half-Angle Formulas
Reduction Formulas

1.8.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109483Product-to-Sum Formulas
Sum-to-Product Formulas
Law of Sines
Law of Cosines
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
1.3: Trigonometric Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
14.3.2: Trigonometric Functions is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.
14: Appendix by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.

1.8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094841.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Use right triangles to evaluate trigonometric functions.
Find function values for 30°, 45°, and 60°.
Use equal cofunctions of complementary angles.
Use the definitions of trigonometric functions of any a ngle.
Use right-triangle trigonometry to solve applied probl ems.
Mt. Everest, which straddles the border between China an d Nepal, is the tallest mountain in the world. Measuring its height is no
easy task and, in fact, the actual measurement has bee n a source of controversy for hundreds of years. The m easurement process
involves the use of triangles and a branch of mathema tics known as trigonometry. In this section, we will defin e a new group of
functions known as trigonometric functions, and find out how they can be used to measure heights, such as those of the tallest
mountains.
We can defined the sine and cosine of an angle in ter ms of the coordinates of a point on the unit circle intersected by the terminal
side of the angle:
In this section, however, we will see another way to define t rigonometric functions using properties of right triangles.
Using Right Triangles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions
We can used a unit circle to define the trigonometric functions. In this section, we use definitions so that we can app ly them to right
triangles. The value of the sine or cosine function of is its value at radians. First, we need to create our right triangle. Figure
shows a point on a unit circle of radius 1. If we dro p a vertical line segment from the point to the x-axis, we have a
right triangle whose vertical side has length and wh ose horizontal side has length. We can use this righ t triangle to redefine sine,
cosine, and the other trigonometric functions as ratios of t he sides of a right triangle.
Figure: Graph of quarter circle with radius of 1. In scribed triangle with an angle of t. Point of (x,y) i s at intersection of
terminal side of angle and edge of circle.
We know
Likewise, we know
These ratios still apply to the sides of a right trian gle when no unit circle is involved and when the tria ngle is not in standard
position and is not being graphed using coordinates. To be able to use these ratios freely, we will give t he sides more general
names: Instead of,we will call the side between the gi ven angle and the right angle the adjacent side to angle. (Adjacent means
“next to.”) Instead of,we will call the side most dista nt from the given angle the opposite side from angle. And instead of,we
will call the side of a right triangle opposite the righ t angle the hypotenuse. These sides are labeled in Figure.Learning Objectives

1.8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484
Figure: The sides of a right triangle in relation to angle.
Understanding Right Triangle Relationships
Given a right triangle with an acute angle of,
A common mnemonic for remembering these relationshi ps is SohCahToa, formed from the first letters of “ Sine is opposite over
hypotenuse, Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, Tangent is opposite over adjacent.”
1. Find the sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypoten use.
2. Find the cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.
3. Find the tangent is the ratio of the opposite side to the adj acent side.
Given the triangle shown in Figure, find the value of.
Figure: A right triangle with side lengths of 8, 15, and 17. Angle alpha also labeled which is opposite to the side labeled
8.
Solution
The side adjacent to the angle is 15, and the hypotenuse of t he triangle is 17, so via Equation:
Relating Angles and Their Functions
When working with right triangles, the same rules apply regardless of the orientation of the triangle. In fa ct, we can evaluate the six
trigonometric functions of either of the two acute an gles in the triangle in Figure. The side opposite on e acute angle is the
side adjacent to the other acute angle, and vice versa.1
how to: Given the side lengths of a right triangle and one of the acute angles, find the sine, cosine, and
tangent of that angle
Example: Evaluating a Trigonometric Function of a Right Triangle

1.8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484
Figure: The side adjacent to one angle is opposite the other.
We will be asked to find all six trigonometric funct ions for a given angle in a triangle. Our strategy is to find the sine, cosine, and
tangent of the angles first. Then, we can find the oth er trigonometric functions easily because we know that the reciprocal of sine is
cosecant, the reciprocal of cosine is secant, and the rec iprocal of tangent is cotangent.
1. If needed, draw the right triangle and label the angle provided.
2. Identify the angle, the adjacent side, the side opposite the angle, and the hypotenuse of the right triangle.
3. Find the required function:
sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse
cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse
tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side
secant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the adjacent sid e
cosecant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the opposite s ide
cotangent as the ratio of the adjacent side to the opposite s ide
Using the triangle shown in Figure, evaluate and.
Figure: Right triangle with sides of 3, 4, and 5. Ang le alpha is also labeled which is opposite the side labe led 4.
Solution
Finding Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths
Here we use unit circle relationships to evaluate trian gles that contain special angles. We do this because when we evaluate the
special angles in trigonometric functions, they have relatively friendly values, values that contain ei ther no or just one square roothow to: Given the side lengths of a right triangle, evaluate the six trigonometric functions of one of the acute
angles
Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Angles Not in Standard Position

1.8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484in the ratio. Therefore, these are the angles often used in math and science problems. We will use multiple s of and,
however, remember that when dealing with right triangles, we a re limited to angles between.
Suppose we have a triangle, which can also be described as a triangle. The sides have lengths in the relatio n
The sides of a triangle, which can also be described as a triangle, have lengths in the relation
These relations are shown in Figure.
Figure: Side lengths of special triangles
We can then use the ratios of the side lengths to eval uate trigonometric functions of special angles.
1. Use the side lengths shown in Figure for the special an gle you wish to evaluate.
2. Use the ratio of side lengths appropriate to the functio n you wish to evaluate.
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of, us ing side lengths.
Solution
Using Equal Co-function of Complements
If we look more closely at the relationship between t he sine and cosine of the special angles relative to the unit circle, we will
notice a pattern. In a right triangle with angles of and, we see that the sine of, namely, is also the cosine of, while the
sine of, namely is also the cosine of (Figure).Given trigonometric functions of a special angle, evaluate using side lengths.
Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths

1.8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484
Figure: The sine of equals the cosine of and vice ve rsa.
This result should not be surprising because, as we see f rom Figure, the side opposite the angle of is also t he side adjacent
to, so and are exactly the same ratio of the same t wo sides, and Similarly, and are also the
same ratio using the same two sides, and.
The interrelationship between the sines and cosines o f and also holds for the two acute angles in any r ight triangle, since in
every case, the ratio of the same two sides would const itute the sine of one angle and the cosine of the o ther. Since the three angles
of a triangle add to π, π,and the right angle is, t he remaining two angles must also add up to. That me ans that a right triangle
can be formed with any two angles that add to —in oth er words, any two complementary angles. So we may state a cofunction
identity: If any two angles are complementary, the sine of on e is the cosine of the other, and vice versa. This i dentity is illustrated in
Figure.
Figure: Co-function identity of sine and cosine of co mplementary angles
Using this identity, we can state without calculating, fo r instance, that the sine of equals the cosine of, and that the sine of
equals the cosine of. We can also state that if, for a certain angle then as well.
The co-function identities in radians are listed in Table.
Table CO-FUNCTION IDENTITIES

1.8.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094841. To find the sine of the complementary angle, find the cos ine of the original angle.
2. To find the cosine of the complementary angle, find the sine of the original angle.
If find.
Solution
According to the cofunction identities for sine and cos ine,
So
Using Trigonometric Functions
In previous examples, we evaluated the sine and cosine in triangles where we knew all three sides. But the re al power of righttriangle trigonometry emerges when we look at triangles in which we know an angle but do not know all the sides.
1. For each side, select the trigonometric function that has the unknown side as either the numerator or the denomi nator. The
known side will in turn be the denominator or the numerat or.
2. Write an equation setting the function value of the kno wn angle equal to the ratio of the corresponding sides.
3. Using the value of the trigonometric function and the k nown side length, solve for the missing side length.
Find the unknown sides of the triangle in Figure.
Figure: A right triangle with sides a, c, and 7. Angl e of 30 degrees is also labeled which is opposite the sid e labeled 7.
Solution
We know the angle and the opposite side, so we can use the ta ngent to find the adjacent side.
We rearrange to solve for.how to: Given the sine and cosine of an angle, find the sine or cosine of its complement.
Example: Using Cofunction Identities
how to: Given a right triangle, the length of one side, and the measure of one acute angle, find the remaining
sides
Example: Finding Missing Side Lengths Using Trigonometric Ratios

1.8.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484We can use the sine to find the hypotenuse.
Again, we rearrange to solve for.
Using Right Triangle Trigonometry to Solve Applied Problems
Right-triangle trigonometry has many practical appli cations. For example, the ability to compute the len gths of sides of a triangle
makes it possible to find the height of a tall obje ct without climbing to the top or having to extend a tape measure along its height.
We do so by measuring a distance from the base of th e object to a point on the ground some distance away, where we can look up
to the top of the tall object at an angle. The angle of elevation of an object above an observer relative to the obser ver is the angle
between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's eye. The right triangle this positi on creates has sides that
represent the unknown height, the measured distance f rom the base, and the angled line of sight from the ground to the top of the
object. Knowing the measured distance to the base of th e object and the angle of the line of sight, we can use trigonometric
functions to calculate the unknown height. Similarly, we can form a triangle from the top of a tall object by looking downward. The
angle of depression of an object below an observer relative to the obse rver is the angle between the horizontal and the lin e from
the object to the observer's eye. See Figure.
Figure: Diagram of a radio tower with line segments e xtending from the top and base of the tower to a poi nt on the ground
some distance away. The two lines and the tower form a right triangle. The angle near the top of the towe r is the angle of
depression. The angle on the ground at a distance from the tower is the angle of elevation.
1. Make a sketch of the problem situation to keep track of k nown and unknown information.
2. Lay out a measured distance from the base of the obj ect to a point where the top of the object is clearly visible.
3. At the other end of the measured distance, look up to the t op of the object. Measure the angle the line of sight makes wi th
the horizontal.
4. Write an equation relating the unknown height, the measur ed distance, and the tangent of the angle of the line of sight.
5. Solve the equation for the unknown height.
To find the height of a tree, a person walks to a poin t 30 feet from the base of the tree. She measures an angle of 57° 57°
between a line of sight to the top of the tree and the gro und, as shown in Figure. Find the height of the tree.how to: Given a tall object, measure its height indirectly
Example: Measuring a Distance Indirectly2

1.8.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109484
Figure: A tree with angle of 57 degrees from vantage point. Vantage point is 30 feet from tree.
Solution
We know that the angle of elevation is and the adjacent side is 30 ft long. The opposite side is the unknown heigh t.
The trigonometric function relating the side opposi te to an angle and the side adjacent to the angle is the tangent. So we will
state our information in terms of the tangent of, lett ing be the unknown height.
The tree is approximately 46 feet tall.
Other ways are "Oscar Had A Heap Of Apples" though this way you need to know sine, cosine, and tangent are in tha t order, or
"Studying Our Homework Can Always Help To Obtain Achievement." Wolfram Math has some more alternatives to
SOHCAHTOA which might be preferred by some.
A famous example of measuring indirectly does not re quire trigonometry but is nevertheless an interesting tale. That tale is about
Thales and his technique to measure the pyramid with the shadow of a stick (or himself). There is some question if it really
happened or not, though the technique was actually correct regardless.
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
5.4: Right Triangle Trigonometry by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.
14.3.1: Basic Trigonometry is licensed CC BY 4.0.1

1.8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094851.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Vectors are essential to physics and engineering. Many fundamental physical quantities are vectors, includin g displacement,
velocity, force, and electric and magnetic vector fi elds. Scalar products of vectors define other fundam ental scalar physical
quantities, such as energy. Vector products of vecto rs define still other fundamental vector physical q uantities, such as torque and
angular momentum. In other words, vectors are a compone nt part of physics in much the same way as sentences a re a component
part of literature.
Figure: A signpost gives information about distances and directions to towns or to other locations relative to the location of
the signpost. Distance is a scalar quantity. Knowing the distance alone is not enough to get to the town; we must also know the
direction from the signpost to the town. The directio n, together with the distance, is a vector quantity c ommonly called the
displacement vector. A signpost, therefore, gives infor mation about displacement vectors from the signpost to towns. (credit:
modification of work by “studio tdes”/Flickr)
In introductory physics, vectors are Euclidean quanti ties that have geometric representations as arrows in one dimension (in a line),
in two dimensions (in a plane), or in three dimensions (in space). They can be added, subtracted, or multiplied.
Describe the difference between vector and scalar quantit ies.
Identify the magnitude and direction of a vector.
Explain the effect of multiplying a vector quantity by a scalar.
Describe how one-dimensional vector quantities are added or subtracted.
Explain the geometric construction for the addition or subtraction of vectors in a plane.
Distinguish between a vector equation and a scalar equation.
Many familiar physical quantities can be specified comp letely by giving a single number and the appropriat e unit. For example, “a
class period lasts 50 min” or “the gas tank in my car holds 65 L” or “the distance between two posts is 10 0 m.” A physical quantity
that can be specified completely in this manner is called a scalar quantity. Scalar is a synonym of “number.” Time, mass, distance,
length, volume, temperature, and energy are examples of scalar quantities.
Scalar quantities that have the same physical units c an be added or subtracted according to the usual rul es of algebra for numbers.
For example, a class ending 10 min earlier than 50 m in lasts 50 min − 10 min = 40 min. Similarly, a 60-ca l serving of corn
followed by a 200-cal serving of donuts gives 60 cal + 200 cal = 260 cal of energy. When we multiply a scal ar quantity by a
number, we obtain the same scalar quantity but with a larger (or smaller) value. For example, if yesterday’s breakfast had 200 cal of
energy and today’s breakfast has four times as much e nergy as it had yesterday, then today’s breakfast ha s 4(200 cal) = 800 cal of
energy. Two scalar quantities can also be multiplied o r divided by each other to form a derived scalar qu antity. For example, if a
train covers a distance of 100 km in 1.0 h, its speed is 100.0 km/1.0 h = 27.8 m/s, where the speed is a der ived scalar quantity
obtained by dividing distance by time.
Many physical quantities, however, cannot be described completely by just a single number of physical uni ts. For example, when
the U.S. Coast Guard dispatches a ship or a helicopter for a rescue mission, the rescue team must know not on ly the distance to the
distress signal, but also the direction from which the signal is coming so they can get to its origin as qu ickly as possible. PhysicalLearning Objectives

1.8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485quantities specified completely by giving a number of units (magnitude) and a direction are called vector quantities. Examples of
vector quantities include displacement, velocity, pos ition, force, and torque. In the language of mathema tics, physical vector
quantities are represented by mathematical objects called vectors (Figure). We can add or subtract two vectors, and we can
multiply a vector by a scalar or by another vector, but we cannot divide by a vector. The operation of d ivision by a vector is not
defined.
Figure: We draw a vector from the initial point or origin (called the “tail” of a vector) to the end o r terminal point (called the
“head” of a vector), marked by an arrowhead. Magnit ude is the length of a vector and is always a positive scalar quantity. (credit:
modification of work by Cate Sevilla)
Let’s examine vector algebra using a graphical meth od to be aware of basic terms and to develop a qualit ative understanding. In
practice, however, when it comes to solving physics pro blems, we use analytical methods. Analytical methods are m ore simple
computationally and more accurate than graphical me thods. From now on, to distinguish between a vector and a scalar quantity, we
adopt the common convention that a letter with an ar row above it denotes a vector, and a letter without an arrow denotes a scalar.
For example, a distance of 2.0 km, which is a scalar qua ntity, is denoted by d = 2.0 km, whereas a displaceme nt of 2.0 km in some
direction, which is a vector quantity, is denoted by.
Suppose you tell a friend on a camping trip that you have discovered a terrific fishing hole 6 km from yo ur tent. It is unlikely your
friend would be able to find the hole easily unless you also communicate the direction in which it can be found with respect to your
campsite. You may say, for example, “Walk about 6 km northeast from my tent.” The key concept here is th at you have to give not
one but two pieces of information—namely, the distance or m agnitude (6 km) and the direction (northeast).
Displacement is a general term used to describe a ch ange in position, such as during a trip from the tent to the fishing hole.
Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. If you walk from the tent (location A) to the hole (locat ion B), as shown in Figure
, the vector, representing your displacement, is drawn as the arrow that originates at point A and e nds at point B. The
arrowhead marks the end of the vector. The direction of the displacement vector is the direction of th e arrow. The length of the
arrow represents the magnitude (or size) D of vector. Here, D = 6 km. Since the magni tude of a vector is its length, which is a
positive number, the magnitude is also indicated by placing the absolute value notation around the symbo l that denotes the vector;
so, we can write equivalently that D ≡ | |. To solve a v ector problem graphically, we need to draw the vector to scale. For
example, if we assume 1 unit of distance (1 km) is re presented in the drawing by a line segment of length u = 2 cm, then the total
displacement in this example is represented by a vecto r of length d = 6u = 6(2 cm) = 12 cm, as shown in Fig ure. Notice that
here, to avoid confusion, we used D = 6 km to denote t he magnitude of the actual displacement and d = 12 cm to denote the length
of its representation in the drawing.
Figure: The displacement vector from point A (the in itial position at the campsite) to point B (the final position at the fishing
hole) is indicated by an arrow with origin at point A and end at point B. The displacement is the same for any of the actual paths
(dashed curves) that may be taken between points A and B.

1.8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485
Figure: A displacement of magnitude 6 km is drawn to scale as a vector of length 12 cm when the length of 2 cm
represents 1 unit of displacement (which in this case is 1 km).
Suppose your friend walks from the campsite at A to th e fishing pond at B and then walks back: from the fishi ng pond at B to the
campsite at A. The magnitude of the displacement vec tor from A to B is the same as the magnitude of the displacement vector
from B to A (it equals 6 km in both cases), so we can write =. However, vector is not equal to vector
because these two vectors have different directions: ≠. In Figure 2.3, vector would be represented by a v ector with
an origin at point B and an end at point A, indicatin g vector points to the southwest, which is exactly 18 0° opposite to the
direction of vector. We say that vector is antiparallel to vector and write =, where the minus sign
indicates the antiparallel direction.
Two vectors that have identical directions are said to be parallel vectors —meaning, they are parallel to each other. Two parallel
vectors and are equal, denoted by =, if and onl y if they have equal magnitudes | | = | |. Two vectors with directions
perpendicular to each other are said to be orthogonal vectors. These relations between vectors are illustrated in Figure.
Figure: Various relations between two vectors and. (a) ≠ because A ≠ B. (b) ≠ because they are not p arallel
and A ≠ B. (c) ≠ because they have different dire ctions (even though | | = | | = A). (d) = becau se they are parallel
and have identical magnitudes A = B. (e) ≠ because they have different directions (are not parallel); h ere, their directions differ
by 90° —meaning, they are orthogonal.
1.8.3.1 Algebra of Vectors in One Dimension
Vectors can be multiplied by scalars, added to other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors. We can illustrate these vector
concepts using an example of the fishing trip seen in Figure.
Figure: Displacement vectors for a fishing trip. (a) St opping to rest at point C while walking from camp (p oint A) to the
pond (point B). (b) Going back for the dropped tack le box (point D). (c) Finishing up at the fishing pond.

1.8.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485Suppose your friend departs from point A (the campsite) and walks in the direction to point B (the fishing pond), but, along the
way, stops to rest at some point C located three-quarte rs of the distance between A and B, beginning from po int A (Figure).
What is his displacement vector when he reaches poi nt C? We know that if he walks all the way to B, his di splacement vector
relative to A is, which has magnitude D = 6 km and a direction of northeast. If he walks only a 0.75 fra ction of the total
distance, maintaining the northeasterly direction, a t point C he must be 0.75 D = 4.5 km away from the cam psite at A. So, his
displacement vector at the rest point C has magnitu de D = 4.5 km = 0.75 D and is parallel to the displa cement vector. All
of this can be stated succinctly in the form of the fo llowing vector equation:
In a vector equation, both sides of the equation are vectors. The previous equation is an example of a ve ctor multiplied by a
positive scalar (number) = 0.75. The result,, of su ch a multiplication is a new vector with a direction p arallel to the direction
of the original vector. In general, when a vector i s multiplied by a positive scalar, the result is a n ew vector that is
parallel to:
The magnitude | | of this new vector is obtained by mu ltiplying the magnitude | | of the original vector, a s expressed by the scalar
equation:
In a scalar equation, both sides of the equation are numbers. Equation is a scalar equation because the magnitudes of vectors
are scalar quantities (and positive numbers). If th e scalar is negative in the vector equation Equation, then the magnitud e |
| of the new vector is still given by Equation, but the direction of the new vector is antiparallel to the direction of.
These principles are illustrated in Figure by two exa mples where the length of vector is 1.5 units. When = 2, the new
vector = 2 has length B = 2A = 3.0 units (twice as long as the original vector) and is parallel to the original vector. When =
−2, the new vector = −2 has length C = |−2| A = 3.0 units (twice as long as the original vector) and is antiparallel to the original
vector.
Figure: Algebra of vectors in one dimension. (a) Mult iplication by a scalar. (b) Addition of two vectors (is called the
resultant of vectors (and (). (c) Subtraction of two vectors (is the difference of vectors (and).
Now suppose your fishing buddy departs from point A (th e campsite), walking in the direction to point B (th e fishing hole), but he
realizes he lost his tackle box when he stopped to r est at point C (located three-quarters of the distan ce between A and B, beginning
from point A). So, he turns back and retraces his steps in the direction toward the campsite and finds the b ox lying on the path at
some point D only 1.2 km away from point C (see Figure). What is his displacement vector when he finds the box at
point D? What is his displacement vector from point D to the hole? We have already established that at r est point C his
displacement vector is = 0.75. Starting at point C, he walks southwest (toward the campsite), which means his new
displacement vector from point C to point D is anti parallel to. Its magnitude | | is D = 1.2 km = 0.2 D, so his
second displacement vector is = −0.2. His total di splacement relative to the campsite is the vector sum of the two
displacement vectors: vector (from the campsite to the rest point) and vector (from the rest point to the point where he
finds his box):AB
AB
AC AB
CD AB

1.8.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485The vector sum of two (or more vectors is called the resultant vector or, for short, the resultant. When the vectors on the righthand-side of Equation are known, we can find the resultant as follows:
When your friend finally reaches the pond at B, his d isplacement vector from point A is the vector sum o f his displacement
vector from point A to point D and his displacement vector from point D to the fishing hole: = + (see
Figure). This means his displacement vector is the dif ference of two vectors:
Notice that a difference of two vectors is nothing mo re than a vector sum of two vectors because the second term in Equation
is vector (which is antiparallel to). When we substit ute Equation into Equation, we obtain the
second displacement vector:
This result means your friend walked D = 0.45 D = 0.45(6.0 km) = 2.7 km from the point where he finds his tac kle box to the
fishing hole.
When vectors and lie along a line (that is, in one dimension), such as in the camping example, their re sultant = + and
their difference = − both lie along the same dir ection. We can illustrate the addition or subtractio n of vectors by drawing the
corresponding vectors to scale in one dimension, as shown in Figure.
To illustrate the resultant when and are two parall el vectors, we draw them along one line by placing th e origin of one vector at
the end of the other vector in head-to-tail fashion (see Figure (\PageIndex{6b}\)). The magnitude of this resultant is the sum of their
magnitudes: R = A + B. The direction of the resultant is parallel to both vectors. When vector is antipar allel to vector, we draw
them along one line in either head-to-head fashion (Figure (\PageIndex{6c}\)) or tail-to-tail fashion. T he magnitude of the vector
difference, then, is the absolute value D = |A − B| of the difference of their magnitudes. The direction of the difference vector is
parallel to the direction of the longer vector.
In general, in one dimension—as well as in higher dim ensions, such as in a plane or in space—we can add an y number of vectors
and we can do so in any order because the addition of vect ors is commutative,
and associative,
Moreover, multiplication by a scalar is distributive:
We used the distributive property in Equation and Eq uation.
When adding many vectors in one dimension, it is conve nient to use the concept of a unit vector. A unit vector, which is denoted
by a letter symbol with a hat, such as, has a magnitu de of one and does not have any physical unit so th at | | ≡ u = 1. The only
role of a unit vector is to specify direction. For exa mple, instead of saying vector has a magnitude of 6. 0 km and a direction of
northeast, we can introduce a unit vector that point s to the northeast and say succinctly that = (6.0 km). Then the
southwesterly direction is simply given by the unit vector. In this way, the displacement of 6.0 km in the southwesterly direction
is expressed by the vectorDB AB

1.8.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485A long measuring stick rests against a wall in a phys ics laboratory with its 200-cm end at the floor. A la dybug lands on the 100cm mark and crawls randomly along the stick. It first walks 15 cm toward the floor, then it walks 56 cm toward the wall, then it
walks 3 cm toward the floor again. Then, after a brief stop, it continues for 25 cm toward the floor and then, again, it crawls up
19 cm toward the wall before coming to a complete res t (Figure). Find the vector of its total displacement and its final
resting position on the stick.
Strategy
If we choose the direction along the stick toward the floor as the direction of unit vector, then the direction towa rd the
floor is and the direction toward the wall is. The ladyb ug makes a total of five displacements:
The total displacement is the resultant of all its d isplacement vectors.
Figure: Five displacements of the ladybug. Note that i n this schematic drawing, magnitudes of displacements ar e not
drawn to scale. (credit: modification of work by “Per sian Poet Gal”/Wikimedia Commons)
Solution
The resultant of all the displacement vectors is
In this calculation, we use the distributive law given by Equation 2.2.9. The result reads that the total displacement
vector points away from the 100-cm mark (initial lan ding site) toward the end of the meter stick that tou ches the wall.
The end that touches the wall is marked 0 cm, so the final posit ion of the ladybug is at the (100 – 32) cm = 68-cm mark.
1.8.3.2 Algebra of Vectors in Two Dimensions
When vectors lie in a plane—that is, when they are in two dimensions—they can be multiplied by scalars, adde d to other vectors,
or subtracted from other vectors in accordance with the general laws expressed by Equation 2.2.1, Equation 2..2.2, Equation 2.2.7,
and Equation 2.2.8. However, the addition rule for two vectors in a plane becomes more complicated than the rule for vector
addition in one dimension. We have to use the laws of geometry to construct resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find
vector magnitudes and directions. This geometric ap proach is commonly used in navigation (Figure). In t his section, weExample: A Ladybug Walker

1.8.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485need to have at hand two rulers, a triangle, a protra ctor, a pencil, and an eraser for drawing vectors to s cale by geometric
constructions.
Figure: In navigation, the laws of geometry are used to draw resultant displacements on nautical maps.
For a geometric construction of the sum of two vectors in a plane, we follow the parallelogram rule. Suppose two vectors and
are at the arbitrary positions shown in Figure. Tran slate either one of them in parallel to the beginni ng of the other vector, so
that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the same point. Now, at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to
vector and at the end of vector we draw a line para llel to vector (the dashed lines in Figure). In thi s way, we obtain a
parallelogram. From the origin of the two vectors we d raw a diagonal that is the resultant of the two vecto rs: = + (Figure
). The other diagonal of this parallelogram is the v ector difference of the two vectors = −, as shown in Figure.
Notice that the end of the difference vector is placed a t the end of vector.
Figure: The parallelogram rule for the addition of two vectors. Make the parallel translation of each ve ctor to a point where
their origins (marked by the dot) coincide and constr uct a parallelogram with two sides on the vectors and the other two sides
(indicated by dashed lines) parallel to the vectors. (a) Draw the resultant vector along the diagonal of the parallelogram from the
common point to the opposite corner. Length R of the resultant vector is not equal to the sum of the magni tudes of the two vectors.
(b) Draw the difference vector = − along the dia gonal connecting the ends of the vectors. Place the o rigin of vector at the
end of vector and the end (arrowhead) of vector a t the end of vector. Length D of the difference ve ctor is not equal to the
difference of magnitudes of the two vectors.
It follows from the parallelogram rule that neither the magnitude of the resultant vector nor the magni tude of the difference vector
can be expressed as a simple sum or difference of ma gnitudes A and B, because the length of a diagonal c annot be expressed as a
simple sum of side lengths. When using a geometric con struction to find magnitudes | | and | |, we have to us e trigonometry laws
for triangles, which may lead to complicated algebra. There are two ways to circumvent this algebraic compl exity. One way is to
use the method of components, which we examine in the next section. The other way is to draw the vectors t o scale, as is done in
navigation, and read approximate vector lengths and angles (directions) from the graphs. In this section we examine the second
approach.
If we need to add three or more vectors, we repeat the parallelogram rule for the pairs of vectors until we find the resultant of all of
the resultants. For three vectors, for example, we first find the resultant of vector 1 and vector 2, and then we find the resultant of
this resultant and vector 3. The order in which we sele ct the pairs of vectors does not matter because the operation of vector
addition is commutative and associative (see Equation 2.2.7 and Equation 2.2.8). Before we state a general rule that follows from
repetitive applications of the parallelogram rule, let’ s look at the following example.
Suppose you plan a vacation trip in Florida. Departing from Tallahassee, the state capital, you plan to visi t your uncle Joe in
Jacksonville, see your cousin Vinny in Daytona Beach, s top for a little fun in Orlando, see a circus performan ce in Tampa, and visit
the University of Florida in Gainesville. Your route ma y be represented by five displacement vectors,,,, and, which are
indicated by the red vectors in Figure. What is your total displacement when you reach Gainesville? The to tal displacement

1.8.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485is the vector sum of all five displacement vectors, which may be found by using the parallelogram rule f our times. Alternatively,
recall that the displacement vector has its beginnin g at the initial position (Tallahassee) and its end at the final position
(Gainesville), so the total displacement vector can be drawn directly as an arrow connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville (see the
green vector in Figure). When we use the parallelogr am rule four times, the resultant we obtain is exactl y this green vector
connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville: = + + + +.
Figure: When we use the parallelogram rule four time s, we obtain the resultant vector = + + + +, wh ich is the
green vector connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville.
Drawing the resultant vector of many vectors can be g eneralized by using the following tail-to-head geomet ric construction.
Suppose we want to draw the resultant vector of four vec tors,,, and (Figure). We select any one of the v ectors as
the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a position where the origin (“tai l”) of the second vector
coincides with the end (“head”) of the first vector. Th en, we select a third vector and make a parallel trans lation of the third vector
to a position where the origin of the third vector c oincides with the end of the second vector. We repeat this procedure until all the
vectors are in a head-to-tail arrangement like the one shown in Figure. We draw the resultant vector by connecting the
origin (“tail”) of the first vector with the end (“he ad”) of the last vector. The end of the resultant ve ctor is at the end of the last
vector. Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, we obtain the same resultant vector regardless of which
vector we choose to be first, second, third, or fourth in th is construction.
Figure: Tail-to-head method for drawing the resultan t vector = + + +. (a) Four vectors of different magnitudes
and directions. (b) Vectors in (a) are translated to n ew positions where the origin (“tail”) of one vector is at the end (“head”) of
another vector. The resultant vector is drawn from th e origin (“tail”) of the first vector to the end (“h ead”) of the last vector in this
arrangement.
The three displacement vectors,, and in Figure ar e specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0, an d C = 8.0,
respectively, and by their respective direction angle s with the horizontal direction = 35°, = −110°, and = 30°. The
physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Ch oose a convenient scale and use a ruler and a protrac tor to find the
following vector sums: (a) = +, (b) = −, and (c) = − +.Example: Geometric Construction of the Resultant

1.8.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485
Figure: Vectors used in Example and in the Exercise f eature that follows.
Strategy
In geometric construction, to find a vector means to find its magnitude and its direction angle with the horizontal direction.
The strategy is to draw to scale the vectors that appe ar on the right-hand side of the equation and const ruct the resultant
vector. Then, use a ruler and a protractor to read t he magnitude of the resultant and the direction ang le. For parts (a) and (b)
we use the parallelogram rule. For (c) we use the tail-to-hea d method.
Solution
For parts (a) and (b), we attach the origin of vector to the origin of vector, as shown in Figure, and c onstruct
a parallelogram. The shorter diagonal of this parall elogram is the sum +. The longer of the diagonals is the
difference −. We use a ruler to measure the length s of the diagonals, and a protractor to measure the angles with the
horizontal. For the resultant, we obtain R = 5.8 cm a nd ≈ 0°. For the difference, we obtain D = 16.2 cm an d =
49.3°, which are shown in Figure.
Figure: Using the parallelogram rule to solve (a) (fi nding the resultant, red) and (b) (finding the diffe rence, blue).
For (c), we can start with vector −3 and draw the rema ining vectors tail-to-head as shown in Figure. In vec tor
addition, the order in which we draw the vectors is uni mportant, but drawing the vectors to scale is very i mportant.
Next, we draw vector from the origin of the first vect or to the end of the last vector and place the arrowh ead at the end
of. We use a ruler to measure the length of, and f ind that its magnitude is S = 36.9 cm. We use a protra ctor and find
that its direction angle is = 52.9°. This solution is sho wn in Figure.
Figure: Using the tail-to-head method to solve (c) (f inding vector, green).

1.8.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109485This page titled 1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.1: Prelude to Vectors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.2: Scalars and Vectors (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
2.3: Scalars and Vectors (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

1.8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094861.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
Describe vectors in two and three dimensions in terms of their components, using unit vectors along the axes.
Distinguish between the vector components of a vector and the scalar components of a vector.
Explain how the magnitude of a vector is defined in terms of the components of a vector.
Identify the direction angle of a vector in a plane.
Explain the connection between polar coordinates and Ca rtesian coordinates in a plane.
Vectors are usually described in terms of their comp onents in a coordinate system. Even in everyday lif e we naturally invoke the
concept of orthogonal projections in a rectangular coordinate system. For example, if you ask someone for d irections to a particular
location, you will more likely be told to go 40 km east an d 30 km north than 50 km in the direction 37° north of east.
In a rectangular (Cartesian) xy-coordinate system in a plane, a point in a plane is described by a pair of coordinates (x, y). In a
similar fashion, a vector in a plane is described b y a pair of its vector coordinates. The x-coordinat e of vector is called its xcomponent and the y-coordinate of vector is called its y-component. The vector x-component is a vector denoted by. The
vector y-component is a vector denoted by. In the Cartesian system, the x and y vector components of a vector are the
orthogonal projections of this vector onto the - and -axes, respectively. In this way, following the parallelog ram rule for vector
addition, each vector on a Cartesian plane can be expresse d as the vector sum of its vector components:
As illustrated in Figure, vector is the diagonal of t he rectangle where the x-component is the side paral lel to the x-axis
and the y-component is the side parallel to the y-axis. Vector component is orthogonal to vector component.
Figure: Vector in a plane in the Cartesian coordina te system is the vector sum of its vector x- and y-compo nents. The xvector component is the orthogonal projection of ve ctor onto the x-axis. The y-vector component is the orthogonal
projection of vector onto the y-axis. The numbers A and A that multiply the unit vectors are the scalar c omponents of the
vector.
It is customary to denote the positive direction on the x-axis by the unit vector and the positive dir ection on the y-axis by the unit
vector. Unit vectors of the axes, and, define two or thogonal directions in the plane. As shown in Figure, the x- and ycomponents of a vector can now be written in terms of the u nit vectors of the axes:
The vectors and defined by Equation 2.11 are the v ector components of vector. The numbers A and A th at define the
vector components in Equation are the scalar components of vector. Combining Equation with Equation,
we obtain the component form of a vector:Learning Objectives
x y
x y

1.8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486If we know the coordinates of the origin point of a vector (where b stands for “beginning”) and the coor dinates e(x, y) of
the end point of a vector (where e stands for “end”), we can obtain the scalar components of a vector simpl y by subtracting the
origin point coordinates from the end point coordin ates:
A mouse pointer on the display monitor of a compute r at its initial position is at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) with respect to the
lower left-side corner. If you move the pointer to an icon located at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm), what is the disp lacement vector of
the pointer?
Strategy
The origin of the xy-coordinate system is the lower le ft-side corner of the computer monitor. Therefore, th e unit vector on
the x-axis points horizontally to the right and the unit vector on the y-axis points vertically upward. The origin of the
displacement vector is located at point b(6.0, 1.6) and the end of the displacement vector is located at point e(2.0, 4.5).
Substitute the coordinates of these points into Equati on to find the scalar components D and D of the displ acement
vector. Finally, substitute the coordinates into Equ ation to write the displacement vector in the vecto r component
form.
Solution
We identify x = 6.0, x = 2.0, y = 1.6, and y = 4.5, wher e the physical unit is 1 cm. The scalar x- and y-com ponents of
the displacement vector are
The vector component form of the displacement vector is
This solution is shown in Figure.
Figure: The graph of the displacement vector. The ve ctor points from the origin point at to the end poi nt at.
Significance
Notice that the physical unit—here, 1 cm—can be placed either with each component immediately before the u nit
vector or globally for both components, as in Equat ion. Often, the latter way is more convenient becaus e it is
simpler.
The vector x-component = −4.0 = 4.0() of the displ acement vector has the magnitude | | = |− 4.0|| | = 4.0
because the magnitude of the unit vector is | | = 1.e e
Example: Displacement of a Mouse Pointer
x y
b e b e

1.8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486Notice, too, that the direction of the x-component is, which is antiparallel to the direction of the +x-a xis; hence, the
x-component vector points to the left, as shown in Figure.
The scalar x-component of vector is D = −4.0.
Similarly, the vector y-component = of the displace ment vector has magnitude | | = |2.9|| | = 2.9 becaus e the
magnitude of the unit vector is | | = 1.
The direction of the y-component is, which is paral lel to the direction of the +y-axis. Therefore, the y-component
vector points up, as seen in Figure. The scalar y-compon ent of vector is D = + 2.9.
The displacement vector is the resultant of its two vec tor components.
The vector component form of the displacement vector Equation tells us that the mouse pointer has been mo ved
on the monitor 4.0 cm to the left and 2.9 cm upward from i ts initial position.
When we know the scalar components A and A of a vecto r, we can find its magnitude A and its direction ang le. The
direction angle —or direction, for short—is the angle the vector for ms with the positive direction on the x-axis. The ang le is
measured in the counterclockwise direction from the + x-axis to the vector (Figure). Because the lengths A, A, and A form
a right triangle, they are related by the Pythagorean the orem:
This equation works even if the scalar components of a vector are negative. The direction angle of a vec tor is defined via the
tangent function of angle in the triangle shown in Figure:
Figure: For vector, its magnitude A and its directio n angle are related to the magnitudes of its scalar c omponents
because A, A, and A form a right triangle.
When the vector lies either in the first quadrant o r in the fourth quadrant, where component A is positi ve (Figure), the angle
in Equation) is identical to the direction angle. For vectors in the fourth quadrant, angle is negat ive, which means that
for these vectors, direction angle is measured clockwi se from the positive x-axis. Similarly, for vectors i n the second quadrant,
angle is negative. When the vector lies in either th e second or third quadrant, where component A is neg ative, the direction angle
is = + 180° (Figure).x
y
x y
x y
x y
x
x

1.8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486
Figure: Scalar components of a vector may be positive or negative. Vectors in the first quadrant (I) have both scalar
components positive and vectors in the third quadrant have both scalar components negative. For vectors in qu adrants II and III, the
direction angle of a vector is = + 180°.
You move a mouse pointer on the display monitor fro m its initial position at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) to an icon located at point
(2.0 cm, 4.5 cm). What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
In Example, we found the displacement vector of th e mouse pointer (see Equation). We identify its scal ar
components D = −4.0 cm and D = + 2.9 cm and substitut e into Equation and Equation to find the magnitud e
D and direction, respectively.
Solution
The magnitude of vector is
The direction angle is
Vector lies in the second quadrant, so its direction angle is
In many applications, the magnitudes and directions o f vector quantities are known and we need to find the resultant of many
vectors. For example, imagine 400 cars moving on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco in a strong wind. Eac h car gives the
bridge a different push in various directions and we would like to know how big the resultant push can possib ly be. We have
already gained some experience with the geometric co nstruction of vector sums, so we know the task of finding the resultant by
drawing the vectors and measuring their lengths and an gles may become intractable pretty quickly, leading to huge errors. Worries
like this do not appear when we use analytical methods. The very first step in an analytical approach is to find vector components
when the direction and magnitude of a vector are known.
Let us return to the right triangle in Figure. The quotient of the adjacent side A to the hypotenuse A is the cosine function of
direction angle, A /A = cos, and the quotient of th e opposite side A to the hypotenuse A is the sine fu nction of, A /A = sin
. When magnitude A and direction are known, we can solve these relations for the scalar components:Example: Magnitude and Direction of the Displacement Vector
x y
x
x y y

1.8.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486When calculating vector components with Equation, c are must be taken with the angle. The direction angle of a vector is
the angle measured counterclockwise from the positive direction on the x-axis to the vect or. The clockwise measurement gives a
negative angle.
A rescue party for a missing child follows a search dog named Trooper. Trooper wanders a lot and makes many trial sniffs
along many different paths. Trooper eventually finds the child and the story has a happy ending, but his d isplacements on
various legs seem to be truly convoluted. On one of t he legs he walks 200.0 m southeast, then he runs nor th some 300.0 m. On
the third leg, he examines the scents carefully for 50.0 m in the direction 30° west of north. On the fourt h leg, Trooper goes
directly south for 80.0 m, picks up a fresh scent an d turns 23° west of south for 150.0 m. Find the scalar components of
Trooper’s displacement vectors and his displacement vec tors in vector component form for each leg.
Strategy
Let’s adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the positive x-axis in the direction of geographic east, with the positive ydirection pointed to geographic north. Explicitly, t he unit vector of the x-axis points east and the uni t vector of the y-axis
points north. Trooper makes five legs, so there are fiv e displacement vectors. We start by identifying their magnitudes and
direction angles, then we use Equation to find the s calar components of the displacements and Equation for
the displacement vectors.
Solution
On the first leg, the displacement magnitude is L = 200.0 m and the direction is southeast. For direction angle we
can take either 45° measured clockwise from the east direction or 45° + 270° measured counterclockwise fro m the east
direction. With the first choice, = −45°. With the second choice, = + 315°. We can use either one of t hese two
angles. The components are
The displacement vector of the first leg is
On the second leg of Trooper’s wanderings, the magnitud e of the displacement is L = 300.0 m and the directi on is
north. The direction angle is = + 90°. We obtain the follo wing results:
On the third leg, the displacement magnitude is L = 5 0.0 m and the direction is 30° west of north. The dir ection angle
measured counterclockwise from the eastern direction is = 30° + 90° = + 120°. This gives the following answers:
On the fourth leg of the excursion, the displacement magnitude is L = 80.0 m and the direction is south. The direction
angle can be taken as either = −90° or \(\theta_{4} = + 270 °. We obtainA
Example: Components of Displacement Vectors

1.8.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486On the last leg, the magnitude is L = 150.0 m and the angle is = −23° + 270° = + 247° (23° west of south), which
gives
1.8.4.1 Polar Coordinates
To describe locations of points or vectors in a plan e, we need two orthogonal directions. In the Cartesian coordinate system these
directions are given by unit vectors and along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively. The Cartesian co ordinate system is very
convenient to use in describing displacements and ve locities of objects and the forces acting on them. However, it becomes
cumbersome when we need to describe the rotation of ob jects. When describing rotation, we usually work in th e polar coordinate
system.
In the polar coordinate system, the location of point P in a plane is given by two polar coordinates (Figure). The first polar
coordinate is the radial coordinate r, which is the distance of point P from the origin. T he second polar coordinate is an angle
that the radial vector makes with some chosen directi on, usually the positive x-direction. In polar coordin ates, angles are measured
in radians, or rads. The radial vector is attached at t he origin and points away from the origin to point P. T his radial direction is
described by a unit radial vector. The second unit vector is a vector orthogonal to the radial direct ion. The positive + direction
indicates how the angle changes in the counterclockwi se direction. In this way, a point P that has coordin ates (x, y) in the
rectangular system can be described equivalently in the polar coordinate system by the two polar coordina tes (r,). Equation
is valid for any vector, so we can use it to express the x- and y-coordinates of vector. In this way, we obt ain the
connection between the polar coordinates and rectangu lar coordinates of point P:
Figure: Using polar coordinates, the unit vector def ines the positive direction along the radius r (radial direction) and,
orthogonal to it, the unit vector defines the positi ve direction of rotation by the angle.
A treasure hunter finds one silver coin at a locati on 20.0 m away from a dry well in the direction 20° no rth of east and finds
one gold coin at a location 10.0 m away from the well in the direction 20° north of west. What are the pol ar and rectangular
coordinates of these findings with respect to the well?
Strategy
The well marks the origin of the coordinate system an d east is the +x-direction. We identify radial dista nces from the
locations to the origin, which are r = 20.0 m (for the silver coin) and r = 10.0 m (for the gold coin). To f ind the angular
coordinates, we convert 20° to radians: 20° = =. We u se Equation to find the x- and y-coordinates of th e
coins.5
Example: Polar Coordinates
S G

1.8.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486Solution
The angular coordinate of the silver coin is =, whe reas the angular coordinate of the gold coin is = − =.
Hence, the polar coordinates of the silver coin are (r,) = (20.0 m,) and those of the gold coin are (r,) = (10.0
m, \frac{8 \pi}{9}\)). We substitute these coordinates into Equation to obtain rectangular coordinates. For the
gold coin, the coordinates are
For the silver coin, the coordinates are
1.8.4.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions
To specify the location of a point in space, we need three coordinates (x, y, z), where coordinates x and y specify locations in a
plane, and coordinate z gives a vertical positions ab ove or below the plane. Three-dimensional space has thre e orthogonal
directions, so we need not two but three unit vectors t o define a three-dimensional coordinate system. In th e Cartesian coordinate
system, the first two unit vectors are the unit vector of the x-axis and the unit vector of the y-axis. The third unit vector is the
direction of the z-axis (Figure). The order in which the axes are labeled, which is the order in which the three unit vectors
appear, is important because it defines the orientat ion of the coordinate system. The order x-y-z, which is equivalent to the order -, defines the standard right-handed coordinate system (positive orientation).
Figure: Three unit vectors define a Cartesian system in three-dimensional space. The order in which these uni t vectors
appear defines the orientation of the coordinate syste m. The order shown here defines the right-handed orie ntation.
In three-dimensional space, vector has three vector components: the x-component = A, which is the part of vector along
the x-axis; the y-component = A, which is the part of along the y-axis; and the z-component = A, wh ich is the part of
the vector along the z-axis. A vector in three-dimensio nal space is the vector sum of its three vector components (Figure):
If we know the coordinates of its origin b(x, y, z) an d of its end e(x y, z), its scalar components are obtai ned by taking their
differences: A and A are given by
and the z-component is given by
Magnitude A is obtained by generalizing Equation to th ree dimensions:
This expression for the vector magnitude comes from a pplying the Pythagorean theorem twice. As seen in Figure, the
diagonal in the xy-plane has length and its square adds to the square A to give A. Note that when the z-c omponent isS G
x
y z
b b b e e e
x y
z2 2

1.8.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109486zero, the vector lies entirely in the xy-plane and its desc ription is reduced to two dimensions.
Figure: A vector in three-dimensional space is the vec tor sum of its three vector components.
During a takeoff of IAI Heron (Figure), its position wit h respect to a control tower is 100 m above the groun d, 300 m to
the east, and 200 m to the north. One minute later, it s position is 250 m above the ground, 1200 m to the east, and 2100 m to
the north. What is the drone’s displacement vector wi th respect to the control tower? What is the magnitu de of its displacement
vector?
Figure: The drone IAI Heron in flight. (credit: SSgt Reynaldo Ramon, USAF)
Strategy
We take the origin of the Cartesian coordinate syste m as the control tower. The direction of the +x-axis is given by unit
vector to the east, the direction of the +y-axis is given by unit vector to the north, and the directi on of the +z-axis is
given by unit vector, which points up from the groun d. The drone’s first position is the origin (or, equiv alently, the
beginning) of the displacement vector and its second po sition is the end of the displacement vector.
Solution
We identify b(300.0 m, 200.0 m, 100.0 m) and e(480.0 m, 370.0 m, 250.0m), and use Equation 2.4.4 and
Equation to find the scalar components of the drone’ s displacement vector:
We substitute these components into Equation to find t he displacement vector:
We substitute into Equation to find the magnitude of the displacement:
This page titled 1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Example: Takeoff of a Drone

1.8.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094862.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.5: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.

1.8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094871.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
Apply analytical methods of vector algebra to find result ant vectors and to solve vector equations for unknown vectors.
Interpret physical situations in terms of vector expre ssions.
1.8.5.1 Algebra of Vectors
Vectors can be added together and multiplied by scal ars. Vector addition is associative and commutative, and vector multiplication
by a sum of scalars is distributive. Also, scalar multipl ication by a sum of vectors is distributive:
In this equation, is any number (a scalar). For exampl e, a vector antiparallel to vector = A + A + A c an be expressed
simply by multiplying by the scalar = −1:
The generalization of the number zero to vector alg ebra is called the null vector, denoted by. All components of the null vector
are zero, = 0 + 0 + 0, so the null vector has no leng th and no direction.
Two vectors and are equal vectors if and only if their difference is the null vector: = − = (A + A + A) − (B +
B + B) = (A − B) + (A − B) + (A − B). This vec tor equation means we must have simultaneously A − B = 0, A −
B = 0, and A − B = 0. Hence, we can write if and only if the corresponding components of vectors and are equal:
Two vectors are equal when their corresponding scalar c omponents are equal. Resolving vectors into their sca lar components (i.e.,
finding their scalar components) and expressing them analytically in vector component form allows us to us e vector algebra to find
sums or differences of many vectors analytically (i.e., without using graphical methods). For example, to f ind the resultant of two
vectors and, we simply add them component by component, a s follows:
In this way, using Equation, scalar components of t he resultant vector = R + R + R are the sums of c orresponding
scalar components of vectors and:
Analytical methods can be used to find components of a resultant of many vectors. For example, if we are to sum up N vectors,
,, …,, where each vector is = F + F + F, the resultant vector is
Therefore, scalar components of the resultant vector areLearning Objectives
x y z
x y z x
y z x x y y z z x x y
y z z
x y z
kx ky kz

1.8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487Having found the scalar components, we can write the resultant in vector component form:
Analytical methods for finding the resultant and, in general, for solving vector equations are very impo rtant in physics because
many physical quantities are vectors. For example, we use this method in kinematics to find resultant displac ement vectors and
resultant velocity vectors, in mechanics to find res ultant force vectors and the resultants of many deri ved vector quantities, and in
electricity and magnetism to find resultant electric or magnetic vector fields.
In many physical situations, we often need to know the d irection of a vector. For example, we may want to know th e direction of a
magnetic field vector at some point or the directio n of motion of an object. We have already said direct ion is given by a unit vector,
which is a dimensionless entity—that is, it has no phys ical units associated with it. When the vector in ques tion lies along one of
the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates, the an swer is simple, because then its unit vector of direct ion is either parallel or
antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis. For example, the direction of vector = −5 m is unit vector = −. The
general rule of finding the unit vector of direction fo r any vector is to divide it by its magnitude:
We see from this expression that the unit vector of d irection is indeed dimensionless because the numerato r and the denominator in
Equation have the same physical unit. In this way, Equ ation allows us to express the unit vector of direct ion in terms
of unit vectors of the axes.
1.8.5.2 Examples
In a Cartesian coordinate system where denotes geogra phic east, denotes geographic north, and denotes alti tude above sea
level, a military convoy advances its position throu gh unknown territory with velocity = (4.0 + 3.0 + 0.1) km/h. If the
convoy had to retreat, in what geographic direction would i t be moving?
Solution
The velocity vector has the third component = (+ 0.1 km/h), which says the convoy is climbing at a rate of 100 m/h
through mountainous terrain. At the same time, its velo city is 4.0 km/h to the east and 3.0 km/h to the nort h, so it moves on
the ground in direction tan (3 /4) ≈ 37° north of ea st. If the convoy had to retreat, its new velocity vect or would have to
be antiparallel to and be in the form, where is a positive number. Thus, the velocity of the retreat would be =
(−4.0 − 3.0 − 0.1) km/h. The negative sign of the t hird component indicates the convoy would be descendi ng. The
direction angle of the retreat velocity is tan (−3 − 4) ≈ 37° south of west. Therefore, the convoy would b e moving on
the ground in direction 37° south of west while descending on its way back.
Three displacement vectors,, and in a plane are s pecified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0, and C = 8.0,
respectively, and by their respective direction angle s with the horizontal direction = 35°, = −110°, and = 30°. The
physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Re solve the vectors to their scalar components and fin d the following vector
sums:
a. = + +,
b. = −, and
c. = − 3 +.
Strategy
First, we find the scalar components of each vector an d then we express each vector in its vector componen t form given by
. Then, we use analytical methods of vector algebra to find the resultants.Example: Direction of Motion
−1
−1
Example: Analytical Computation of a Resultant

1.8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487Solution
We resolve the given vectors to their scalar components:
For (a) we may substitute directly into Equation to find the scalar components of the resultant:
Therefore, the resultant vector is cm.
For (b), we may want to write the vector difference as
Hence the difference vector is cm.
For (c), we can write vector in the following explicit fo rm:
Then, the scalar components of are
The vector is cm.
Significance
Having found the vector components, we can illustrate the vectors by graphing or we can compute magnitudes and
direction angles, as shown in Figure. Results for the magnitudes in (b) and (c) can be compared with resu lts for
the same problems obtained with the graphical method.
Figure: Graphical illustration of the solutions obtain ed analytically.
Four dogs named Astro, Balto, Clifford, and Dug play a tu g-of-war game with a toy (Figure). Astro pulls on the t oy in
direction = 55° south of east, Balto pulls in direc tion = 60° east of north, and Clifford pulls in direc tion = 55° west of
north. Astro pulls strongly with 160.0 units of force (N), which we abbreviate as A = 160.0 N. Balto pulls even st ronger than
Astro with a force of magnitude B = 200.0 N, and Cliffor d pulls with a force of magnitude C = 140.0 N. When Dug pulls on
the toy in such a way that his force balances out th e resultant of the other three forces, the toy does n ot move in any direction.
With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on t he toy for this to happen?Example: The Tug-of-War Game

1.8.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487
Figure: Four dogs play a tug-of-war game with a toy.

Strategy
We assume that east is the direction of the positive x-axis and north is the direction of the positive y -axis. As in Example
, we have to resolve the three given forces — (the p ull from Astro), (the pull from Balto), and (the pu ll from
Clifford)—into their scalar components and then fin d the scalar components of the resultant vector = + +. When
the pulling force from Dug balances out this result ant, the sum of and must give the null vector + =. This
means that = so the pull from Dug must be antiparallel to.
Solution
The direction angles are = = −55°, = 90° − = 30 °, and = 90° + = 145°, and substituting them into
gives the scalar components of the three given forces:
Now we compute scalar components of the resultant vector:
The antiparallel vector to the resultant is
The magnitude of Dug's pulling force is
The direction of Dug's pulling force is
Dug pulls in the direction 18.1° south of west because both components are negative, which means the pull v ector lies
in the third quadrant.

1.8.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487Find the magnitude of the vector that satisfies the equa tion 2 − 6 + 3 = 2, = − 2 and = − +.
Strategy
We first solve the given equation for the unknown ve ctor. Then we substitute and; group the terms along each of the
three directions,, and; and identify the scalar co mponents C, C, and C. Finally, we substitute into to f ind
magnitude C.
Solution
The components are C =, C =, and C =, and substituting in to gives
Starting at a ski lodge, a cross-country skier goes 5.0 km north, then 3.0 km west, and finally 4.0 km southwest before taking a
rest. Find his total displacement vector relative to t he lodge when he is at the rest point. How far and in what direction must he
ski from the rest point to return directly to the lodge?
Strategy
We assume a rectangular coordinate system with the or igin at the ski lodge and with the unit vector poin ting east and the
unit vector pointing north. There are three displace ments:,, and. We identify their magnitudes as D = 5.0 km,
D = 3.0 km, and D = 4.0 km. We identify their dir ections are the angles = 90°, = 180°, and = 180° + 4 5° = 225°.
We resolve each displacement vector to its scalar co mponents and substitute the components into to obta in the scalar
components of the resultant displacement from the l odge to the rest point. On the way back from the rest p oint to the
lodge, the displacement is = −. Finally, we find the magnit ude and direction of.
Solution
Scalar components of the displacement vectors are
Scalar components of the net displacement vector areExample: Vector Algebra
x y z
x y z
Example: Displacement of a Skier
2 3

1.8.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487Hence, the skier’s net displacement vector is = D + D = (−5.8 + 2.2)km. On the way back to the lodge, his
displacement is = − = −(−5.8 + 2.2)km = (5.8 − 2.2)km. Its magnitude is B = =
km = 6.2 km and its direction angle is = tan = −20.8°. Therefore, to return to the lodge, he must go 6.2 km in
a direction about 21° south of east.
Significance
Notice that no figure is needed to solve this problem by the analytical method. Figures are required when u sing a
graphical method; however, we can check if our soluti on makes sense by sketching it, which is a useful final step in
solving any vector problem.
A jogger runs up a flight of 200 identical steps to t he top of a hill and then runs along the top of the hill 50.0 m before he stops
at a drinking fountain (Figure). His displacement ve ctor from point A at the bottom of the steps to poin t B at the
fountain is = (−90.0 + 30.0)m. What is the height an d width of each step in the flight? What is the actual distance the
jogger covers? If he makes a loop and returns to point A, what is his net displacement vector?
Figure: A jogger runs up a flight of steps.

Strategy
The displacement vector is the vector sum of the j ogger’s displacement vector along the stairs (from po int A at the
bottom of the stairs to point T at the top of the s tairs) and his displacement vector on the top of the h ill (from point T at
the top of the stairs to the fountain at point B). W e must find the horizontal and the vertical compone nts of. If each step
has width w and height h, the horizontal component of must have a length of 200w and the vertical componen t must
have a length of 200h. The actual distance the jogge r covers is the sum of the distance he runs up the stai rs and the distance
of 50.0 m that he runs along the top of the hill.
Solution
In the coordinate system indicated in Figure, the jo gger’s displacement vector on the top of the hill i s =
(−50.0 m). His net displacement vector is
Therefore, his displacement vector along the stairs is
Its scalar components are D = −40.0 m and D = 30.0 m. Theref ore, we must havex y
−1
Example: Displacement of a Jogger
ATx ATy

1.8.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109487Hence, the step width is w = = 0.2 m = 20 cm, and the st ep height is w = = 0.15 m = 15 cm. The distance
that the jogger covers along the stairs is
Thus, the actual distance he runs is D + D = 50.0 m + 50.0 m = 100.0 m. When he makes a loop and comes back
from the fountain to his initial position at point A, the total distance he covers is twice this distance,or 200.0 m.
However, his net displacement vector is zero, because whe n his final position is the same as his initial positi on, the
scalar components of his net displacement vector are ze ro ().
If the velocity vector of the military convoy is = (4.000 + 3.000 + 0.100)km/h, what is the unit ve ctor of its direction of
motion.
Strategy
The unit vector of the convoy’s direction of motion is the unit vector that is parallel to the veloci ty vector. The unit vector
is obtained by dividing a vector by its magnitude, in ac cordance with Equation.
Solution
The magnitude of the vector is
To obtain the unit vector, divide by its magnitude:
Significance
Note that when using the analytical method with a calc ulator, it is advisable to carry out your calculati ons to at least
three decimal places and then round off the final an swer to the required number of significant figures, whic h is the way
we performed calculations in this example. If you ro und off your partial answer too early, you risk your final answer
having a huge numerical error, and it may be far off from the exact answer or from a value measured in an experimen t.
1.8.5.3 Contributors
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.6: Algebra of Vectors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.7: Algebra of Vectors Examples by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.AT TB
Example: The Unit Vector of Direction

1.8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094881.8.6: Products of Vectors
Explain the difference between the scalar product and the vector product of two vectors.
Determine the scalar product of two vectors.
Determine the vector product of two vectors.
Describe how the products of vectors are used in physics.
A vector can be multiplied by another vector but ma y not be divided by another vector. There are two ki nds of products of vectors
used broadly in physics and engineering. One kind of m ultiplication is a scalar multiplication of two vectors. Taking a scalar
product of two vectors results in a number (a scalar), as its name indicates. Scalar products are used to de fine work and energy
relations. For example, the work that a force (a vector) performs on an object while causing its displacemen t (a vector) is defined as
a scalar product of the force vector with the displa cement vector. A quite different kind of multiplicat ion is a vector multiplication
of vectors. Taking a vector product of two vectors returns as a result a vector, as its name suggests. Vector products ar e used to
define other derived vector quantities. For example, i n describing rotations, a vector quantity called torque is defined as a vector
product of an applied force (a vector) and its lever arm (a vector). It is important to distinguish between these two kinds of vector
multiplications because the scalar product is a scalar qu antity and a vector product is a vector quantity.
1.8.6.1 The Scalar Product of Two Vectors (the Dot Product)
Scalar multiplication of two vectors yields a scalar product.
The scalar product of two vectors and is a number defi ned by the equation
where is the angle between the vectors (shown in Figure). The scalar product is also called the dot product because of
the dot notation that indicates it.
In the definition of the dot product, the direction of angle does not matter, and can be measured from either of the two vectors
to the other because = =. The dot product is a ne gative number when 90° < ≤ 180° and is a positive
number when 0° ≤ < 90°. Moreover, the dot product of two parallel vectors is = AB cos 0° = AB, and the dot product of two
antiparallel vectors is = AB cos 180° = −AB. The scalar product of two orthogonal vectors vanishes: = AB co s 90° = 0.
The scalar product of a vector with itself is the square o f its magnitude:
Figure: The scalar product of two vectors. (a) The an gle between the two vectors. (b) The orthogonal proj ection A of
vector onto the direction of vector. (c) The orth ogonal projection B of vector onto the direction o f vector.
In the Cartesian coordinate system, it often more conv enient to use unit vectors when computing equations i nvolving
vectors. Figure shows possible ways the unit vectors can be d efined.Learning Objectives
Definition: Scalar Product (Dot Product)

1.8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488
Figure: Three different configurations of the unit v ectors for the Cartesian coordinate system.

Scalar products of the unit vector of an axis with other unit vectors of axes always vanish because these unit vectors are orthogonal:
In these equations, we use the fact that the magnitud es of all unit vectors are one: = 1. For unit vectors o f the axes,
Equation gives the following identities:
The scalar product can also be interpreted as either the product of B with the projection A of vector o nto the direction of
vector (Figure (b)) or the product of A with the proje ction B of vector onto the direction of vector (Figure (c)):
For example, in the rectangular coordinate system in a plane, the scalar x-component of a vector is its dot product with the unit
vector, and the scalar y-component of a vector is its dot pr oduct with the unit vector:
Scalar multiplication of vectors is communtative,
and obeys the distributive law:
We can use the commutative and distributive laws to derive various relations for vectors, such as expressing the dot product of two
vectors in terms of their scalar components.
When the vectors in Equation are given in their vector component forms,
we can compute their scalar product as follows:

1.8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488Since scalar products of two different unit vectors of axes give zero, and scalar products of unit vectors with themselves give one
(see Equation and Equation), there are only three nonzero terms in this expression. Thus, the scalar p roduct simplifies
to
1.8.6.1.1 Examples
For the vectors shown, find the scalar product.
Figure: Vectors used in the Example.
Strategy
From the Figure, the magnitudes of vectors and are A = 10.0 and F = 20.0. Angle, between them, is the diff erence:
= 110° − 35° = 75°. Substituting these values into Equation gives the scalar product.
Solution
A straightforward calculation gives us
When force pulls on an object and when it causes its d isplacement, we say the force performs work. The amoun t of work
the force does is the scalar product. If the stick i n Example moves momentarily and gets displaced by ve ctor =
(−7.9 − 4.2)cm, how much work is done by the third dog in E xample?
Strategy
We compute the scalar product of displacement vecto r with force vector = (5.0 + 12.5)N, which is the pull from the
third dog. Let’s use W to denote the work done by force on displacement.
Solution
Calculating the work is a straightforward application of th e dot product:
Significance
The SI unit of work is called the joule (J), where 1 J = 1 N · m. The unit cm · N can be written as 10 m · N = 10 J,
so the answer can be expressed as W = −0.9875 J ≈ −1.0 J.Example: The Scalar Product
Example: The Work of a Force
−2 −2

1.8.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094881.8.6.1.2 Using The Scalar Product of Two Vectors to Find the Angle Between Vectors
We can use Equation for the scalar product in term s of scalar components of vectors to find the angle b etween two vectors.
When we divide Equation by AB, we obtain the equation for cos, into which we substitute Equation:
Angle between vectors and is obtained by taking the inverse cosine of the expression in Equation.
Three dogs are pulling on a stick in different dire ctions, as shown in Figure. The first dog pulls with for ce = (10.0 −
20.4 + 2.0)N, the second dog pulls with force = (−1 5.0 − 6.2)N, and the third dog pulls with force = (5.0 + 12.5
)N. What is the angle between forces and?
Figure: Three dogs are playing with a stick.
Strategy
The components of force vector are F = 10.0 N, F = −20.4 N, and F = 2.0 N, whereas those of force vector are
F = −15.0 N, F = 0.0 N, and F = −6.2 N. Computing the sc alar product of these vectors and their magnitudes, and
substituting into Equation gives the angle of interest.
Solution
The magnitudes of forces and are
and
Substituting the scalar components into Equation yields the scalar product
Finally, substituting everything into Equation gives the angle
Significance
Notice that when vectors are given in terms of the un it vectors of axes, we can find the angle between the m without
knowing the specifics about the geographic directions the unit vectors represent. Here, for example, the +x -direction
might be to the east and the +y-direction might be to the north. But, the angle between the forces in th e problem is the
same if the +x-direction is to the west and the +y-direc tion is to the south.Example
1x 1y 1z
2x 2y 2z

1.8.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094881.8.6.2 The Vector Products of Two Vectors (the Cross Product)
Vector multiplication of two vectors yields a vector pro duct.
The vector product of two vectors and is denoted b y × and is often referred to as a cross product. The vector product
is a vector that has its direction perpendicular to both vectors and. In other words, vector × is perpe ndicular to the
plane that contains vectors and, as shown in Figure. The magnitude of the vector product is defined as
where angle, between the two vectors, is measured from vector (first vector in the product) to vector (s econd vector in
the product), as indicated in Figure, and is between 0° a nd 180°.
According to Equation, the vector product vanishes for pairs of vectors that are either parallel (= 0 °) or antiparallel (=
180°) because sin 0° = sin 180° = 0.
Figure: The vector product of two vectors is drawn in three-dimensional space. (a) The vector product is a vector
perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and. Small squares drawn in perspective mark right angles between and,
and between and so that if and lie on the floor, vector points vertically upward to the ceiling. (b) The vector product
is a vector antiparallel to vector.
On the line perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and there are two alternative directions— either up or down, as
shown in Figure —and the direction of the vector prod uct may be either one of them. In the standard right -handed
orientation, where the angle between vectors is measure d counterclockwise from the first vector, vector poi nts upward, as
seen in Figure (a). If we reverse the order of multipli cation, so that now comes first in the product, then ve ctor must
point downward, as seen in Figure (b). This means that vectors and are antiparallel to each other and that
vector multiplication is not commutative but anticommutative. The anticommutative property means the vector product reverses
the sign when the order of multiplication is reversed:
Similar to the dot product, the cross product has the following distributive property:
The distributive property is applied frequently when vectors are expressed in their component forms, in te rms of unit vectors of
Cartesian axes. When we apply the definition of the c ross product, Equation, to unit vectors,, and t hat define the
positive x-, y-, and z-directions in space, we find that
All other cross products of these three unit vectors mu st be vectors of unit magnitudes because,, and ar e orthogonal. For
example, for the pair and, the magnitude is | | = ij sin 90° = (1)(1)(1) = 1. The direction of the vec tor product must be
orthogonal to the xy-plane, which means it must be a long the z-axis. The only unit vectors along the z-a xis are − or +. By theVector Product (Cross Product)

1.8.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488corkscrew rule, the direction of vector must be para llel to the positive z-axis. Therefore, the result of the multiplication is
identical to +. We can repeat similar reasoning for t he remaining pairs of unit vectors. The results of these multiplications are
Notice that in Equation, the three unit vectors,, and appear in the cyclic order shown in a diagram in Figure. The
cyclic order means that in the product formula, fol lows and comes before, or follows and comes before, or follows and
comes before. The cross product of two different uni t vectors is always a third unit vector. When two unit vectors in the cross
product appear in the cyclic order, the result of su ch a multiplication is the remaining unit vector. Wh en unit vectors in the cross
product appear in a different order, the result is a u nit vector that is antiparallel to the remaining un it vector (i.e., the result is with
the minus sign). In practice, when the task is to find cross products of vectors that are given in vector component form, this rule for
the cross-multiplication of unit vectors is very useful.
Figure: (a) The diagram of the cyclic order of the unit vectors of the axes. (b) The only cross products wh ere the unit vectors
appear in the cyclic order.
Suppose we want to find the cross product for vectors = A + A + A and = B + B + B. We can use the
distributive property (Equation), the anticommutat ive property (Equation), and the results in Equati on and
Equation for unit vectors to perform the following alg ebra:
When performing algebraic operations involving the c ross product, be very careful about keeping the corr ect order of
multiplication because the cross product is anticomm utative. The last two steps that we still have to do to complete our task are,
first, grouping the terms that contain a common unit vector and, second, factoring. In this way we obtain th e following very useful
expression for the computation of the cross product:
In this expression, the scalar components of the cross-pr oduct vector are
When finding the cross product, in practice, we can u se either Equation or Equation, depending on which one of
them seems to be less complex computationally. They b oth lead to the same final result. One way to make sure if the final result is
correct is to use them both.x y z x y z

1.8.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094881.8.6.2.1 Mnemonics For Identifying the Direction of the Cross Product
The corkscrew right-hand rule is a common mnemonic used to determine the directi on of the vector product. As shown in Figure
, a corkscrew is placed in a direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and, and its h andle is turned in the
direction from the first to the second vector in th e product. The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the
corkscrew.
Figure: The corkscrew right-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the cross product. Place a corkscrew in
the direction perpendicular to the plane that conta ins vectors and, and turn it in the direction from the first to the second vector
in the product. The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the corkscrew. (First two i mages from the left)
Upward movement means the cross-product vector points u p. (Last two images) Downward movement means the cross-p roduct
vector points downward.
The right-hand rule is another common mnemonic used to determine the d irection of the vector product. As shown in Figure
, the open right hand is placed such that the finger s are aligned to the first vector in the product (in this case) and such that
when the fingers are curled inwards, they align with the second vector in the product (). The direction of the cross product is
given by the thumb points.
Figure: The right-hand rule is used to determine the direction of cross product. Place the hand in a direc tion
perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and, parallel to, and such that when the fingers are c urled inwards, they align
with the second vector in the product (). The image on the left shows the fingers aligned with. The middl e image shows the
fingers curling towards. The last image shows the finge rs along with the thumb pointing along the directi on of the cross
product:.
1.8.6.2.2 Examples
The mechanical advantage that a familiar tool calle d a wrench provides (Figure) depends on magnitude F of the appli ed
force, on its direction with respect to the wrench ha ndle, and on how far from the nut this force is appli ed. The distance R from
the nut to the point where force vector is attached is called the lever arm and is represented by the radial vector. The
physical vector quantity that makes the nut turn is called torque (denoted by), and it is the vector product of the lever arm
with the force:.
To loosen a rusty nut, a 20.00-N force is applied to the wrench handle at angle = 40° and at a distance o f 0.25 m from the nut,
as shown in Figure (a). Find the magnitude and directio n of the torque applied to the nut. What would the ma gnitude and
direction of the torque be if the force were applied at angle = 45°, as shown in Figure (b)? For what value of angle
does the torque have the largest magnitude?Example: The Torque of a Force

1.8.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488
Figure: A wrench provides grip and mechanical advant age in applying torque to turn a nut. (a) Turn coun terclockwise to
loosen the nut. (b) Turn clockwise to tighten the nut.
Strategy
We adopt the frame of reference shown in Figure, wher e vectors and lie in the xy-plane and the origin is at the
position of the nut. The radial direction along vec tor (pointing away from the origin) is the reference direction for
measuring the angle because is the first vector i n the vector product =. Vector must lie along th e z-axis
because this is the axis that is perpendicular to th e xy-plane, where both and lie. To compute the mag nitude, we use
Equation. To find the direction of, we use the corkscrew r ight-hand rule (Figure).
Solution
For the situation in (a), the corkscrew rule gives the d irection of in the positive direction of the z-axi s. Physically,
it means the torque vector points out of the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. We identify F = 2 0.00 N and R
= 0.25 m, and compute the magnitude using Equation:
For the situation in (b), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the negative direction of the z-ax is.
Physically, it means the vector points into the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. The magnitude of th is torque
is
The torque has the largest value when sin = 1, which happens when = 90°. Physically, it means the wrench is mo st
effective—giving us the best mechanical advantage—wh en we apply the force perpendicular to the wrench han dle. For
the situation in this example, this best-torque value is = RF = (0.25 m)(20.00 N) = 5.00 N • m.
Significance
When solving mechanics problems, we often do not need t o use the corkscrew rule at all, as we’ll see now in the
following equivalent solution. Notice that once we hav e identified that vector lies along the z-axis, we c an write
this vector in terms of the unit vector of the z-axis:
In this equation, the number that multiplies is the scalar z-component of the vector. In the computati on of this
component, care must be taken that the angle is measu red counterclockwise from (first vector) to (second vector)
Following this principle for the angles, we obtain RF s in (+ 40°) = + 3.2 N • m for the situation in (a), and we obtain RF
sin (−45°) = −3.5 N • m for the situation in (b). In t he latter case, the angle is negative because the gra ph in Figure
indicates the angle is measured clockwise; but, the same result is obtained when this angle is measured
counterclockwise because +(360° − 45°) = + 315° and s in (+ 315°) = sin (−45°). In this way, we obtain the so lution
without reference to the corkscrew rule. For the situat ion in (a), the solution is = + 3.2 N • m; for the si tuation
in (b), the solution is = −3.5 N • m.

1.8.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488When moving in a magnetic field, some particles may e xperience a magnetic force. Without going into detai ls—a detailed
study of magnetic phenomena comes in later chapters— let’s acknowledge that the magnetic field is a vector, the magnetic
force is a vector, and the velocity of the partic le is a vector. The magnetic force vector is propor tional to the vector product
of the velocity vector with the magnetic field vecto r, which we express as =. In this equation, a constant takes care
of the consistency in physical units, so we can omit p hysical units on vectors and. In this example, let’s assume the
constant is positive. A particle moving in space wit h velocity vector = −5.0 − 2.0 + 3.5 enters a regi on with a magnetic
field and experiences a magnetic force. Find the mag netic force on this particle at the entry point to the region where the
magnetic field vector is (a) = 7.2 − − 2.4 and (b) = 4.5. In each case, find magnitude F of the ma gnetic force and
angle the force vector makes with the given magnetic field vector.
Strategy
First, we want to find the vector product, because the n we can determine the magnetic force using =.
Magnitude F can be found either by using components, F =, or by computing the magnitude | | directly
using Equation. In the latter approach, we would have to find the angle between vectors and. When we hav e,
the general method for finding the direction angle involves the computation of the scalar product and substitution
into Equation 2.8.13. To compute the vector product we can either use Eq uation or compute the product directly,
whichever way is simpler.
Solution
The components of the velocity vector are u = −5.0, u = −2.0, and u = 3.5. (a) The components of the magn etic field
vector are B = 7.2, B = −1.0, and B = −2.4. Substituting them into Equation gives the scalar components of
vector:
Thus, the magnetic force is = (8.3 + 13.2 + 19.4) an d its magnitude is
To compute angle, we may need to find the magnitude of the mag netic field vector
and the scalar product:
Now, substituting into Equation 2.8.13 gives angle:
Hence, the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector. (We could have saved some time if we
had computed the scalar product earlier.)
(b) Because vector = 4.5 has only one component, we can perform the algebra quickly and find the vector product
directly:Example: A Particle in a Magnetic Field
x y z
x y z

1.8.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109488The magnitude of the magnetic force is
Because the scalar product is
the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magn etic field vector.
Significance
Even without actually computing the scalar product, we can predict that the magnetic force vector must a lways be
perpendicular to the magnetic field vector because of the way this vector is constructed. Namely, the magn etic force
vector is the vector product = and, by the definit ion of the vector product (see Figure), vector must be
perpendicular to both vectors and.
In conclusion to this section, we want to stress that “do t product” and “cross product” are entirely differen t mathematical objects
that have different meanings. The dot product is a scalar; the cross product is a vector. Later chapters use the terms dot product
and scalar product interchangeably. Similarly, the terms cross product and vector product are used interchangeably.
1.8.6.3 Contributors
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 1.8.6: Products of Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.8: Products of Vectors (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
2.9: Products of Vectors (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

1.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109489SECTION OVERVIEW
1.9: Math Review of Other Topics

1.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094891.9.1: Geometrical Shapes
1.9.2: Triangles
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using The Substitution Method
1.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Elimination Method
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
1.9.11: Functions
1.9.12: Basic Functions
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
1.9.15: Derivatives
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals
1.9.21: Integrals
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia
1.9.25: Table of Integrals
1.9.26: Further Vector Topics
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equations

1.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094891.9: Math Review of Other Topics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094901.9.1: Geometrical Shapes
know what a polygon is
know what perimeter is and how to find it
know what the circumference, diameter, and radius of a cir cle is and how to find each one
know the meaning of the symbol ππ and its approximating value
know what a formula is and four versions of the circumference formula of a circle
know the meaning and notation for area
know the area formulas for some common geometric figures
be able to find the areas of some common geometric fig ures
know the meaning and notation for volume
know the volume formulas for some common geometric object s
be able to find the volume of some common geometric ob jects
Polygons
We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure ments of geometric figures such as rectangles,
triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we nee d to be familiar with several definitions.
A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segm ents (portions of straight lines).
Polygons
Not polygons
Perimeter
The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon.
To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengt hs of all the sides.
Find the perimeter of each polygon.
SolutionLearning Objectives
Definition: Polygon
Definition: Perimeter
Sample Set A

1.9.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490
Solution
Solution
Our first observation is that three of the dimensions are missing. However, we can determine the missing meas urements
using the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the mi ssing measurements. Visualize
Sample Set A
Sample Set A

1.9.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490Find the perimeter of each polygon.
Answer
20 ft
Answer
26.8 m
Answer
49.89 mi
Circumference/Diameter/Radius
Diameter (d)
A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through th e center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circl e.Practice Set A
Practice Set A
Practice Set A

1.9.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490Radius (r)
A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle.
The radius is one half the diameter.
Circumference (C)
The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. It is given by
Find the circumference of the circle.
Solution
Use the formula.
By commutativity of multiplication,
, exactly
This result is exact since has not been approximated.
Find the perimeter of the figure.
Solution
We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles).
The larger radius is 6.2 cm.
The smaller radius is Sample Set B
Sample Set B

1.9.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm.
Find the outside perimeter of
Answer
41.634 mm
The Meaning and Notation for Area
The product, or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be int erpreted physically as the
area of a surface.
Area
The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contai ned in the surface.
For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (Th e squares may have to
be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surfa ce.)
We will examine the area of the following geometric figur es.

Practice Set B

1.9.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490

Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures
Find the area of the triangle.
Solution
The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often writte n as 60.
Find the area of the rectangle.
Solution
Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish t o convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction sinc e it has
inches in the numerator. Then,
Thus, Sample Set A
Sample Set A

1.9.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in.
Find the area of the parallelogram.
Solution
The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm.
Find the area of the trapezoid.
Solution
The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm.
Find the approximate area of the circle.
Sample Set A
Sample Set A
Sample Set A

1.9.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490Solution
The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft.
The Meaning and Notation for Volume
The product, or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be inte rpreted
physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object.
Volume
The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contai ned in the object.
For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional obj ect. (The cubes may
have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.)

Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects
Find the volume of the rectangular solid.Sample Set B

1.9.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490
Solution
The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in.
Find the approximate volume of the sphere.
Solution
The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which i s often written as 904.32 cm.
Find the approximate volume of the cylinder.
SolutionSample Set B
Sample Set B

1.9.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.0529 2 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approxi mated with
3.14.
Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decima l places.
Solution
The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated with 3.14.Sample Set B

1.9.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490Table of Formulas for Common Shapes
Figure Formulas
Square
Figure
Rectangle
Figure
Parallelogram
Figure
Trapezoid
Figure
Triangle
Figure
Circle
Figure
V olume (V) is measured in cubic units and
surface area (SA) is measured in square
units.

1.9.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109490Cube
Figure
Rectangular Solid
Figure
Right Circular Cylinder
Figure
Right Circular Cone
Figure
Sphere
Figure
This page titled 1.9.1: Geometrical Shapes is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Denny
Burzynski & Wade Ellis, Jr. (OpenStax CNX).

1.9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094911.9.2: Triangles
Triangles
1. Identify equilateral, isosceles, scalene, acute, right, and obtuse triangles.
2. Identify whether triangles are similar, congruent, or neit her.
3. Identify corresponding sides of congruent and similar triangles.
4. Find the missing measurements in a pair of similar triangle s.
5. Solve application problems involving similar triangles
6. Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the unknown side of a right triangle.
7. Solve application problems involving the Pythagorean Th eorem.
Classifying and Naming Triangles
A triangle is formed when three straight line segments bound a portion of the plane. The line segments are called the sides of the
triangle. A point where two sides meet is called a vertex of the triangle, and the angle formed is called an angle of the triangle.
The symbol for triangle is.
The triangle in Figure is denoted by (or or, etc.).
Its sides are,, and.
Its vertices are, and.
Its angles are,, and.
Figure: Triangle.
The triangle is the most important figure in plane geometry, This is because figures with more than thre e sides can always be
divided into triangles (Figure). If we know the proper ties of a triangle, we can extend this knowledge to the study of other
figures as well.
Figure: A closed figure formed by more than three str aight lines can be divided into triangles.
A fundamental property of triangles is the following:Learning Objectives

1.9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491The sum of the angles of a triangle is.
In of Figure,.
Find:
Solution
Answer:

The table below shows and describes three classificati ons of triangles. Notice how the types of angles in the triangle are used to
classify the triangle.
Name of Triangle Picture of Triangle Description
Acute Triangle
A triangle with 3 acute angles (3 angles
measuring between 0° and 90°).
Obtuse Triangle
A triangle with 1 obtuse angle (1 angle
measuring between 90° and 180°).
Right Triangle
A triangle containing one right angle (1
angle that measures 90°). Note that the
right angle is shown with a corner mark and
does not need to be labeled 90°.Theorem
Example

1.9.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491The sum of the measures of the three interior angle s of a triangle is always 180°. This fact can be appli ed to find the measure of the
third angle of a triangle, if you are given the other two. Consider the examples below.
A triangle has two angles that measure 35° and 75°. Find the m easure of the third angle.
Solution
The sum of the three interior angles of a triangle is 18 0°.
35° + 75° + = 180°
Find the value of.
110º + = 180º
= 180° ‒ 110º
= 70°
Answer: The third angle of the triangle measures 70°.
One of the angles in a right triangle measures 57º. Find the m easurement of the third angle.
Solution
The sum of the three angles of a triangle is 180°. One of t he angles has a measure of 90° as it is a right triangle.
57° + 90° + = 180°
Simplify.
147º + = 180°
Find the value of.
= 180º - 147º
= 33º
Answer: The third angle of the right triangle measures 33°.
There is an established convention for naming triangl es. The labels of the vertices of the triangle, which are generally capital
letters, are used to name a triangle.
You can call this triangle ABC or ∆ABC since A, B, and C are vertices of the triangle. When naming the trian gle, you can begin
with any vertex. Then keep the letters in order as y ou go around the polygon. The triangle above could be named in a variety of
ways: ∆ABC, or ∆CBA. The sides of the triangle are line segment s AB, AC, and CB.
Just as triangles can be classified as acute, obtuse, or right based on their angles, they can also be cl assified by the length of their
sides. Sides of equal length are called congruent sides. While we designate a segment joining points A and B by the notation,
we designate the length of a segment joining points A and B by the notation AB without a segment bar over it. The length AB is a
number, and the segment is the collection of points that make up the segment.Example
Example

1.9.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Mathematicians show congruency by putting a hash mark symbol through the middle of sides of equal length. If the hash mark is
the same on one or more sides, then those sides are c ongruent. If the sides have different hash marks, the y are not congruent. The
table below shows the classification of triangles by their si de lengths.
Name of Triangle Picture of Triangle Description
Equilateral Triangle
A triangle whose three sides have the same
length. These sides of equal length are
called congruent sides.
Isosceles Triangle
A triangle with exactly two congruent sides.
Scalene Triangle
A triangle in which all three sides are a
different length.
To describe a triangle even more specifically, you can us e information about both its sides and its angles. Consider this example.
Classify the triangle below.
Solution
Notice what kind of angles the triangle has. Since one angl e is a right angle, this is a right triangle.
Notice the lengths of the sides. Are there congruence marks or other labels?
The congruence marks tell us there are two sides of equal le ngth. So, this is an isosceles triangle.
Answer: This is an isosceles right triangleExample

1.9.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Find and:
Solution
Answer:,.
In Figure, is called an exterior angle of,,, and are called the interior angles of. and
are said to be the interior angles remote from the exterior angle.
Figure: is an exterior angle of.
The results of Example suggest the following theorem.
An exterior angle is equal to the sum of the two remote inter ior angles,
In Figure,.
Find:Example
Theorem
Example

1.9.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Solution
is an exterior angle with remote interior angles and. By Theorem,
The least common denominator (1, c, d) is 15.
Check:
Answer:.
Our work on the sum of the angles of a triangle can easil y be extended to other figures:
Find the sum of the angles of a quadrilateral (four sided f igure),
Solution
Divide the quadrilateral into two triangles as illustrate d,Example

1.9.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Answer:.
Find the sum of the angles of a pentagon (five-sided figure).
Solution
Divide the pentagon into three triangles as illustra ted, The sum is equal to the sum of the angles of the three triangle =
Answer:.

Identifying Congruent and Similar Triangles
Two triangles are congruent if they are exactly the same size and shape. In congruent triangles, the mea sures of corresponding
angles and the lengths of corresponding sides are equal. Consider the two triangles shown below:
Example

1.9.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Since both ∠B and ∠E are right angles, these triangles are right triangle s. Let’s call these two triangles ∆ABC and ∆DEF. These
triangles are congruent if every pair of correspondin g sides has equal lengths and every pair of correspo nding angles has the same
measure.
The corresponding sides are opposite the corresponding angles.
↔ means “corresponds to”
∠B ↔ ∠E
∠A ↔ ∠D
∠C ↔ ∠F
∆ABC and ∆DEF are congruent triangles as the corresponding sides and corresponding angles are equal.
Let’s take a look at another pair of triangles. Below are the triangles ∆ABC and ∆RST.
These two triangles are surely not congruent because ∆R ST is clearly smaller in size than ∆ABC. But, even thoug h they are not the
same size, they do resemble one another. They are t he same shape. The corresponding angles of these tri angles look like they might
have the same exact measurement, and if they did they woul d be congruent angles and we would call the triangles similar triangles.
Congruent angles are marked with hash marks, just as con gruent sides are.

1.9.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Figure: Image showing angle measurements of both
triangles.
Figure: Image showing triangles ABC and RST using hash marks to show angle
congruency.
We can also show congruent angles by using multiple b ands within the angle, rather than multiple hash mark s on one band. Below
is an image using multiple bands within the angle.
Figure: Image showing triangles ABC and RST using band s to show angle congruency.
If the corresponding angles of two triangles have th e same measurements they are called similar triangles. This name makes sense
because they have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. When a pair of triangles is similar, t he corresponding sides are
proportional to one another. That means that there is a consistent scale factor that can be used to comp are the corresponding sides.
In the previous example, the side lengths of the lar ger triangle are all 1.4 times the length of the sm aller. So, similar triangles are
proportional to one another.
Just because two triangles look similar does not mean they are similar triangles in the mathematical sense of the wo rd. Checking
that the corresponding angles have equal measure is one wa y of being sure the triangles are similar.
Corresponding Sides of Similar Triangles
There is another method for determining similarity o f triangles that involves comparing the ratios of th e lengths of the
corresponding sides.
If the ratios of the pairs of corresponding sides are equal, t he triangles are similar.
Consider the two triangles below.

1.9.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
∆ABC is not congruent to ∆DEF because the side lengths of ∆DEF are longer than those of ∆ABC. So, are these triangles simila r?
If they are, the corresponding sides should be proportiona l.
Since these triangles are oriented in the same way, you can pair the left, right, and bottom sides: and, and, and
. (You might call these the two shortest sides, the two longest sides, and the two leftover sides and arrive at the same ratios).
Now we will look at the ratios of their lengths.
Substituting the side length values into the proportion, you see that it is true:
If the corresponding sides are proportional, then the tr iangles are similar. Triangles ABC and DEF are similar, but not congruent.
Let’s use this idea of proportional corresponding sides t o determine whether two more triangles are similar.
Determine if the triangles below are similar by seeing if their corresponding sides are proportional.
Solution
First determine the corresponding sides, which are opposite c orresponding angles.
Write the corresponding side lengths as ratios.
Substitute the side lengths into the ratios, and determi ne if the ratios of the corresponding sides are equi valent. They are, so
the triangles are similar.Example

1.9.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Answer: ∆ABC and ∆DEF are similar.
The mathematical symbol ~ means “is similar to”. So, you can write ∆ABC is similar to ∆DEF as ∆ABC ~ ∆DEF.

Finding Missing Measurements in Similar Triangles
You can find the missing measurements in a triangle if you know some measurements of a similar triangle. Let’s look at an
example.
∆ABC and ∆XYZ are similar triangles. What is the length of sid e BC?
Solution
In similar triangles, the ratios of corresponding side s are proportional. Set up a proportion of two ratios, one that includes
the missing side.
Substitute in the known side lengths for the side names in the ratio. Let the unknown side length be n.
Solve for n using cross multiplication.
This process is fairly straightforward—but be careful th at your ratios represent corresponding sides, recal ling that corresponding
sides are opposite corresponding angles.
Solving Application Problems Involving Similar Triangles
Applying knowledge of triangles, similarity, and congr uence can be very useful for solving problems in rea l life. Just as you can
solve for missing lengths of a triangle drawn on a pa ge, you can use triangles to find unknown distances be tween locations or
objects.
Let’s consider the example of two trees and their shad ows. Suppose the sun is shining down on two trees, one tha t is 6 feet tall and
the other whose height is unknown. By measuring the le ngth of each shadow on the ground, you can use triangl e similarity to findExample

1.9.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491the unknown height of the second tree.
First, let’s figure out where the triangles are in this situation. The trees themselves create one pair of c orresponding sides. The
shadows cast on the ground are another pair of correspo nding sides. The third side of these imaginary simila r triangles runs from
the top of each tree to the tip of its shadow on the grou nd. This is the hypotenuse of the triangle.
If you know that the trees and their shadows form similar t riangles, you can set up a proportion to find the height of the tree.
When the sun is at a certain angle in the sky, a 6- foot tree will cast a 4-foot shadow. How tall is a tree that casts an 8-foot
shadow?
Solution
The angle measurements are the same, so the triangles are similar triangles. Since they are similar triangl es, you can use
proportions to find the size of the missing side.
Set up a proportion comparing the heights of the trees an d the lengths of their shadows.
Substitute in the known lengths. Call the missing tree heigh t h.
Solve for h using cross-multiplication.
Answer: The tree is 12 feet tall.

The Pythagorean Theorem
Pythagoras studied right triangles, and the relationsh ips between the legs and the hypotenuse of a right t riangle, before deriving his
theory.Example

1.9.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
If a and b are the lengths of the legs of a right triangle and c is the length of the hypotenuse, then the sum of th e squares of the
lengths of the legs is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse.
This relationship is represented by the formula:
In the box above, you may have noticed the word “squ are,” as well as the small 2s to the top right of the le tters in. To
square a number means to multiply it by itself. So, fo r example, to square the number you multiply, and to square the number
, you multiply. Some common squares are shown in the table below.
Number Number Times Itself Square
1 1
2 4
3 9
4 16
5 25
10 100
When you see the equation, you can think of this as “the length of side a times itself, plus the length of side b times
itself is the same as the length of side c times itself.”
Let’s try out all of the Pythagorean Theorem with an act ual right triangle.
This theorem holds true for this right triangle—the s um of the squares of the lengths of both legs is th e same as the square of the
length of the hypotenuse. And, in fact, it holds true for all right triangles.The Pythagorean Theorem

1.9.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491The Pythagorean Theorem can also be represented in te rms of area. In any right triangle, the area of the square drawn from the
hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the areas of the sq uares that are drawn from the two legs. You can see t his illustrated below in the
same 3-4-5 right triangle.
Note that the Pythagorean Theorem only works with right triangles.
Finding the Length of the Hypotenuse
You can use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the lengt h of the hypotenuse of a right triangle if you know the length of the
triangle’s other two sides, called the legs. Put another way, i f you know the lengths of a and b, you can find c.
In the triangle above, you are given measures for le gs a and b: 5 and 12, respectively. You can use the Pythagorean T heorem to find
a value for the length of c, the hypotenuse.
The Pythagorean Theorem.
Substitute known values for a and b.
Evaluate.
Simplify. To find the value of c, think about a number that, when multiplied by itself, equals 169. Does 10 work? How about 11?
12? 13? (You can use a calculator to multiply if the numb ers are unfamiliar.)
The square root of 169 is 13.
Using the formula, you find that the length of c, the hypotenuse, is 13.

1.9.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Finding the Length of a Leg
You can use the same formula to find the length of a right triangle’s leg if you are given measurement s for the lengths of the
hypotenuse and the other leg. Consider the example bel ow.
Find the length of side a in the triangle below. Use a calculator to estimate the s quare root to one decimal place.
Solution
In this right triangle, you are given the measuremen ts for the hypotenuse, c, and one leg, b. The hypotenuse is always
opposite the right angle and it is always the longest side of the triangle.
= 6
= 7
To find the length of leg a, substitute the known values i nto the Pythagorean Theorem.
Solve for. Think: what number, when added to 36, gives you 49?
Use a calculator to find the square root of 13. The c alculator gives an answer of 3.6055…, which you can ro und to 3.6.
(Since you are approximating, you use the symbol ≈.)
Answer: a ≈ 3.6

Find Example
Example

1.9.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Solution
Check:
Answer:.
Find:
Solution
Check:Example

1.9.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Answer:.
Find:
Solution
Check:
Answer:.Example

1.9.2.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491Find
Solution

We reject because cannot be negative.
Check,:
Answer:.
Find and:Example
Example

1.9.2.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491
Solution
is a rectangle so and. Therefore and.
Answer:,.
Find, and:
Solution
is a rhombus. The diagonals of a rhombus are perpendicu lar and bisect each other.
Answer:.

Pythagoras (c. 582 - 507 B.C.) was not the first to discove r the theorem which bears his name. It was known long b efore his
time by the Chinese, the Babylonians, and perhaps al so the Egyptians and the Hindus, According to traditi on, Pythagoras was
the first to give a nroof of the theorem, His proof probably made use of areas, like the one suggested. In Figure below,Example
Historical Note

1.9.2.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491(each square contains four congruent right triangles with sides of lengths,, and, In addition the square on the left contains
a square with side a and a square with side while the one on th e right contains a square with side c.)
Figure: Pythagoras may have proved in this way.
Since the time of Pythagoras, at least several hundred dif ferent proofs of the Pythagorean Theorem have been prop osed,
Pythagoras was the founder of the Pythagorean school, a secre t religious society devoted to the study of philosophy,
mathematics, and science. Its membership was a select group, whic h tended to keep the discoveries and practices of the so ciety
secret from outsiders. The Pythagoreans believed that n umbers were the ultimate components of the universe and t hat all
physical relationships could be expressed with whole numb ers, This belief was prompted in part by their discover y that the
notes of the musical scale were related by numerical rati os. The Pythagoreans made important contributions to m edicine,
physics, and astronomy, In geometry, they are credited wit h the angle s
um theorem for triangles, the properties of parallel line s, and the theory of similar triangles and proportions.

Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Solve Real-world Problems
The Pythagorean Theorem is perhaps one of the most u seful formulas you will learn in mathematics because there are so many
applications of it in real world settings. Architects and engineers use this formula extensively when buil ding ramps, bridges, and
buildings. Look at the following examples.
The owners of a house want to convert a stairway leadin g from the ground to their back porch into a ramp. The porch is 3 feet
off the ground, and due to building regulations, th e ramp must start 12 feet away from the base of the p orch. How long will the
ramp be?
Use a calculator to find the square root, and round the answe r to the nearest tenth.
Solution
To solve a problem like this one, it often makes sen se to draw a simple diagram showing where the legs and hypotenuse of
the triangle lie.
Identify the legs and the hypotenuse of the triangle. You know that the triangle is a right triangle since the ground and the
raised portion of the porch are perpendicular—this m eans you can use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve this problem.
Identify a, b, and c.Example

1.9.2.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491 = 3
= 12
Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of c.
Use a calculator to find c.
The square root of 153 is 12.369…, so you can round that t o 12.4.
Answer: The ramp will be 12.4 feet long.
A sailboat has a large sail in the shape of a right triangle. The longest edge of the sail measures 17 yar ds, and the bottom edge
of the sail is 8 yards. How tall is the sail?
Solution
Draw an image to help you visualize the problem. In a right triangle, the hypotenuse will always be the lon gest side, so here
it must be 17 yards. The problem also tells you that the bo ttom edge of the triangle is 8 yards.
Setup the Pythagorean Theorem.
, so
Answer: The height of the sail is 15 yards.Example

1.9.2.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491The length of the shorter side of a right triangle i s and the length of the hypotenuse is. Find the leng th of the longer side and
find both of the angles, aside from the right angle, in t he triangle.
Answer
Draw the triangle such that it is obvious
which side is the shorter side →
Pythagorean Theorem →
Subtract \x^2 from both sides of the equation →
Swap sides →
Take the square root of both
sides of the equation → \(y=\sqrt{r^2-x^2})\)
By definition, the sine of θ is the side
opposite θ divided by the hypotenuse → sinθ=
Take the arcsine of both sides of the
equation in order to get θ by itself → θ=sin
By definition, the cosine of ϕ is the side
adjacent to ϕ divided by the hypotenuse → cosϕ=
Take the arccosine of both sides of the
equation in order to get ϕ by itself → ϕ=cos
To solve a problem like the one above, you need to memorize the relations between the sides and the angl es of a right
triangle. A convenient mnemonic for doing so is “SOHCAHTOA ”
pronounced as a single word.
Referring to the diagram above right:
SOH reminds us that:: sinθ=
CAH reminds us that:: cosθ=
TOA reminds us that:: tanθ=
Points to remember:
1. The angle θ is never the 90 degree angle.
2. The words “opposite” and “adjacent” designate sides relative to the angle. For instance,Example:
-1

1.9.2.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109491the cosine of θ is the length of the side adjacent to θ div ided by the length of the
hypotenuse.
You also need to know about the arcsine and the arcc osine functions to solve the example problem above. T he arcsine
function is the inverse of the sine function. The answe r to the question, “What is the arcsine of 0.44?” is, “ that angle whose
sine is 0.44.” There is an arcsine button on your c alculator. It is typically labeled sin-1, to be read, “arcsine.” To use it you
probably have to hit the inverse button or the second fun ction button on your calculator first.
The inverse function of a function undoes what the func tion does. Thus:
sin sinθ =θ
Furthermore, the sine function is the inverse function to the arcsine function and the cosine function is t he inverse function
to the arccosine function. For the former, this means that:
sin(sin x)=x

This page titled 1.9.2: Triangles is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Ted Sundstrom &
Steven Schlicker (ScholarWorks @Grand Valley State University) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
1.5: Triangles by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.
4.4: Pythagorean Theorem by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.
1A: Mathematical Prelude by Jeffrey W. Schnick is licensed CC BY-SA 2.5. Original source: http://www.cbphysics.org.-1
-1

1.9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094921.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
Angles
Lines, line segments, points, and rays are the build ing blocks of other figures. For example, two rays with a common endpoint
make up an angle. The common endpoint of the angle is called the vertex.
The angle ABC is shown below. This angle can also be ca lled ABC, CBA or simply B. When you are naming angle s, be
careful to include the vertex (here, point B) as the midd le letter.
The image below shows a few angles on a plane. Notice tha t the label of each angle is written “point-vertex-po int,” and the
geometric notation is in the form ABC.
Sometimes angles are very narrow; sometimes they are v ery wide. When people talk about the “size” of an an gle, they are referring
to the arc between the two rays. The length of the ra ys has nothing to do with the size of the angle itsel f. Drawings of angles will
often include an arc (as shown above) to help the reader iden tify the correct ‘side’ of the angle.
Think about an analog clock face. The minute and hou r hands are both fixed at a point in the middle of the clock. As time passes,
the hands rotate around the fixed point, making larg er and smaller angles as they go. The length of the h ands does not impact the
angle that is made by the hands.
An angle is measured in degrees, represented by the sy mbol º. A circle is defined as having 360º. (In skateb oarding and basketball,
“doing a 360” refers to jumping and doing one complete bo dy rotation.
A right angle is any degree that measures exactly 90º. This repres ents exactly one-quarter of the way around a circle. R ectangles
contain exactly four right angles. A corner mark is often u sed to denote a right angle, as shown in right angle DCB be low.
Angles that are between 0º and 90º (smaller than right angles) are called acute angles. Angles that are between 90º and 180º (larger
than right angles and less than 180º) are called obtuse angles. And an angle that measures exactly 180º is called a straight angle

1.9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492because it forms a straight line.
Figure: Examples of Angles
Label each angle below as acute, right, or obtuse.
Solution
You can start by identifying any right angles.
GFI is a right angle, as indicated by the corner mark at ve rtex F.
Acute angles will be smaller than GFI (or less than 90º). This means that DAB and MLN are acute.
TQS is larger than GFI, so it is an obtuse angle.
Answer: DAB and MLN are acute angles. GFI is a right angle. TQS is an o btuse angle.Example

1.9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Identify each point, ray, and angle in the picture below.
Solution
Begin by identifying each point in the figure. There are 4: E, F, G, and J.
Now find rays. A ray begins at one point, and then con tinues through another point towards infinity (indic ated by an arrow).
Three rays start at point J:,, and. But also notice that a ray could start a t point F and go through J and G, and
another could start at point G and go through J and F. These rays can be represented by and.
Finally, look for angles. EJG is obtuse, EJF is acute, and FJG is straight. (Don’t forget those straight angles!)
Answer: Points: E, F, G, J
Rays:,,,,
Angles: EJG, EJF, FJG
Identify the acute angles in the given image:
Example
Try It Now 2

1.9.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Finding Angle Measurements
Understanding how parallel and perpendicular lines re late can help you figure out the measurements of so me unknown angles. To
start, all you need to remember is that perpendicular lin es intersect at a 90º angle and that a straight angle measu res 180º.
The measure of an angle such as A is written as m A. Look at the example below. How can you find the measureme nts of the
unmarked angles?
Find the measurement of IJF.
Solution
Only one angle, HJM, is marked in the image. Notice that it is a right angle, so it measures 90º. HJM is formed by th e
intersection of lines and. Since is a line, IJM is a straight angle measuring 180º.
You can use this information to find the measurement of HJI:
m HJM + m HJI = m IJM
90º + m HJI = 180º
m HJI = 90º
Example

1.9.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Now use the same logic to find the measurement of IJF. IJF is formed by the intersection of lines and. Si nce
is a line, HJF will be a straight angle measuring 180º.
You know that HJI measures 90º. Use this information to find the measurement of IJF:
m HJM + m IJF = m HJF
90º + m IJF = 180º
m IJF = 90º
Answer: m IJF = 90º
In this example, you may have noticed that angles HJI, IJF, and HJM are all right angles. (If you were asked to find the
measurement of FJM, you would find that angle to be 90º, too.) This is what happens when two lines are perpendic ular—the four
angles created by the intersection are all right angles.
Not all intersections happen at right angles, though. In the example below, notice how you can use the sam e technique as shown
above (using straight angles) to find the measurement of a missing angle.
Find the measurement of DAC.
SolutionExample

1.9.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492This image shows the line and the ray intersecting a t point A. The measurement of BAD is 135º. You can use
straight angles to find the measurement of DAC.
BAC is a straight angle, so it measures 180º.
Use this information to find the measurement of DAC.
m BAD + m DAC = m BAC
135º + m DAC = 180º
m DAC = 45º
Answer: m DAC = 45º
Find the measurement of CAD.
Try It Now 2

1.9.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Supplementary and Complementary Angles
In the example above, m BAC and m DAC add up to 180º. Two a ngles whose measures add up to 180º are called supplementary
angles. There’s also a term for two angles whose measurements add up to 90º, they are called complementary angles.
One way to remember the difference between the two term s is that “corner” and “complementary” each begin wit h c (a 90º angle
looks like a corner), while straight and “supplementary” each begin with s (a straight angle measures 180º).
If you can identify supplementary or complementary angles within a problem, finding missing angle measu rements is often simply
a matter of adding or subtracting.
Two angles are supplementary. If one of the angles measures 4 8º, what is the measurement of the other angle
Solution
Two supplementary angles make up a straight angle, so the meas urements of the two angles will be 180º.
m A + m B = 180º
You know the measurement of one angle. To find the measure ment of the second angle, subtract 48º from 180º.
48º+ m B = 180º
m B = 180º - 48º
m B = 132º
Answer: The measurement of the other angle is 132º
Find the measurement of AXZ.
Solution
This image shows two intersecting lines, and. They in tersect at point X, forming four angles. Angles AXY and
AXZ are supplementary because together they make up the st raight angle YXZ.
Use this information to find the measurement of AXZ.
m AXY + m AXZ = m YXZ
30º + m AXZ = 180ºExample
Example

1.9.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492m AXZ = 150º
Answer: m AXZ = 150º
Find the measurement of BAC.
Solution
This image shows the line and the rays and, all int ersecting at point A. Angle BAD is a right angle. Angles
BAC and CAD are complementary because together they creat e BAD.
Use this information to find the measurement of BAC.
m BAC + m CAD = m BAD
m BAC + 50º = 90º
m BAC = 40ºExample

1.9.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492
Answer: m BAC = 40º
Find the measurement of CAD.
Solution
You know the measurements of two angles here: CAB and DAE. Yo u also know that m BAE = 180º.
Use this information to find the measurement of CAD.
m BAC + m CAD + m DAE = m BAE
25º + m CAD + 75º = 180º
m CAD + 100º = 180º
m CAD = 80º
Answer: m CAD = 80ºExample

1.9.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Parallel and Transversal Lines
Two lines are parallel if they do not meet, no matter how far they are exten ded. The symbol for parallel is. In Figure,
. The arrow marks are used to indicate the lines are paral lel.
Figure: and are parallel.They do not meet no matt er how far they are
extended.
Figure: and are not parallel. They meet at
point.

Figure: is a transversal.

A transversal is a line that intersects two other lines at two disti nct points. In Figure, is a transversal. and are
called alternate interior angles of lines and. The word "alternate," here, means th at the angles are on different sides of the
transversal, one angle formed with and the other forme d with. The word "interior" means that they are betwe en the two
lines. Notice that they form the letter "." (Figure). and are also alternate interior angles. They also form a " "
though It is stretched out and backwards. Viewed from the s ide, the letter " " may also look like an "."

1.9.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492
Figure: Alternate interior form the letters " " or " ". The letter may be stretched out or backwards.
Alternate interior angles are important because of the following theorem:
If two lines are parallel then their alternate interi or angles are equal, If the alternate interior angle s of two lines are equal then
the lines must 'oe parallel,
In Figure, must be parallel to because the altern ate interior angles are both. Notice that the other pair of alternate
interior angles, and, are also equal. They are bot h. In Figure, the lines are not parallel and none of the alternate
interior angles are equal.
Figure: The lines are parallel and their alternate i nterior angles are equal.
Figure: The lines are not parallel and their alterna te interior angles are not equal.

Find and:Theorem The "Z" Theorem
Example

1.9.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492
Solution
since the arrows indicate parallel lines. because alt ernate interior angles of parallel lines are equal.
Answer:.
Corresponding angles of two lines are two angles which are on the same side o f the two lines and the same side of the transversal,
In Figure, and are corresponding angles of lines a nd. They form the letter "." and, and, and
and are other pairs of corresponding angles of an d. They all form the letter " ", though it might be a backwards or
upside down " " (Figure).
Figure: Four pairs of corresponding angles are illustrat ed.
Figure: Corresponding angles form the letter "," thou gh it may be a backwards or upside down "."
Corresponding angles are important because of the followi ng theorem:
If two lines are parallel then their corresponding an gles are equal. If the corresponding angles of two line s are equal then the
lines must be parallel.

Theorem: The "F" Theorem

1.9.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Find:
Solution
The arrow indicate. Therefore because and are the measures of corresponding angles of the
parallel lines and.
Answer:.
Figure: Each pair of corresponding angles is equal.
Notice that we can now find all the other angles in Exa mple. Each one is either supplementary to one of t he angles
or forms equal vertical angles with one of them (Figu re). Therefore all the corresponding angles are equal, Also each
pair of alternate interior angles is equal. It is not hard to see that if just one pair of corresponding angles or one pair of alternate
interior angles are equal then so are all other pairs of corresponding and alternate interior angles.
Proof of Theorem: The corresponding angles will be eq ual if the alternate interior angles are equal and v ice versa. Therefore
Theorem follows directly from Therorem.
In Figure, and are called interior angles on the same side of the transversal.(In some textbooks, interior angles
on the same sdie of the transversal are called coint erior angles.) and are also interior angles on th e same side of the
transversal, Notice that each pair of angles forms the l etter "." Compare Figure with Figure 10 and also with E xample
, The following theorem is then apparent:Example

1.9.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492
Figure: Interior angles on the same side of the transve rsal form the letter " ". It may also be a backwards "."
If two lines are parallel then the interior angles o n the same side of the transversal are supplementary (they add uP to). If
the interior angles of two lines on the same side of the transversal are supplementary then the lines must be paral lel.
Find and the marked angles:
Solution
The lines are parallel so by Theorem the two labelled angles must be supplementary.
Check:
Answer:,,.Theorem:The "C" Theorem
Example

1.9.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Find and the marked angles:
Solution
because vertical angles are equal. and are interio r angles on the same side of the
transversal, and therefore are supplementary because the lines are parallel.
Check:
Answer:,,.
List all pairs of alternate interior angles in the d iagram, (The single arrow indicates is parallel to a nd the double arrow
indicates is parallel to.
Example

Example

1.9.3.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Solution
We see if a letter or can be formed using the line segm ents in the diagram (Figure),
Answer: and are alternate interior angles of lines and. and are alternate interior angles
of lines and
A telescope is pointed at a star above the horizon, What angle must the mirror make with the horizonta l so that the
star can be seen in the eyepiece?
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Examples
Example

1.9.3.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Find the angle as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. ThereforeExample
Example

1.9.3.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of Example
Example

1.9.3.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. ThereforeExample

1.9.3.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
SolutionExample
Example

1.9.3.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492 because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Example
Example

1.9.3.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109492Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
Find the rest of the angles as a function of
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
This page titled 1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Henry Africk (New York City College of Technology at CUNY Academi c Works) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of
the LibreTexts platform.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
1.4: Parallel Lines by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.Example

1.9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094931.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
6.1.1: Properties of Angles
1. Identify parallel and perpendicular lines.
2. Find measures of angles.
3. Identify complementary and supplementary angles.
4. Determine the slopes of parallel and perpendicular li nes.
5. Find equations of parallel and perpendicular lines
Parallel and Perpendicular
Parallel lines are two or more lines that never inters ect. Likewise, parallel line segments are two line segme nts that never intersect
even if the line segments were turned into lines tha t continued forever. Examples of parallel line segm ents are all around you, in the
two sides of this page and in the shelves of a bookcase. When you see lines or structures that seem to run in the same direction,
never cross one another, and are always the same distan ce apart, there’s a good chance that they are parallel.
Perpendicular lines are two lines that intersect at a 90º (right) angle. And perpendicular line segments als o intersect at a 90º (right)
angle. You can see examples of perpendicular lines e verywhere as well—on graph paper, in the crossing patt ern of roads at an
intersection, to the colored lines of a plaid shirt. I n our daily lives, you may be happy to call two lines perpendicular if they merely
seem to be at right angles to one another. When study ing geometry, however, you need to make sure that two l ines intersect at a 90º
angle before declaring them to be perpendicular.
The image below shows some parallel and perpendicular l ines. The geometric symbol for parallel is ||, so you can show that AB ||
CD. Parallel lines are also often indicated by the mar king >> on each line (or just a single > on each lin e). Perpendicular lines are
indicated by the symbol?, so you can write.
If two lines are parallel, then any line that is perpe ndicular to one line will also be perpendicular to t he other line. Similarly, if two
lines are both perpendicular to the same line, then those two lines are parallel to each other. Let’s ta ke a look at one example and
identify some of these types of lines.
Identify a set of parallel lines and a set of perpendic ular lines in the image below.Learning Objectives
Example

1.9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493
Solution
Parallel lines never meet, and perpendicular lines i ntersect at a right angle. and do not intersect in this image, but if
you imagine extending both lines, they will intersect soon. So, they are neither parallel nor perpendicular.
is perpendicular to both and, as indicated by the rig ht-angle marks at the intersection of those lines.
Since is perpendicular to both lines, then and are p arallel.

1.9.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493
Answer: ||
Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular
Parallel lines are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, wi th slopes and, are
parallel if their slopes are the same,. Consider the foll owing two lines:
Consider their corresponding graphs:
Figure
Both lines have a slope and thus are parallel.
Perpendicular lines are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (degrees). Two nonvertical l ines in the same plane,
with slopes and, are perpendicular if the product o f their slopes is. We can solve for and obtain
. In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have sl opes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals. For example,
if given a slope
then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite re ciprocal:
The mathematical notation reads “ perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular l ines if their product
is.

1.9.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive sl ope, then any perpendicular line will have a negativ e slope. Furthermore, the
rise and run between two perpendicular lines are intercha nged.
Figure
Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite rec iprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and ch ange the sign. In other
words,
If, then
Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be per formed mentally. Some examples follow
Table
Given slope Slope of perpendicular line
Determine the slope of a line parallel to.
Solution
Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we can see that its slope is. Thus the slope of any line p arallel to the
given line must be the same,. The mathematical notation reads “ parallel.”
Answer:Example

1.9.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493
Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to.
Solution
First, solve for and express the line in slope-intercept fo rm.
In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is, and thus.
Answer:
Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to
find the equation of a line given some geometric rel ationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another
line.
Find the equation of the line passing through and paral lel to
Solution
Here the given line has slope, and the slope of a lin e parallel is. Since you are given a point and the slope,
use the point-slope form of a line to determine the equat ion.
Answer:
It is important to have a geometric understanding o f this question. We were asked to find the equation o f a line parallel to
another line passing through a certain point.
Figure
Through the point we found a parallel line,, shown d ashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given
line, but the -intercept is different. If we keep in m ind the geometric interpretation, then it will be easi er to remember theExample
Example

1.9.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493process needed to solve the problem.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution
The given line has slope, and thus. Substitute this slop e and the given point into point-slope form.
Answer:
Geometrically, we see that the line, shown dashed bel ow, passes through and is perpendicular to the
given line.
Figure
It is not always the case that the given line is in sl ope-intercept form. Often you have to perform addition al steps to determine the
slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a li ne are outlined in the following example.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution
Step 1: Find the slope. First, find the slope of the given line. To do this, solve for to change standard for m to slopeintercept form,.Example
Example

1.9.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493In this form, you can see that the slope is, and thus.
Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a lin e. In this case,
the slope is and the given point is.
Step 3: Solve for.
Answer:
Find the equation of the line passing through and paral lel to.
Solution
Find the slope by solving for.
The given line has the slope, and so. We use this and th e point in point-slope form.
Answer:
When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the g eometric interpretation.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution
We recognize that is a horizontal line and we want to fi nd a perpendicular line passing through.Example
Example

1.9.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493
Figure
If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line.
Figure
Equations of vertical lines look like. Since it mus t pass through, we conclude that is the equation. All
ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the sa me -coordinate.
Answer:
We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line,, in slope-intercept form as follows:
Written in this form, we see that the slope is. If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by fin ding the opposite
reciprocal, we run into a problem:, which is undefine d. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two
nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are per pendicular to vertical lines.

1.9.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109493Key Takeaways
Parallel lines have the same slope.
Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite recipr ocals. In other words, if, then.
To find an equation of a line, first use the given informati on to determine the slope. Then use the slope and a point on the line to
find the equation using point-slope form.
Horizontal and vertical lines are perpendicular to each o ther.
This page titled 1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
3.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines by Anonymous is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 3.0. Original source:
https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/beginning-algeb ra.

1.9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094941.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
Plot ordered pairs in a Cartesian coordinate system.
Graph equations by plotting points.
Graph equations with a graphing utility.
Find -intercepts and -intercepts.
Use the distance formula.
Use the midpoint formula.
Plotting Ordered Pairs in the Cartesian Coordinate System
The Cartesian coordinate system, also called the rectangular coordinate system, is based on a two-dimensional plane consisting of
the -axis and the -axis. Perpendicular to each other, th e axes divide the plane into four sections. Each sec tion is called a quadrant;
the quadrants are numbered counterclockwise as shown in Figure.
Figure
The center of the plane is the point at which the two axes cross. It is known as the origin, or point. Fro m the origin, each axis
is further divided into equal units: increasing, pos itive numbers to the right on the -axis and up the - axis; decreasing, negative
numbers to the left on the -axis and down the -axis. The axes extend to positive and negative infinity as sh own by the arrowheads
in Figure.Learning Objectives

1.9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494
Figure
Each point in the plane is identified by its -coordi nate, or horizontal displacement from the origin, an d its -coordinate, or vertical
displacement from the origin. Together, we write them as an ordered pair indicating the combined distance from the origin in the
form. An ordered pair is also known as a coordinate pair because it consists of - and -coordinates. For ex ample, we can
represent the point in the plane by moving three un its to the right of the origin in the horizontal dir ection, and one unit down
in the vertical direction. See Figure.
Figure
When dividing the axes into equally spaced increment s, note that the -axis may be considered separately f rom the -axis. In other
words, while the -axis may be divided and labeled accord ing to consecutive integers, the -axis may be divided and labeled by
increments of, or, or. In fact, the axes may repr esent other units, such as years against the balance i n a savings account, or
quantity against cost, and so on. Consider the rectan gular coordinate system primarily as a method for sh owing the relationship
between two quantities.
A two-dimensional plane where the
-axis is the horizontal axis
-axis is the vertical axisCartesian Coordinate System

1.9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494A point in the plane is defined as an ordered pair,, such that is determined by its horizontal distanc e from the origin and
is determined by its vertical distance from the origin.
Plot the points,, and in the plane.
Solution
To plot the point, begin at the origin. The -coordi nate is, so move two units to the left. The -coordina te is, so
then move four units up in the positive direction.
To plot the point, begin again at the origin. The - coordinate is, so move three units to the right. Th e -coordinate is
also, so move three units up in the positive direction.
To plot the point, begin again at the origin. The - coordinate is. This tells us not to move in either direction along
the -axis. The -coordinate is, so move three units down in the negative direction. See the graph in Figure.
Figure
Analysis
Note that when either coordinate is zero, the point mu st be on an axis. If the -coordinate is zero, the po int is on the -axis.
If the -coordinate is zero, the point is on the -axis.
Graphing Equations by Plotting Points
We can plot a set of points to represent an equation. When such an equation contains both an variable and a variable, it is called
an equation in two variables. Its graph is called a graph in two variables. Any graph on a two-dimensional plane is a graph in
two variables.
Suppose we want to graph the equation. We can begin by substituting a value for into the equation and det ermining the
resulting value of. Each pair of - and -values is an ordered pair that can be plotted. Table lists va lues of from to
and the resulting values for.
Table Example: Plotting Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

1.9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494We can plot the points in the table. The points for this particular equation form a line, so we can con nect them (Figure). This
is not true for all equations.
Figure
Note that the -values chosen are arbitrary, regardles s of the type of equation we are graphing. Of course, some situations may
require particular values of to be plotted in order to see a particular result. Otherwise, it is logical to choose values that can be
calculated easily, and it is always a good idea to cho ose values that are both negative and positive. There is no rule dictating how
many points to plot, although we need at least two to graph a line. Keep in mind, however, that the more po ints we plot, the more
accurately we can sketch the graph.
1. Make a table with one column labeled, a second column labe led with the equation, and a third column listing the resul ting
ordered pairs.
2. Enter -values down the first column using positive an d negative values. Selecting the -values in numerical o rder will
make the graphing simpler.
3. Select -values that will yield -values with little effo rt, preferably ones that can be calculated mentally.
4. Plot the ordered pairs.
5. Connect the points if they form a line.Howto: Given an equation, graph by plotting points

1.9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494Graph the equation by plotting points.
Solution
First, we construct a table similar to Table. Choose val ues and calculate.
Table
Now, plot the points. Connect them if they form a line. See Fi gure.
Figure
Finding -intercepts and -intercepts
The intercepts of a graph are points at which the graph crosses the axes. The -intercept is the point at which the graph crosses the
\(x\)-axis. At this point, the -coordinate is zero. Th e -intercept is the point at which the graph crosses the -axis. At this point, the
-coordinate is zero.
To determine the -intercept, we set equal to zero an d solve for. Similarly, to determine the -intercept, we set equal to zero
and solve for. For example, lets find the intercepts of t he equation.
To find the -intercept, set.Example: Graphing an Equation in Two Variables by Plotting Points

1.9.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494−intercept:
To find the -intercept, set.
−intercept:
We can confirm that our results make sense by observ ing a graph of the equation as in Figure. Notice tha t the graph crosses
the axes where we predicted it would.
Figure
1. Find the -intercept by setting and solving for.
2. Find the -intercept by setting and solving for.
Find the intercepts of the equation. Then sketch the grap h using only the intercepts.
Solution
Set to find the -intercept.
−intercept:
Set to find the -intercept.Howto: GIVEN AN EQUATION, FIND THE INTERCEPTS
Example: Finding the Intercepts of the Given Equation

1.9.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494−intercept:
Plot both points, and draw a line passing through them as i n Figure.
Figure
Using the Distance Formula
Derived from the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance formula is used to find the distance between two points in the plane. The
Pythagorean Theorem,, is based on a right triangle wher e and are the lengths of the legs adjacent to the right angle,
and is the length of the hypotenuse. See Figure.
Figure
The relationship of sides and to side is the same as that of sides and to side. We use the absolute v alue
symbol to indicate that the length is a positive num ber because the absolute value of any number is pos itive. (For example,
.) The symbols and indicate that the lengths of t he sides of the triangle are positive. To find the l ength, take
the square root of both sides of the Pythagorean Theorem.
It follows that the distance formula is given as
We do not have to use the absolute value symbols in this defi nition because any number squared is positive.

1.9.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494Given endpoints and, the distance between two points is g iven by
Find the distance between the points and.
Solution
Let us first look at the graph of the two points. Connect the p oints to form a right triangle as in Figure
Figure
Then, calculate the length of using the distance formu la.
Using the Midpoint Formula
When the endpoints of a line segment are known, we can find the point midway between them. This point is known as the midpoint
and the formula is known as the midpoint formula. Given the endpoints of a line segment, and, the m idpoint
formula states how to find the coordinates of the midpoint M.
A graphical view of a midpoint is shown in Figure. Noti ce that the line segments on either side of the midpoi nt are
congruent.distance between two points
Example: Finding the Distance between Two Points

1.9.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109494
Figure
Find the midpoint of the line segment with the endpoints a nd.
Solution
Use the formula to find the midpoint of the line segment.
The diameter of a circle has endpoints and. Find the ce nter of the circle.
Solution
The center of a circle is the center, or midpoint, of i ts diameter. Thus, the midpoint formula will yield the ce nter point.
Key Concepts
We can locate, or plot, points in the Cartesian coordi nate system using ordered pairs, which are defined as dis placement from
the -axis and displacement from the -axis. See Example.
An equation can be graphed in the plane by creating a t able of values and plotting points. See Example.
Using a graphing calculator or a computer program makes gr aphing equations faster and more accurate. Equations usu ally have
to be entered in the form _____. See Example.
Finding the - and -intercepts can define the graph of a line. These are t he points where the graph crosses the axes. See
Example.
The distance formula is derived from the Pythagorean Theo rem and is used to find the length of a line segment. See Example
and Example.
The midpoint formula provides a method of finding the co ordinates of the midpoint dividing the sum of the -coord inates and
the sum of the -coordinates of the endpoints by. See Example and Example.
This page titled 1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Example: Finding the Midpoint of the Line Segment
Example: Finding the Center of a Circle

1.9.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094942.1: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.

1.9.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094951.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Solve equations using a general strategy
Solve inequalities using the Subtraction and Addition Proper ties of inequality
Solve inequalities using the Division and Multiplication Pro perties of inequality
Solve inequalities that require simplification
Translate to an inequality and solve
It is time now to lay out one overall strategy that can be used to solve any linear equation. Some equati ons we solve will not require
all these steps to solve, but many will.
Beginning by simplifying each side of the equation makes the remaining steps easier.
Solve:.
Answer
1. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
Combine like terms.
2. Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.Learning Objectives
Example: How to Solve Linear Equations Using the General Strategy
GENERAL STRATEGY FOR SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS.

1.9.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094953. Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the equation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
4. Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1.
Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
State the solution to the equation.
5. Check the solution. Substitute the solution into the original equation to m ake sure the result is a true statement.
Solve:
Answer

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible by distributing.
The only y term is on the left side, so all variable t erms are on the left side of the
equation.
Add 9 to both sides to get all constant terms on the ri ght side of the equation.
Simplify.
Rewrite −y as −1y.
Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1 by dividing both sides by −1.
Simplify.
Check:

Let y=−17.

Solve: Example
Example

1.9.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Distribute.
Combine like terms.
The only a term is on the left side, so all variable t erms are on one side of the
equation.
Add 10 to both sides to get all constant terms on the o ther side of the equation.
Simplify.
Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 11 by dividing both sides by
55.
Simplify.
Check:

Let a=0.

Solve: Example

1.9.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Distribute.
Add m to get the variables only to the left.
Simplify.
Add 2 to get constants only on the right.
Simplify.
Divide by 5.
Simplify.
Check:

Let m=2.

Solve: Example

1.9.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Simplify—use the Distributive Property.
Combine like terms.
Add 2 to both sides to collect constants on the right.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by −6−6.
Simplify.
Check: Let y=−13.

Solve: Example

1.9.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Distribute.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 4x to get the variables only on the right sid e since.
Simplify.
Subtract 21 to get the constants on left.
Simplify.
Divide by 6.
Simplify.
Check:

Let.

Solve: Example

1.9.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Simplify from the innermost parentheses first.
Combine like terms in the brackets.
Distribute.
Add 160s to get the s’s to the right.
Simplify.
Subtract 600 to get the constants to the left.
Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.
Check:

Substitute s=−2.

Solve:.Example

1.9.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Distribute.
Subtract 18n to get the variables to the left.
Simplify.
Subtract 1.8 to get the constants to the right.
Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.
Check:

Let n=0.4.

Use the Distance, Rate, and Time Formula
One formula you will use often in algebra and in every day life is the formula for distance traveled by an object moving at a
constant rate. Rate is an equivalent word for “speed.” The basic idea of rate may already familiar to you. Do you know what
distance you travel if you drive at a steady rate of 60 miles per hour for 2 hours? (This might happen i f you use your car’s cruise
control while driving on the highway.) If you said 120 miles, you already know how to use this formula!
For an object moving at a uniform (constant) rate, the distance traveled, the elapsed time, and the rate ar e related by the
formula:
We will use the Strategy for Solving Applications that we used earlier in this chapter. When our problem requi res a formula, we
change Step 4. In place of writing a sentence, we write the app ropriate formula. We write the revised steps here for refe rence.
1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
2. Identify what we are looking for.
3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent th at quantity.
4. Translate into an equation. Write the appropriate formula for th e situation. Substitute in the given information.
5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
You may want to create a mini-chart to summarize the inf ormation in the problem. See the chart in this first exam ple.DISTANCE, RATE, AND TIME
SOLVE AN APPLICATION (WITH A FORMULA).

1.9.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Jamal rides his bike at a uniform rate of 12 miles per ho ur for hours. What distance has he traveled?
Answer
Step 1. Read the problem.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. distance traveled
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. Let d = distance.
Step 4. Translate: Write the appropriate formula.

Substitute in the given information.
Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check
Does 42 miles make sense?
Jamal rides:

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence. Jamal rode 42 miles.
Rey is planning to drive from his house in San Diego to visit his grandmother in Sacramento, a distance of 5 20 miles. If he can
drive at a steady rate of 65 miles per hour, how many hou rs will the trip take?Example
Example

1.9.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer
Step 1. Read the problem.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. How many hours (time)
Step 3. Name.
Choose a variable to represent it.Let t = time.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.
Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check. Substitute the numbers into
the formula and make sure the result is a
true statement.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence. Rey’s trip will take 8 hours.
Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable
You are probably familiar with some geometry formula s. A formula is a mathematical description of the re lationship between
variables. Formulas are also used in the sciences, such a s chemistry, physics, and biology. In medicine they a re used for
calculations for dispensing medicine or determining bo dy mass index. Spreadsheet programs rely on formulas t o make calculations.
It is important to be familiar with formulas and be able t o manipulate them easily.
In Exercise and Exercise, we used the formula. Th is formula gives the value of d, distance, when you su bstitute
in the values of r and t, the rate and time. But in E xercise, we had to find the value of t. We substitute d in values of d and r
and then used algebra to solve for tt. If you had to do this often, you might wonder why there is not a for mula that gives the value
of t when you substitute in the values of d and r. We can make a formula like this by solving the formula for t.
To solve a formula for a specific variable means to isolate that variable on one side of the equals sig n with a coefficient of 1. All
other variables and constants are on the other side o f the equals sign. To see how to solve a formula for a specific variable, we will
start with the distance, rate and time formula.
Solve the formula d=rt for t:
1. when d=520 and r=65
2. in general
Answer
We will write the solutions side-by-side to demonstrate that solving a formula in general uses the same steps a s when weExample

1.9.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495have numbers to substitute.
1. when d=520 and r=65 2. in general
Write the formula. Write the formula.
Substitute.
Divide, to isolate t. Divide, to isolate tt.
Simplify. Simplify.
We say the formula is solved for t.
Solve the formula for h:
1. when and
2. in general
Answer
1. when and 2. in general
Write the formula.
Write the formula.
Substitute.

Clear the fractions.
Clear the fractions.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Solve for h.
Solve for hh.
We can now find the height of a triangle, if we know the area and the base, by using the formula

The formula is used to calculate simple interest, I, for a principal, P, invested at rate, r, for t years.
Solve the formula I=Prt to find the principal, P:
1. when I=$5,600, r=4%,t=7years
2. in generalExample
Example

1.9.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer
1. I=$5,600, r=4%,t=7years 2. in general
Write the formula.
Write the formula.
Substitute.

Simplify.
Simplify.
Divide, to isolate P.
Divide, to isolate P.
Simplify.
Simplify.
The principal is

Later in this class, and in future algebra classes, you ’ll encounter equations that relate two variables, usu ally x and y. You might be
given an equation that is solved for y and need to solve it for x, or vice versa. In the following example, we’re give n an equation
with both x and y on the same side and we’ll solve it for y.
Solve the formula 3x+2y=18 for y:
1. when x=4
2. in general
Answer
1. when x=4 2. in general

Substitute.

Subtract to isolate the
y-term.
Subtract to isolate the
y-term.
Divide.
Divide.
Simplify.
Simplify.
In Exercise through Exercise we used the numbers i n part 1 as a guide to solving in general in part 2. Now we will
solve a formula in general without using numbers as a guid e.
Solve the formula P=a+b+c for a.Example
Example

1.9.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer
We will isolate aa on one side of the equation.
Both b and c are added to a, so we subtract them from both
sides of the equation.
Simplify.
Solve the formula 6x+5y=13 for y.
Answer

Subtract 6x from both sides to isolate the term with y.
Simplify.
Divide by 5 to make the coefficient 1.
Simplify.
The fraction is simplified. We cannot divide 13−6x by 5.
Solve Inequalities using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Inequality
The Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality st ate that if two quantities are equal, when we add or sub tract the same amount
from both quantities, the results will be equal.
Similar properties hold true for inequalities.
Table
For example, we know that −4 is less than 2.
If we subtract 5 from both quantities, is the left side still less than
the right side?
We get −9 on the left and −3 on the right.
And we know −9 is less than −3.
The inequality sign stayed the same.
Similarly we could show that the inequality also stays the s ame for addition.
This leads us to the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Inequality.Example
PROPERTIES OF EQUALITY

1.9.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495We use these properties to solve inequalities, taking t he same steps we used to solve equations. Solving the i nequality, the
steps would look like this:
Any number greater than 4 is a solution to this inequal ity.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Add to both sides of the inequality.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve Inequalities using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Inequality
The Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality state that if two quantities are equal, when we divide or multiply both
quantities by the same amount, the results will also be e qual (provided we don’t divide by 0).
Are there similar properties for inequalities? What hap pens to an inequality when we divide or multiply both sides by a constant?
Consider some numerical examples.PROPERTIES OF INEQUALITY
Example
PROPERTIES OF EQUALITY

1.9.6.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Table

Divide both sides by 5.
Multiply both sides by 5.
Simplify.
Fill in the inequality signs.
The inequality signs stayed the same.
Does the inequality stay the same when we divide or multi ply by a negative number?
Table

Divide both sides by -5.
Multiply both sides by -5.
Simplify.

Fill in the inequality signs.

The inequality signs reversed their direction.
When we divide or multiply an inequality by a positi ve number, the inequality sign stays the same. When we divide or multiply an
inequality by a negative number, the inequality sign rev erses.
Here are the Division and Multiplication Properties of Ine quality for easy reference.
For any real numbers a,b,c
When we divide or multiply an inequality by a:
positive number, the inequality stays the same.
negative number, the inequality reverses.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.DIVISION AND MULTIPLICATION PROPERTIES OF INEQUALITY
Example

1.9.6.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Divide both sides of the inequality by 7.
Since, the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Divide both sides of the inequality by −10.
Since, the inequality reverses.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Sometimes when solving an inequality, the variable ends u p on the right. We can rewrite the inequality in reverse t o get the
variable to the left.
Think about it as “If Xavier is taller than Alex, then Alex i s shorter than Xavier.”
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Multiply both sides of the inequality by.
Since, the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.
Rewrite the variable on the left.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Example
SOLVING INEQUALITIES
Example

1.9.6.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Multiply both sides of the inequality by −2.
Since, the inequality reverses.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.

Solve Inequalities That Require Simplification
Most inequalities will take more than one step to solv e. We follow the same steps we used in the general str ategy for solving linear
equations, but be sure to pay close attention during multip lication or division.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Subtract 9m from both sides to collect the variables on the
left.
Simplify.
Divide both sides of the inequality by −5, and reverse the
inequality.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality graph the solution on the number lin e, and write the solution in interval notation.Example
Example
Example

1.9.6.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer
Simplify each side as much as possible. 8p+3(p−12)>7p−28
Distribute. 8p+3p−36>7p−28
Combine like terms. 11p−36>7p−28
Subtract 7p from both sides to collect the variables on the left. 11p−36−7p>7p−28−7p
Simplify. 4p−36>−28
Add 36 to both sides to collect the constants on the ri ght. 4p−36+36>−28+36
Simplify. 4p>8
Divide both sides of the inequality by 4; the inequal ity stays
the same.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Just like some equations are identities and some are c ontradictions, inequalities may be identities or con tradictions, too. We
recognize these forms when we are left with only const ants as we solve the inequality. If the result is a t rue statement, we have an
identity. If the result is a false statement, we have a con tradiction.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the num ber line, and write the solution in interval
notation.
Answer
Simplify each side as much as possible. 8x−2(5−x)<4(x+9)+6 x
Distribute. 8x−10+2x<4x+36+6x
Combine like terms. 10x−10<10x+36
Subtract 10x from both sides to collect the variables o n the
left.10x−10−10x<10x+36−10x
Simplify. −10<36
The xx’s are gone, and we have a true statement.The inequality is an identity.
The solution is all real numbers.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.Example
Example

1.9.6.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer

Multiply both sides by the LCD, 24, to clear the frac tions.
Simplify.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 5a from both sides to collect the variables on the left.
Simplify.
The statement is false! The inequality is a contradiction.
There is no solution.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation. There is no so lution.
Translate to an Inequality and Solve
To translate English sentences into inequalities, we need to recognize the phrases that indicate the in equality. Some words are easy,
like ‘more than’ and ‘less than’. But others are not as obviou s.
Think about the phrase ‘at least’ – what does it mean to be ‘at least 21 years old’? It means 21 or more. The phrase ‘at least’ is the
same as ‘greater than or equal to’.
Table shows some common phrases that indicate inequalities.
Table
is greater than is greater than or equal to is less than is less than or equal to
is more than is at least is smaller than is at most
is larger than is no less than has fewer than is no more than
exceeds is the minimum is lower than is the maximum
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Twelve times c is no more than 96.Example

1.9.6.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109495Answer
Translate.
Solve—divide both sides by 12.
Simplify.
Write in interval notation.
Graph on the number line.
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Thirty less than x is at least 45.
Answer
Translate.
Solve—add 30 to both sides.
Simplify.
Write in interval notation.
Graph on the number line.
Key Concepts
General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations
1. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
Combine like terms.
2. Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equat ion.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
3. Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the e quation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
4. Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1.
Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
State the solution to the equation.
5. Check the solution.
Substitute the solution into the original equation.
This page titled 1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.
2.7: Solve Linear Inequalities by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra2e.
2.6: Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.Example

1.9.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094961.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Solve quadratic equations using the Quadratic Formula
Use the discriminant to predict the number and type of solu tions of a quadratic equation
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve a quad ratic equation
Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
1. Evaluate when and.
If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.
2. Simplify:.
If you missed this problem, review Example 8.13.
3. Simplify:.
If you missed this problem, review Example 8.76.
Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula
When we solved quadratic equations in the last section by completing the square, we took the same steps every time. By the end of
the exercise set, you may have been wondering ‘isn’t there an easier way to do this?’ The answer is ‘yes’. Mathematicians look for
patterns when they do things over and over in order to make their work easier. In this section we will deri ve and use a formula to
find the solution of a quadratic equation.
We have already seen how to solve a formula for a spe cific variable ‘in general’, so that we would do the al gebraic steps only once,
and then use the new formula to find the value of th e specific variable. Now we will go through the steps o f completing the square
using the general form of a quadratic equation to solve a qua dratic equation for.Learning Objectives

1.9.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496We start with the standard form of a quadratic equation a nd solve it for by completing the square.

Isolate the variable terms on one side.
Make the coefficient of equal to, by dividing by.
Simplify.
To complete the square, find and add it to both side s of
the equation.
The left side is a perfect square, factor it.
Find the common denominator of the right side and writ e
equivalent fractions with the common denominator.
Simplify.
Combine to one fraction.
Use the square root property.
Simplify the radical.
Add to both sides of the equation.
Combine the terms on the right side.
The final equation is called the "Quadratic Formula."
The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form, where are given by the formula:
To use the Quadratic Formula, we substitute the values of, and from the standar d form into the expression on the right side
of the formula. Then we simplify the expression. The res ult is the pair of solutions to the quadratic equation.
Notice the Quadratic Formula (Equation) is an equation. Make sure you use both sides of the equation.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.Definition: Quadratic Formula
Example How to Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula

1.9.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Solution
Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in
standard form. Identify the values.This equation is in standard form.
Step 2: Write the quadratic formula.
Then substitute in the values of.Substitute in
Step 3: Simplify the fraction, and solve
for.
Step 4: Check the solutions.Put each answer in the original equation
to check. Substitute and.
1. Write the quadratic equation in standard form,. Id entify the values of, and.
2. Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the valu es of, and.
3. Simplify.
4. Check the solutions.
If you say the formula as you write it in each proble m, you’ll have it memorized in no time! And remember, the Quadratic Formula
is an EQUATION. Be sure you start with “ ”.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.HowTo: Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
Example

1.9.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Solution

Write the equation in standard form by adding to ea ch side.
This equation is now in standard form.
Identify the values of,,.,,
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Simplify.

Check:

When we solved quadratic equations by using the Square Root Property, we sometimes got answers that had radi cals. That can
happen, too, when using the Quadratic Formula. If we get a radical as a solution, the final answer must have the radical in its
simplified form.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.Example

1.9.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Solution

This equation is in standard form.
Identify the values of and.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor out the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
When we substitute, and into the Quadratic Formula an d the radicand is negative, the quadratic equation will have imagi nary
or complex solutions. We will see this in the next exam ple.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
SolutionExample

1.9.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Table 9.3.5

This equation is in standard form.
Identify the values of.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical using complex numbers.
Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite in standard form.
Write as two solutions.
Remember, to use the Quadratic Formula, the equation must be written in standard form,. Sometimes, we will need
to do some algebra to get the equation into standard f orm before we can use the Quadratic Formula.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution
Our first step is to get the equation in standard form.Example

1.9.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Table 9.3.6

Distribute to get the equation in standard form.
This equation is now in standard form.
Identify the values of.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Write as two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
When we solved linear equations, if an equation had to o many fractions we cleared the fractions by multiply ing both sides of the
equation by the LCD. This gave us an equivalent equati on—without fractions— to solve. We can use the same st rategy with
quadratic equations.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution
Our first step is to clear the fractions.Example

1.9.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Table 9.3.7

Multiply both sides by the LCD,, to clear the fracti ons.
Multiply.
Subtract to get the equation in standard form.
Identify the values of, and.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Think about the equation. We know from the Zero Product Property that this equation has only one solution,.
We will see in the next example how using the Quadratic Formula to solve an equation whose standard form is a perfec t square
trinomial equal to gives just one solution. Notice that once the radicand is simplified it becomes, which leads t o only one
solution.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
SolutionExample

1.9.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Table 9.3.8

Add to get the equation in standard form.
Identify the values of, and.
Write the quadratic formula.
Then substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Simplify the fraction.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Did you recognize that is a perfect square trinomial. It is equivalent to? If you solve
by factoring and then using the Square Root Property, do yo u get the same result?
Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
When we solved the quadratic equations in the previou s examples, sometimes we got two real solutions, one real so lution, and
sometimes two complex solutions. Is there a way to predic t the number and type of solutions to a quadratic e quation without
actually solving the equation?
Yes, the expression under the radical of the Quadrat ic Formula makes it easy for us to determine the num ber and type of solutions.
This expression is called the discriminant.
Discriminant
Figure 9.3.85
Let’s look at the discriminant of the equations in s ome of the examples and the number and type of solut ions to those quadratic
equations.
Table 9.3.9Definition

1.9.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Quadratic Equation (in
standard form)Discriminat Value of the Discriminant Number and Type of Solutions
real
real
complex
Figure 9.3.86
Using the Discriminant, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
For a quadratic equation of the form,,
If, the equation has real solutions.
if, the equation has real solution.
if, the equation has complex solutions.
Determine the number of solutions to each quadratic equ ation.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
To determine the number of solutions of each quadratic e quation, we will look at its discriminant.
a.
The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is positive, there are real solut ions to the equation.
b.Example

1.9.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is negative, there are complex s olutions to the equation.
c.
The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is, there is real solution to the equation.
Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Use to Solve a Quadratic Equation
We summarize the four methods that we have used to solve q uadratic equations below.
Methods for Solving Quadratic Equations
1. Factoring
2. Square Root Property
3. Completing the Square
4. Quadratic Formula
Given that we have four methods to use to solve a quad ratic equation, how do you decide which one to use? Fac toring is often the
quickest method and so we try it first. If the equati on is or we use the Square Root Property. For any othe r
equation, it is probably best to use the Quadratic Form ula. Remember, you can solve any quadratic equation b y using the Quadratic
Formula, but that is not always the easiest method.
What about the method of Completing the Square? Most people find that method cumbersome and prefer not to use it. We needed
to include it in the list of methods because we comp leted the square in general to derive the Quadratic Fo rmula. You will also use
the process of Completing the Square in other areas of alge bra.

1.9.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Solve a Quadratic Equation
1. Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this method is v ery quick.
2. Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form or, it can easily be solved by using the
Square Root Property.
3. Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using th e Quadratic Formula.
The next example uses this strategy to decide how to solve e ach quadratic equation.
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each q uadratic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
Since the equation is in the, the most appropriate metho d is to use the Square Root Property.
b.
We recognize that the left side of the equation is a perfect square trinomial, and so factoring will be t he most appropriate
method.
c.
Put the equation in standard form.
While our first thought may be to try factoring, th inking about all the possibilities for trial and erro r method leads us to
choose the Quadratic Formula as the most appropriate metho d.
Problems Involving the Quadratic Formula
First comes the quadratic equation, then comes the qu adratic formula. The quadratic formula is the soluti on to the quadratic
equation:
in which
x is the variable whose value is sought, and a, b, and c are co nstants
The goal is to find the value of x that makes the left side 0. That value is given by the quadratic formula:
to be read/said:
‘x’ equals minus ‘b’, plus-or-minus the square root of ‘b’ sq uared minus four ‘a’ ‘c’, all over two ‘a’.
So, how do you know when you have to use the quadratic formula? There is a good chance that you need it whe n the square of the
variable for which you are solving, appears in the equ ation you are solving. When that is the case, carry ou t the algebraic stepsExample

1.9.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496needed to arrange the terms as they are arranged in equation 1-8 above. If this is impossible, then the quadratic formula is not to be
used. Note that in the quadratic equation you have a term with the variable to the second power, a term with the variable to the first
power, and a term with the variable to the zeroth power (the constant term). If additional powers also appea r, such as the one-half
power (the square root), or the third power, then the quadratic formula does not apply. If the equation i ncludes additional terms in
which the variable whose value is sought appears as the argument of a special function such as the sine fu nction or the exponential
function, then the quadratic formula does not apply. Now suppose that there is a square term and you can g et the equation that you
are solving in the form of equation 1-8 above but t hat either b or c is zero. In such a case, you can u se the quadratic formula, but it
is overkill. If b in equation 1-8 above is zero then the eq uation reduces to:
The easy way to solve this problem is to recognize tha t there is at least one x in each term, and to factor the x out. This yields:
Then you have to realize that a product of two multi plicands is equal to zero if either multiplicand is equal to zero. Thus, setting
either multiplicand equal to zero and solving for x yields a solution. We have two multiplicands involvi ng x, so, there are two
solutions to the equation. The second multiplicand in the exp ression is x itself, so
is a solution to the equation. Setting the first term equal to zero gives:
Now suppose the b in the quadratic equation, equation 1-8, i s zero. In that case, the quadratic equation reduces to:
which can easily be solved without the quadratic formula as f ollows:
where we have emphasized the fact that there are two sq uare roots to every value by placing a plus-or-minu s sign in front of the
radical.
Now, if upon arranging the given equation in the form of t he quadratic equation (equation 1-8):
you find that a, b, and c are all non-zero, then you should use the quadratic formula. Here we present an example of a problem
whose solution involves the quadratic formula:
Given
find x.
SolutionExample: Quadratic Formula Example Problem

1.9.7.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496At first glance, this one doesn’t look like a quadrat ic equation, but as we begin isolating x, as we always stri ve to do in solving
for x, (hey, once we have x all by itself on the left side of the equation, with no x on the right side of the equation, we have
indeed solved for x—that’s what it means to solve for x) we quickly find that it is a quadratic equation. Whe never we have the
unknown in the denominator of a fraction, the first s tep in isolating that unknown is to multiply both side s of the equation by
the denominator. In the case at hand, this yields:
Multiplying through on the left we find
At this point it is pretty clear that we are dealing with a quadratic equation so our goal becomes gettin g it into the standard
form of the quadratic equation, the form of equatio n 1-8, namely:. Combining the terms involving x on the left
and rearranging we obtain
Subtracting 24 from both sides yields:
which is indeed in the standard quadratic equation fo rm. Now we just have to use inspection to identify which values in our
given equation are the a, b, and c that appear in th e standard quadratic equation (equation 1-8). Althou gh it is
not written, the constant multiplying the x, in the case a t hand, is just 1. So we have a = 1, b = 4, and c = −21.
Substituting these values into the quadratic formula (eq uation 1-9):
yields
which results in x=3,x=-7
as the solutions to the problem. As a quick check we substitut e each of these values back into the original equation:
and find that each substitution leads to an identity. (An identity is an equation whose validity is trivially obvious, such as 6 =
6.)
Key Concepts
Quadratic Formula
The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form are g iven by the formula:
How to solve a quadratic equation using the Quadratic Formula.
1. Write the quadratic equation in standard form,. Id entify the values of.
2. Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the valu es of.
3. Simplify.
4. Check the solutions.
Using the Discriminant,, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
For a quadratic equation of the form,2

1.9.7.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109496If, the equation has real solutions.
If, the equation has real solution.
If, the equation has complex solutions.
Methods to Solve Quadratic Equations:
Factoring
Square Root Property
Completing the Square
Quadratic Formula
How to identify the most appropriate method to solve a quad ratic equation.
1. Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this me thod is very quick.
2. Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form or, it can easily be s olved by using
the Square Root Property.
3. Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using th e Quadratic Formula.
Glossary
discriminant
In the Quadratic Formula,, the quantity is called the d iscriminant.
This page titled 1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.4: Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.
1A: Mathematical Prelude by Jeffrey W. Schnick is licensed CC BY-SA 2.5. Original source: http://www.cbphysics.org.

1.9.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094971.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using The Substitution Method
Solve a system of equations using the substitution method.
Recognize systems of equations that have no solution or a n infinite number of solutions.
Solve application problems using the substitution method.
Using Substitution to Solve a System of Equations
In the substitution method, you solve for one variabl e and then substitute that expression into the other equation. The important
thing here is that you are always substituting values that are equivalent.
For example:
Sean is 5 years older than four times his daughter’s age. His daug hter is 7. How old is Sean?
You might do this problem in your head. Sean’s daugh ter is 7, so “four times his daughter’s age” is 28, a nd 5 years added to that is
33. Sean is 33.
If you solved the problem like that, you used a simp le substitution—you substituted in the value “7” for “his daughter’s age.” You
learned in the second part of the problem that “his daughter is 7.” So substituting in a value of “7” fo r “his daughter’s age” in the
first part of the problem was okay, because you knew these t wo quantities were equal.
Let’s look at a simple system of equations that can be s olved using substitution.
Find the value of for this system.
Equation A:
Equation B:
Solution
The problem asks to solve for.
Equation B gives you the value of,, so you can
substitute 2 into Equation A for.
Substituting into Equation A.
Simplify and solve the equation for.
You can substitute a value for a variable even if it is an expression. Here’s an example.
Solve for and.
Equation A:
Equation B: Learning Objectives
Example
Example

1.9.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497Solution
The goal of the substitution method is to rewrite one of the
equations in terms of a single variable. Equation tel ls us
that, so it makes sense to substitute that into
Equation A for.
Substitute into Equation A for and you get
Simplify and solve the equation to get.
To now find, substitute this value for into either e quation
and solve for. We will use Equation A here to get.
TRUE TRUEFinally, check the solution, by substituting these
values into each of the original equations.
and The solution is.
Remember, a solution to a system of equations must be a solution to each of the equations within the syst em. The ordered pair
works for both equations, so you know that it is a solution to the system as well.
Let’s look at another example whose substitution involv es the distributive property.
Solve for and.Example

1.9.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497Solution
Choose an equation to use for the substitution.
The first equation tells you how to express in terms of, so
it makes sense to substitute into the second equation
for.
Substitute for into the second equation.
Simplify and solve the equation for.
To find, substitute this value for back into one of the
original equations.
TRUE TRUECheck the solution, by substituting them into
each of the original equations.
and.
The solution is.
In the examples above, one of the equations was alre ady given to us in terms of the variable or. This allowed us to quickly
substitute that value into the other equation and solve for one of the unknowns.
Sometimes you may have to rewrite one of the equations in terms of one of the variables first before you ca n substitute. Look at the
example below.
Solve for and.Example

1.9.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497Solution
Choose an equation to use for the substitution. The seco nd
equation,, can easily be rewritten in terms of, so
it makes sense to start there.
Rewrite in terms of.
Substitute for in the other equation as
Simplify and solve the equation for.
Substitute back into one of the original equations to
solve for.
TRUE TRUECheck both solutions by substituting them into each of the
original equations.
and
The solution is.
Special Situations
There are some cases where using the substitution metho d will yield results that, at first, do not make sense. Let’s take a look at
some of these and figure out what is going on.
Solve for and.
Solution
Since the first equation is, you can substitute
in for in the second equation.
Expand the expression on the left.
Combine like terms on the left side of equation.
, so you are left with.
The statement is false, so there is no solution.
You get the false statement. What does this mean? The gr aph of this system sheds some light on what is happeni ng.Example

1.9.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497
The lines are parallel. They never intersect and ther e is no solution to this system of linear equations. No te that the result
is not a solution. It is simply a false statement and it indica tes that there is no solution.
Now take this problem, which is interesting as well.
Substituting for in the second equation, you find the following:
This time, you get a true statement:. But what does this type of answer mean? Again, graphing can help you make
sense of this system.
This system consists of two equations that both repres ent the same line; the two lines are collinear. Every point along the line will
be a solution to the system, and that’s why the substit ution method yields a true statement. In this case, th ere are an infinite number
of solutions.
Solving Application Problems Using Substitution
Systems of equations are a very useful tool for model ing real-life situations and answering questions about them. If you can
translate the application into two linear equations wi th two variables, then you have a system of equation s that you can solve to find
the solution. You can use any method to solve the syst em of equations. Use the substitution method in this topi c.

1.9.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497In order to sell more of its produce, a local farm sel ls bags of apples in two sizes: medium and large. A me dium bag contains 4
Macintosh and 1 Granny Smith apples and costs $2.80. A la rge bag contains 8 Macintosh and 4 Granny Smith apples and costs
$7.20. The price of one Granny Smith apple is the same i n the medium bag as it is in the large bag. The price of one Macintosh
apple is the same in the medium bag as it is in the large bag. What is the price of each kind of apple?
Let’s start by creating a system of equations that r epresents what is happening in the problem. There are two types of apples and
two sizes of bags. You can let represent the cost of a Macintosh apple and represent the cost of a Grann y Smith apple. Let’s
make a table and see what is known.
Cost of Macintosh
apples+Cost of Granny
Smith apples= Total cost of bag
Medium + = $2.80
Large + = $7.20
Now that you have two equations in the same variables, you can solve the system. You will use substitution. The st eps are shown in
the example below:
Solve for and using the substitution method.
Solution
First, rewrite one of the equations in terms of one of the
variables.
Substitute for in the second equation and solve
for.
Substitute the value of,, into one of the original
equations to solve for.
Check both equations by substituting in the values of and

One Granny Smith apple costs $0.80 and one Macintosh apple costs $0.50.
Using the substitution method can be an effective approac h to solving geometric problems.Example

1.9.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109497The perimeter of a rectangle is 60 inches. If the length is 10 inches longer than the width, find the dimensions using the
substitution method.
Solution
Use the information provided to write a system of equat ions.
Let and.
Substitute for in the first equation and solve for.
To find, substitute 10 for in one of the equations a nd
solve for.
Check both solutions by substituting them into the two
equations.
Both of them are true, so this is a correct solution.
The length of the rectangle is 20 inches.
The width of the rectangle is 10 inches.
This page titled 1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using The Su bstitution Method is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by The NROC Project via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.2.1: The Substitution Method by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.Example

1.9.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094981.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Elimination Method
Solve application problems using the elimination method.
Solve a system of equations when no multiplication is necessa ry to eliminate a variable.
Solve a system of equations when multiplication is necessary t o eliminate a variable.
Recognize systems that have no solution or an infinite nu mber of solutions.
Solve application problems using the elimination method.
Recognize systems that have no solution or an infinite nu mber of solutions.
Solving a System of Equations Using the Elimination Method
The elimination method for solving systems of linear equations uses the ad dition property of equality. You can add the same va lue
to each side of an equation.
So if you have a system: and, you can add to the left side of the first equation and add 8 to the rig ht
side of the equation. And since, you are adding the same value to each side of the first equation.
Using Addition to Eliminate a Variable
If you add the two equations, and together, as noted abo ve, watch what happens.
You have eliminated the term, and this equation can be solved using the methods for solving equations with o ne variable.
Let’s see how this system is solved using the eliminat ion method.
Use elimination to solve the system.
Solution
Add the equations.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations and solve
for.
TRUE TRUEBe sure to check your answer in both equations!
The answers check.
The solution is.Example

1.9.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Unfortunately, not all systems work out this easily. How a bout a system like and? If you add these two
equations together, no variables are eliminated.
But you want to eliminate a variable. So let’s add the opposite of one of the equations to the other equation.
You have eliminated the variable, and the problem can now be solved. See the example below.
Use elimination to solve the system.
Solution
You can eliminate the y-variable if you add the opp osite of one
of the equations to the other equation.
Rewrite the second equation as its opposite.
Add.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations and solve
for.
TRUE TRUEBe sure to check your answer in both equations!
The answers check.
The solution is.
The following are two more examples showing how to solve lin ear systems of equations using elimination.
Use elimination to solve the system.Example
Example

1.9.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
Notice the coefficients of each variable in each equ ation. If
you add these two equations, the term will be elimina ted
since.
Add and solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations.
TRUE TRUECheck solutions.
The answers check.
The solution is.
Use elimination to solve for and.
Solution
Notice the coefficients of each variable in each equ ation. You
will need to add the opposite of one of the equation s to
eliminate the variable, as, but.
Change one of the equations to its opposite, add and so lve for
Substitute into one of the original equations and solve
for.
The solution is.
Go ahead and check this last example—substitute into bot h equations. You get two true statements: and!
Notice that you could have used the opposite of the first equ ation rather than the second equation and gotten the sam e result.
Using Multiplication and Addition to Eliminate a Variables
Many times, adding the equations or adding the opposite of one of the equations will not result in eliminat ing a variable. Look at
the system below.Example

1.9.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498If you add the equations above, or add the opposite of one of the equations, you will get an equation th at still has two variables. So
let’s now use the multiplication property of equalit y first. You can multiply both sides of one of the e quations by a number that will
result in the coefficient of one of the variables bei ng the opposite of the same variable in the other equatio n.
This is where multiplication comes in handy. The first e quation contains the term and the second equation contains the term.
If you multiply the second equation by -4, when you add bo th equations, the variables will add up to 0.
See the example below.
Solve for and.
Equation A:
Equation B:
Solution
Look for terms that can be eliminated. The equations do not
have any or terms with the same coefficients.
Multiply the second equation by -4 so they have the sa me
coefficient.
Rewrite the system, and add the equations.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations to find.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer.
The answers check.
The solution is.
There are other ways to solve this system. Instead of m ultiplying one equation in order to eliminate a var iable when the equations
were added, you could have multiplied both equations by different numbers.
Let’s remove the variable this time. Multiply Equatio n A by 5 and Equation B by -3.
Solve for and.Example
Example

1.9.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
Look for terms that can be eliminated. The equations do not
have any and terms with the same coefficient.
In order to use the elimination method, you have to create
variables that have the same coefficient—then you can
eliminate them. Multiply the top equation by 5.
Now multiply the bottom equation by -3.
Next add the equations, and solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations to find.
The solution is. You arrive at the same solution as before.
These equations were multiplied by 5 and -3 respective ly, because that gave you terms that would add up to 0. Be sure to multiply
all of the terms of the equation.
Special Situations
Just as with the substitution method, the elimination method will sometimes eliminate both variables, and you end up with either a
true statement or a false statement. Recall that a fal se statement means that there is no solution.
Let’s look at an example.
Solve for and.
Solution
Add the equations to eliminate the x-term.
There is no solution.
Graphing these lines shows that they are parallel lin es and as such do not share any point in common, ver ifying that there is no
solution.Example

1.9.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498
If both variables are eliminated and you are left wi th a true statement, this indicates that there are an infinite number of ordered
pairs that satisfy both of the equations. In fact, the equ ations are the same line.
Solve for and.
Solution
Add the equations to eliminate the x-term.
There are an infinite number of solutions.
Graphing these two equations will help to illustrate what is h appening.
Solving Application Problems Using the Elimination Method
The elimination method can be applied to solving sys tems of equations that model real situations. Two exam ples of using the
elimination method in problem solving are shown below.Example

1.9.9.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498The sum of two numbers is 10. Their difference is 6. What a re the two numbers?
Solution
Write a system of equations to model the situation.
=one number
=the other number
Add the equations to eliminate the y-term and then so lve for
Substitute the value for into one of the original eq uations to
find.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer by substituting and into the
original system.
The answers check.
The numbers are 8 and 2.
A theater sold 800 tickets for Friday night’s perfor mance. One child ticket costs $4.50 and one adult tic ket costs $6.00. The
total amount collected was $4,500. How many of each type of ticket were sold?Example
Example

1.9.9.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
The total number of tickets sold is.
The amount of money collected is
System of equations:Write a system of equations to model the ticket sale si tuation.
=number of adult tickets sold
=number of child tickets sold
Use multiplication to re-write the first equation.
Add the opposite of the second equation to eliminate a term
and solve for.
Substitute 200 in for in one of the original equatio ns.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer by substituting and into
the original system.
The answers check.
600 adult tickets and 200 child tickets were sold.
Solving A System of Three Linear Equations with Three Variables
Equations can have more than one or two variables. You are go ing to look at equations with three variables. Equati ons with one
variable graph on a line. Equations with two variable s graph on a plane. Equations with three variables g raph in a 3-dimensional
space.
Equations with one variable require only one equatio n to have a unique (one) solution. Equations with two variables require two
equations to have a unique solution (one ordered pa ir). So it should not be a surprise that equations wit h three variables require a
system of three equations to have a unique solution (one ord ered triplet).
Solving A System of Three Variables
Just as when solving a system of two equations, there a re three possible outcomes for the solution of a syste m of three variables.
Let’s look at this visually, although you will not be graphing these equations.
Case 1: There is one solution. In order for three equations wi th three variables to have one solution, the planes m ust intersect in a
single point.

1.9.9.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Case 2: There is no solution. The three planes do not have any points in common. (Note that two of the equations may have points
in common with each other, but not all three.) Below are exa mples of some of the ways this can happen.
Case 3: There are an infinite number of solutions. This occur s when the three planes intersect in a line. And this ca n also occur
when the three equations graph as the same plane.
Let’s start by looking at Case 1, where the system has a unique (one) solution. This is the case that you are usually most interested
in.
Here is a system of linear equations. There are three va riables and three equations.
You know how to solve a system with two equations and two variables. For the first step, use the elimination met hod to remove one
of the variables. In this case, can be eliminated by addin g the first and second equations.
To solve the system, though, you need two equations using two variables. Adding the first and thi rd equations in the original system
will also give an equation with and but not.
Now you have a system of two equations and two variables.
Solve the system using elimination again. In this case, you can eliminate by adding the opposite of the second e quation:
Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Now you use one of the equations in the two-variable syste m to find.

1.9.9.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Finally, use any equation from the first system, along with the values al ready found, to solve for the last variable.
Be sure to check your answer. With this many steps, there are a lot of places to make a si mple error!
Since,, and is a solution for all three equations, it’s the solution for the system of equations. Just as two values
can be written as an ordered pair, three values can be writt en as an ordered triplet:.
1. Choose two equations and use them to eliminate one vari able.
2. Choose another pair of equations and use them to eli minate the same variable.
3. Use the resulting pair of equations from steps 1 and 2 t o eliminate one of the two remaining variables.
4. Solve the final equation for the remaining variable.
5. Find the value of the second variable. Do this by using one o f the resulting equations from steps 1 and 2 and the valu e of
the found variable from step 4.
6. Find the value of the third variable. Do this by using one of the original equations and the values of the found v ariables
from steps 4 and 5.
7. Check your answer in all three equations!
Solve for,, and.Solving a system of three variables
Example

1.9.9.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
Step 1: Choose two equations and eliminate a variable. The
first two equations can be added to eliminate.
Step 2: The third equation has no variable, so there’ s
nothing to eliminate! You have a system of two equati ons and
two variables.
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable. These equations ca n be
added to eliminate.
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations from th e
system in step 3 that involves just two variables, one of which
was that you already know. Solve for the second varia ble.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the original
equations that had all three variables to solve for th e third
variable.
Step 7: Check your answer.
The solution is.
As with systems of two equations with two variables, you may need to add the opposite of one of the equations o r even multiply
one of the equations before adding in order to elimina te one of the variables.
Solve for,, and.Example

1.9.9.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
Step 1: First, choose two equations and eliminate a vari able.
Multiply the second equation by -1, and then add it to the first
equation. This will eliminate.
Step 2: Next, combine the third equation and one of t he first
two to eliminate again. However, the third equation has a
coefficient of -4 on while the coefficients in the first two
equations are both 1. So, multiply the second equation by 4
and add.
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable using the equation s from
steps 1 and 2. Again, they cannot be added as they are. Look at
the coefficients on. If you multiply the equation f rom step 1
by -3, the terms will have the same coefficient.
Multiply and then add. Be careful of the signs!
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations from th e
system in step 3, that involves just two variables, one o f which
was. Solve for the second variable.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the original
equations to solve for the third variable.
Step 7: Check your answer.
The solution is.
These systems can be helpful for solving real-world problem s.

1.9.9.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Andrea sells photographs at art fairs. She prices the photos according to size: small photos cost $10, mediu m photos cost $15,
and large photos cost $40. She usually sells as many sm all photos as medium and large photos combined. She al so sells twice
as many medium photos as large. A booth at the art fair cos ts $300.
If her sales go as usual, how many of each size photo mu st she sell to pay for the booth?Example

1.9.9.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Solution
=number of small photos sold
=number of medium photos sold
=number of large photos sold
=money received for small photos
=money received for medium photos
=money received for large photosTo set up the system, first choose the variables. In this case the
unknown values are the number of small, medium, and l arge
photos.
The total of her sales must be $300 to pay for the boo th.
The number of small photos is the same as the total of m edium
and large photos.
She sells twice as many medium photos as large photos.
To make things easier, rewrite the equations to be in the same
format, with all variables on the left side of the equ al sign and
only a constant number on the right.
Now solve the system.
Step 1: First choose two equations and eliminate a varia ble.
Since one equation has no variable, it may be helpfu l to use
the other two equations and eliminate the variable from
them.
Multiply the second equation by -10 and add.
Step 2: The second equation for our two-variable system will
be the remaining equation (that has no variable).
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable using the equation s from
steps 1 and 2.
While you could multiply the second equation by 25 t o
eliminate, the numbers will be easier to work with if y ou
divide the first equation by 25. Don’t forget to be c areful of
the signs!
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations contain ing just
two variables, one of those variables being, that you
already know, to solve for the second
variable. t’s best to use one of the original equations—in
case an error was made in multiplication.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the origina l
equations to solve for the third variable.
You can even use one of the equations before you rewro te it
for the system.
She usually sells as many small photos as medium and large
photos combined.
Medium and large photos combined, which is the
number of small photos.
She also sells twice as many medium photos as large. Step 7: Check your answer.

1.9.9.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Medium photos is 6, which is twice the number of large
photos (3).With application problems, it’s sometimes easier (and be tter)
to use the original wording of the problem rather tha n the
equations you write.
A booth at the art fair costs $300. Andrea receives $10 (9) or
$90 for the 9 small photos, $15(6) or $90 for the 6 m edium
photos, and $40(3) or $120 for the large photos.
If Andrea sells small photos, medium photos, and larg e photos, she’ll receive exactly the amount of mone y needed to pay
for the booth.
Systems with No Solutions or an Infinite Number of Solutions
Now let’s look at Case 2 (no solution) and Case 3 (an inf inite number of solutions).
Since you will not graph these equations, as it is dif ficult to graph in three dimensions on a 2-dimensiona l sheet of paper, you will
look at what happens when you try to solve systems with no soluti ons or an infinite number of solutions.
Let’s look at a system that has no solutions.
Suppose you wanted to solve this system, and you started wit h the last two equations. Multiply the third equation b y 4 and add it to
the second equation to eliminate.
In this case, the result is a false statement. This means there are no solutions to the t wo equations and therefore there can be no
solutions for the system of three equations. If this o ccurs for any two of the three equations, then there is no solution for the system
of equations.
Now let’s look at a system that has an infinite number of solut ions.
For the first step, you would choose two equations and co mbine them to eliminate a variable. You can eliminat e by multiplying
the first equation by 3 and adding to the second equation.
Notice that when the two equations are added, all variables are eliminated! The final equation is a true statement:.
When this happens, it’s because the two equations are equivalent. These two equations would graph as the same plane. B ut in order
for the solution to the system of three equations to be infin ite, you need to continue to check with the third equatio n.
Since the first two equations are equivalent, the syste m of equations could be written with only two equations. Continue as before.
Multiply the first equation by -4 and add the third equati on.

1.9.9.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109498Again, the final equation is the true statement. So t he third equation is the same plane as the first two. Now you can confirm
that there are an infinite number of solutions—all of t he points that are on the plane that these three equation s each describe.
This is one type of situation where there are an infin ite number of solutions. There are others, which you will not examine at this
time.
How many solutions does the following system of equations have?
Solution
Multiply the first equation by -2 and then add that resulting
equation to the second equation.
is a true statement, which leads us to believe that yo u
may have an infinite number of solutions. This outcome
indicates that the first pair of equations is really th e same
equation. The values of,, and that will make the first
equation work will also work for the second.
Now add the third equation with the first.
Again, the result is another true statement. The first and third
equations are the same. So you have three equations tha t will
all graph as the same plane.
There are an infinite number of solutions to this system.
Solve the following system of equations.
Solution
Compare the coefficients on the terms. Multiply the first
equation by -4 and then add that resulting equation to the
second equation.
Notice that a false statement is produced:. This
means that there is no solution to this system of equatio ns; you
do not have to complete any further steps.
The system has no solutions.Example
Example

1.9.9.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094981.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the E limination Method is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by LibreTexts.
14.2.1: The Substitution Method by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.
14.2.2: The Elimination Method by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.
14.3.1: Solving Systems of Three Variables by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.

1.9.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1094991.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
Evaluate 2 × 2 determinants.
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of equations in two v ariables.
Evaluate 3 × 3 determinants.
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations in three variables.
Know the properties of determinants.
We have learned how to solve systems of equations in t wo variables and three variables, and by multiple meth ods: substitution,
addition, Gaussian elimination, using the inverse of a matrix, and graphing. Some of these methods are easier to apply than others
and are more appropriate in certain situations. In this section, we will study two more strategies for solving systems of equations.
Evaluating the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix
A determinant is a real number that can be very use ful in mathematics because it has multiple applicatio ns, such as calculating area,
volume, and other quantities. Here, we will use determina nts to reveal whether a matrix is invertible by using the entries of a square
matrix to determine whether there is a solution to t he system of equations. Perhaps one of the more interes ting applications,
however, is their use in cryptography. Secure signals or messages are sometimes sent encoded in a matrix. The data can only be
decrypted with an invertible matrix and the determin ant. For our purposes, we focus on the determinant as a n indication of the
invertibility of the matrix. Calculating the determi nant of a matrix involves following the specific patt erns that are outlined in this
section.
The determinant of a 2 × 2 matrix, given
is defined as
Notice the change in notation. There are several ways to indicate the determinant, including and replaci ng the brackets
in a matrix with straight lines,.
Find the determinant of the given matrix.
Solution
Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations in Two Variables
We will now introduce a final method for solving syste ms of equations that uses determinants. Known as Cramer’s Rule, this
technique dates back to the middle of the 18th centu ry and is named for its innovator, the Swiss mathemati cian Gabriel CramerLearning Objectives
FIND THE DETERMINANT OF A 2 × 2 MATRIX
Example: Finding the Determinant of a Matrix

1.9.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499(1704-1752), who introduced it in 1750 in Introduction à l'Analyse des lignes Courbes algébriq ues. Cramer’s Rule is a viable and
efficient method for finding solutions to systems with an arbitrary number of unknowns, provided that we hav e the same number of
equations as unknowns.
Cramer’s Rule will give us the unique solution to a system of equations, if it exists. However, if the syste m has no solution or an
infinite number of solutions, this will be indicated b y a determinant of zero. To find out if the system is inconsistent or dependent,
another method, such as elimination, will have to be used.
To understand Cramer’s Rule, let’s look closely at ho w we solve systems of linear equations using basic row ope rations. Consider a
system of two equations in two variables.
We eliminate one variable using row operations and s olve for the other. Say that we wish to solve for. If E quation is
multiplied by the opposite of the coefficient of i n Equation, Equation is multiplied by the coeffic ient of in
Equation, and we add the two equations, the variable wil l be eliminated.
Now, solve for.
Similarly, to solve for,we will eliminate.
Solving for gives
Notice that the denominator for both and is the dete rminant of the coefficient matrix.
We can use these formulas to solve for and, but Crame r’s Rule also introduces new notation:
:determinant of the coefficient matrix
:determinant of the numerator in the solution of
:determinant of the numerator in the solution of
The key to Cramer’s Rule is replacing the variable c olumn of interest with the constant column and calcul ating the determinants.
We can then express and as a quotient of two determina nts.

1.9.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Cramer’s Rule is a method that uses determinants to solve systems of equations that have the same numbe r of equations as
variables.
Consider a system of two linear equations in two variables.
The solution using Cramer’s Rule is given as
If we are solving for, the column is replaced with the constant column. If we are solving for, the colu mn is replaced
with the constant column.
Solve the following system using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
Solve for.
Solve for.CRAMER’S RULE FOR SYSTEMS
Example: Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System

1.9.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499The solution is.
Evaluating the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
Finding the determinant of a 2×2 matrix is straightfo rward, but finding the determinant of a 3×3 matrix is more complicated. One
method is to augment the 3×3 matrix with a repetition of the first two columns, giving a 3×5 matrix. Then we calculate the sum of
the products of entries down each of the three diagonals (upper left to lower rig ht), and subtract the products of entries up each of
the three diagonals (lower left to upper right). This is more easily understood with a visual and an example.
Find the determinant of the 3×3 matrix.
1. Augment with the first two columns.
2. From upper left to lower right: Multiply the entries down th e first diagonal. Add the result to the product of entries d own the
second diagonal. Add this result to the product of the entr ies down the third diagonal.
3. From lower left to upper right: Subtract the product of ent ries up the first diagonal. From this result subtract the pr oduct of
entries up the second diagonal. From this result, subtract the product of entries up the third diagonal.
The algebra is as follows:
Find the determinant of the matrix given
Solution
Augment the matrix with the first two columns and then fo llow the formula. Thus,
This method works well for 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 matrices. For larger matrices it is best to use computer software to c omplete the
calculations.Example: Finding the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
Q&A: Can we use the same method to find the determinant of a larger matrix?

1.9.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations in Three Variables
Now that we can find the determinant of a matrix, we c an apply Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three eq uations in three
variables. Cramer’s Rule is straightforward, following a pattern consistent with Cramer’s Rule for matrices. As the order of
the matrix increases to, however, there are many more cal culations required.
When we calculate the determinant to be zero, Cramer ’s Rule gives no indication as to whether the system has no solution or an
infinite number of solutions. To find out, we have to perf orm elimination on the system.
Consider a system of equations.
where
If we are writing the determinant,we replace the col umn with the constant column. If we are writing the det erminant,we
replace they y column with the constant column. If we are writing the determinant,we replace the column wi th the constant
column. Always check the answer.
Find the solution to the given system using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
Use Cramer’s Rule.
Then,
The solution is.
Special Situations: No Solutions or Infinite Number of SolutionsExample: Solving a System Using Cramer’s Rule

1.9.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Solve the system of equations using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
We begin by finding the determinants,,and.
We know that a determinant of zero means that either the system has no solution or it has an infinite n umber of solutions.
To see which one, we use the process of elimination. Our goal is to eliminate one of the variables.
1. Multiply Equation by.
2. Add the result to Equation.
We obtain the equation, which is false. Therefore, th e system has no solution. Graphing the system reveals t wo
parallel lines. See Figure.
Figure
Solve the system with an infinite number of solutions.
Solution
Let’s find the determinant first. Set up a matrix augment ed by the first two columns.Example: Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve an Inconsistent System
Example: Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a Dependent System

1.9.10.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Then,
As the determinant equals zero, there is either no solu tion or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform
elimination to find out.
1. Multiply Equation by and add the result to Equation:
2. Obtaining an answer of, a statement that is always true, means that the system has an infinite number of solutions.
Graphing the system, we can see that two of the planes ar e the same and they both intersect the third plane on a line. See
Figure.
Figure
Understanding Properties of Determinants
There are many properties of determinants. Listed h ere are some properties that may be helpful in calcu lating the determinant of a
matrix.
1. If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determin ant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.
2. When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.
3. If either two rows or two columns are identical, the deter minant equals zero.
4. If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column o f zeros, the determinant equals zero.
5. The determinant of an inverse matrix is the recipr ocal of the determinant of the matrix.
6. If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the de terminant is multiplied by the same factor.
Illustrate each of the properties of determinants.
Solution
Property 1 states that if the matrix is in upper tria ngular form, the determinant is the product of the e ntries down the main
diagonal.
Augment with the first two columns.
ThenPROPERTIES OF DETERMINANTS
Example: Illustrating Properties of Determinants

1.9.10.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Property 2 states that interchanging rows changes the sign. Given
Property 3 states that if two rows or two columns are identic al, the determinant equals zero.
Property 4 states that if a row or column equals zero, the determinant equals zero. Thus,
Property 5 states that the determinant of an inverse matr ix is the reciprocal of the determinant. Thus,
Property 6 states that if any row or column of a matr ix is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same
factor. Thus,

1.9.10.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109499Find the solution to the given system.
Solution
Using Cramer’s Rule, we have
Notice that the second and third columns are identic al. According to Property 3, the determinant will be ze ro, so there is
either no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to find out.
1. Multiply Equation by and add the result to Equation.
Obtaining a statement that is a contradiction means that the system has no solution.
Key Concepts
The determinant for is. See Example.
Cramer’s Rule replaces a variable column with the con stant column. Solutions are,. See Example.
To find the determinant of a matrix, augment with the first two columns. Add the three diagonal entries (upper left t o
lower right) and subtract the three diagonal entries (lower left to upper right). See Example.
To solve a system of three equations in three variables us ing Cramer’s Rule, replace a variable column with the co nstant column
for each desired solution:,,. See Example.
Cramer’s Rule is also useful for finding the solution of a system of equations with no solution or infinite solution s. See Example
and Example.
Certain properties of determinants are useful for solving problems. For example:
If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinan t equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.
When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes s ign.
If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determi nant equals zero.
If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of z eros, the determinant equals zero.
The determinant of an inverse matrix is the reciproc al of the determinant of the matrix.
If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the dete rminant is multiplied by the same factor. See Example and
Example.
This page titled 1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cram er's Rule is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.8: Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.Example: Using Cramer’s Rule and Determinant Properties to Solve a System

1.9.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095001.9.11: Functions
Use functional notation to evaluate a function.
Determine the domain and range of a function.
Draw the graph of a function.
Find the zeros of a function.
Make new functions from two or more given functions.
Describe the symmetry properties of a function.
Determine the conditions for when a function has an inve rse.
Use the horizontal line test to recognize when a function is one-to-one.
Find the inverse of a given function.
Draw the graph of an inverse function.
Functions
Given two sets and a set with elements that are order ed pairs where is an element of and is an element of is a
relation from to. A relation from to defines a r elationship between those two sets. A function is a spe cial type of relation in
which each element of the first set is related to ex actly one element of the second set. The element of the first set is called the
input; the element of the second set is called the output. Functions are used all the time in mathematics to d escribe relationships
between two sets. For any function, when we know the input, the output is determined, so we say that the output i s a function of the
input. For example, the area of a square is determine d by its side length, so we say that the area (the out put) is a function of its side
length (the input). The velocity of a ball thrown in the air can be described as a function of the amou nt of time the ball is in the air.
The cost of mailing a package is a function of the we ight of the package. Since functions have so many uses, it is important to have
precise definitions and terminology to study them.
Figure: A function can be visualized as an input/outp ut device
A function consists of a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for assigning each input to exactly one output. The set of
inputs is called the domain of the function. The set of outputs is called the range of the function.
Figure: A function maps every element in the domain to exactly one element in the range. Although each input can be sent
to only one output, two different inputs can be sent to the same output.
For example, consider the function, where the domain is the set of all real numbers and the rule is to squa re the input. Then, the
input is assigned to the output.
Since every nonnegative real number has a real-value square root, every nonnegative number is an element of the range of this
function. Since there is no real number with a square that is negative, the negative real numbers are not el ements of the range. WeLearning Objectives
Definition: Functions

1.9.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500conclude that the range is the set of nonnegative real num bers.
For a general function with domain, we often use to denote the input and to denote the output associate d with. When
doing so, we refer to as the independent variable and as the dependent variable, because it depends on. Using function
notation, we write, and we read this equation as “ equa ls of For the squaring function described earlier, we wr ite
Algebraic Formulas
Sometimes we are given a function in an explicit formu la. Formulas arise in many applications. For example, the area of a circle of
radius is given by the formula. When an object is thrown upward from the ground with an initial velocity ft/s, its
height above the ground from the time it is thrown u ntil it hits the ground is given by the formula. W hen
dollars are invested in an account at an annual int erest rate compounded continuously, the amount of money after years is given
by the formula. Algebraic formulas are important to ols to calculate function values. Often we also repres ent these
functions visually in graph form.
Given an algebraic formula for a function, the grap h of is the set of points, where is in the domain of and is in
the range. To graph a function given by a formula, i t is helpful to begin by using the formula to create a table of inputs and outputs.
If the domain of consists of an infinite number of values, we cannot list all of them, but because listi ng some of the inputs and
outputs can be very useful, it is often a good way to begin.
When creating a table of inputs and outputs, we typic ally check to determine whether zero is an output. T hose values of where
are called the zeros of a function. For example, the zeros of are. The zeros determine where the graph
of intersects the -axis, which gives us more informatio n about the shape of the graph of the function. The graph of a function
may never intersect the -axis, or it may intersect multi ple (or even infinitely many) times.
Another point of interest is the -intercept, if it exis ts. The -intercept is given by.
Since a function has exactly one output for each inpu t, the graph of a function can have, at most, one -in tercept. If is in the
domain of a function then has exactly one -interce pt. If is not in the domain of then has no -interce pt. Similarly, for
any real number if is in the domain of, there is exactly one output and the line intersects the gr aph of exactly
once. On the other hand, if is not in the domain of is not defined and the line does not intersect the graph of. This
property is summarized in the vertical line test.
Given a function, every vertical line that may be d rawn intersects the graph of no more than once. If an y vertical line
intersects a set of points more than once, the set of poin ts does not represent a function.
We can use this test to determine whether a set of plotted poi nts represents the graph of a function (Figure).Vertical Line Test

1.9.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure: (a) The set of plotted points represents the gr aph of a function because every vertical line interse cts the set of
points, at most, once. (b) The set of plotted points do es not represent the graph of a function because some v ertical lines intersect
the set of points more than once.
Consider the function
a. Find all zeros of.
b. Find the -intercept (if any).
c. Sketch a graph of.
Solution
1.To find the zeros, solve. We discover that has one zero at.
2. The -intercept is given by
3. Given that is a linear function of the form tha t passes through the points and, we can sketch the
graph of (Figure).
Figure: The function is a line with -intercept and -intercept.
Consider the function.
a. Find all zeros of.
b. Find the -intercept (if any).
c. Sketch a graph of.
SolutionExample: Finding Zeros and -Intercepts of a Function
Example: Using Zeros and -Intercepts to Sketch a Graph

1.9.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095001.To find the zeros, solve. This equation implies. Since for all, this equation has no
solutions, and therefore has no zeros.
2.The -intercept is given by.
3.To graph this function, we make a table of values. Since we need, we need to choose values of. We choo se
values that make the square-root function easy to evalu ate.
-3 -2 1
1 2 3
Making use of the table and knowing that, since the fu nction is a square root, the graph of should be simil ar to the graph of
, we sketch the graph (Figure).
Figure: The graph of has a -intercept but no -inter cepts.
Find the zeros of
Hint
Factor the polynomial.
Answer
If a ball is dropped from a height of 100 ft, its h eight s at time is given by the function, where s is
measured in feet and is measured in seconds. The domai n is restricted to the interval where is the time whe n the
ball is dropped and is the time when the ball hits the ground.
a. Create a table showing the height s(t) when and. Using the data from the table, determine the domain
for this function. That is, find the time when the ball hits the ground.
b. Sketch a graph of.
Solution
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
100 96 84 64 36 0
Since the ball hits the ground when, the domain of this fu nction is the interval.
2.Exercise
Example: Finding the Height of a Free-Falling Object

1.9.11.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure, the values of are getting smaller as is getti ng larger. A function with this property is said to be
decreasing. On the other hand, for the function gra phed in Figure, the values of are getting
larger as the values of are getting larger. A functi on with this property is said to be increasing. It is im portant to note,
however, that a function can be increasing on some in terval or intervals and decreasing over a different i nterval or intervals.
For example, using our temperature function plotted a bove, we can see that the function is decreasing on th e interval,
increasing on the interval, and then decreasing on t he interval. We make the idea of a function increa sing or
decreasing over a particular interval more precise in the next definition.
We say that a function is increasing on the interval if for all
when
We say is strictly increasing on the interval if for all
when
We say that a function is decreasing on the interval if for all
if
We say that a function is strictly decreasing on the i nterval if for all,
if
For example, the function is increasing on the inter val because whenever. On the other hand,
the function is decreasing on the interval because whenever (Figure).Definition: Increasing and Decreasing on an Interval

1.9.11.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure: (a) The function is increasing on the interv al. (b) The function is decreasing on the
interval.
Combining Functions
Now that we have reviewed the basic characteristics of f unctions, we can see what happens to these properties wh en we combine
functions in different ways, using basic mathematical operations to create new functions. For example, if th e cost for a company to
manufacture items is described by the function and the revenue created by the sale of items is described by the function
, then the profit on the manufacture and sale of i tems is defined as. Using the difference between two
functions, we created a new function.
Alternatively, we can create a new function by composing two functions. For example, given the functions and
, the composite function is defined such that
The composite function is defined such that
Note that these two new functions are different from each ot her.
Combining Functions with Mathematical Operators
To combine functions using mathematical operators, we simply write the functions with the operator and simpl ify. Given two
functions and, we can define four new functions:
Sum
Difference
Product
for Quotient

1.9.11.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Given the functions and, find each of the following fun ctions and state its domain.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
1.
The domain of this function is the interval.
2.
The domain of this function is the interval.
3.
The domain of this function is the interval.
4..
The domain of this function is
For and, find and state its domain.
Hint
The new function is a quotient of two functions. For what val ues of is the denominator zero?
Answer
The domain is
Function Composition
When we compose functions, we take a function of a fun ction. For example, suppose the temperature on a give n day is described
as a function of time (measured in hours after midn ight) as in Table. Suppose the cost, to heat or cool a building for 1
hour, can be described as a function of the temperatu re. Combining these two functions, we can describe t he cost of heating or
cooling a building as a function of time by evaluat ing. We have defined a new function, denoted, which is defined
such that for all in the domain of. This new func tion is called a composite function. We note that si nce cost
is a function of temperature and temperature is a f unction of time, it makes sense to define this new fu nction. It does not
make sense to consider, because temperature is not a functi on of cost.
Consider the function with domain and range, and the function with domain and range. If is a subse t of, then
the composite function is the function with domain s uch that
A composite function can be viewed in two steps. First, the function maps each input in the domain of t o its output
in the range of. Second, since the range of is a su bset of the domain of, the output is an element in the domain of, and
therefore it is mapped to an output in the range of. In Figure, we see a visual image of a composite function.Example: Combining Functions Using Mathematical Operations
Exercise
Definition: Composite Functions

1.9.11.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure: For the composite function, we have and.
Consider the functions and.
a. Find and state its domain and range.
b. Evaluate.
c. Find and state its domain and range.
d. Evaluate.
Solution
1. We can find the formula for in two different ways. We could write
Alternatively, we could write
Since for all real numbers the domain of is the se t of all real numbers. Since, the
range is, at most, the interval. To show that the rang e is this entire interval, we let and solve this equat ion
for to show that for all in the interval, there e xists a real number such that. Solving this equatio n for
we see that, which implies that
If is in the interval, the expression under the r adical is nonnegative, and therefore there exists a real number such that
. We conclude that the range of is the interval
2.
3. We can find a formula for in two ways. First, we could wr ite
Alternatively, we could write
The domain of is the set of all real numbers such that. To find the range of we need to find all val ues for which
there exists a real number such that
Solving this equation for we see that we need to satisfy
which simplifies toExample: Compositions of Functions Defined by Formulas

1.9.11.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Finally, we obtain
Since is a real number if and only if the range of is the set
4.
In Example, we can see that. This tells us, in genera l terms, that the order in which we compose
functions matters.
Let. Let Find.
Solution
Symmetry of Functions
The graphs of certain functions have symmetry properti es that help us understand the function and the sha pe of its graph. For
example, consider the function shown in Figure. If we take the part of the curve that lies to the right
of the -axis and flip it over the -axis, it lays exact ly on top of the curve to the left of the -axis. In t his case, we say the function
has symmetry about the -axis. On the other hand, consider the function shown in Figu re. If we take the
graph and rotate it about the origin, the new graph will look exactly the same. In this case, we say the fun ction has symmetry
about the origin.
Figure: (a) A graph that is symmetric about the -axis. (b) A graph that is symmetric about the origin.
If we are given the graph of a function, it is easy t o see whether the graph has one of these symmetry pro perties. But without a
graph, how can we determine algebraically whether a fun ction has symmetry? Looking at Figure again, we see that
since is symmetric about the -axis, if the point is on the graph, the point is on the graph. In other words,
. If a function has this property, we say is an even function, which has symmetry about the -axis. For example,
is even becauseExercise

1.9.11.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500In contrast, looking at Figure again, if a function is symmetric about the origin, then whenever the poi nt is on the
graph, the point is also on the graph. In other word s,. If has this property, we say is an odd function,
which has symmetry about the origin. For example, is od d because
If for all in the domain of, then is an even function. An even function is symmetric about the -axis.
If for all in the domain of, then is an odd function. An odd function is symmetric about the origin.
Determine whether each of the following functions is even, od d, or neither.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
To determine whether a function is even or odd, we evaluate and compare it to and.
1. Therefore, is even.
2. Now, Furthermore, noting that, we see
that. Therefore, is neither even nor odd.
3. Therefore, is odd.
Determine whether is even, odd, or neither.
Hint
Compare with and.
Answer
is odd.
One symmetric function that arises frequently is the absolute value function, written as. The absolute value function is defined
as
Some students describe this function by stating that it “makes everything positive.” By the definition of th e absolute value function,
we see that if, then and if, then However, for Th erefore, it is more accurate to
say that for all nonzero inputs, the output is posit ive, but if, the output. We conclude that the ran ge of the absolute
value function is In Figure, we see that the absolu te value function is symmetric about the -axis and i s
therefore an even function.Definition: Even and Odd Functions
Example: Even and Odd Functions
Exercise

1.9.11.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure: The graph of is symmetric about the -axis.
Find the domain and range of the function.
Solution
Since the absolute value function is defined for all real numbers, the domain of this function is. Since for
all, the function. Therefore, the range is, at most, the set To see that the range is, in fact,
this whole set, we need to show that for there exists a real number such that
A real number satisfies this equation as long as
Since, we know, and thus the right-hand side of the equation is nonnegative, so it is possible that there is a
solution. Furthermore,
Therefore, we see there are two solutions:
The range of this function is
For the function, find the domain and range.
Hint
for all real numbers.
Answer
Domain =, range =
Inverse Functions
An inverse function reverses the operation done by a particular function. In other words, whatever a funct ion does, the inverse
function undoes it. In this section, we define an inv erse function formally and state the necessary condit ions for an inverse function
to exist. We examine how to find an inverse function and study the relationship between the graph of a fu nction and the graph of its
inverse. Then we apply these ideas to define and discuss prop erties of the inverse trigonometric functions.Example: Working with the Absolute Value Function
Exercise: Domain and Range

1.9.11.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Existence of an Inverse Function
We begin with an example. Given a function and an ou tput, we are often interested in finding what value or values
were mapped to by. For example, consider the functio n. Since any output, we can solve this equation
for to find that the input is. This equation defin es as a function of. Denoting this function as, and writing
, we see that for any in the domain of. Thus, this new function,, “undid” what
the original function did. A function with this prop erty is called the inverse function of the original func tion.
Given a function with domain and range, its inverse function (if it exists) is the function with domain and rang e
such that if and only if. In other words, for a function and its inverse,
for all in and
for all in.
Note that is read as “ inverse.” Here, the is not used as an exponent so
Figure shows the relationship between the domain and range of and the domain and range of.
Figure: Given a function and its inverse if and onl y if. The range of becomes the domain of
and the domain of becomes the range of.
Recall that a function has exactly one output for ea ch input. Therefore, to define an inverse function, we need to map each input to
exactly one output. For example, let’s try to find t he inverse function for. Solving the equation for, we arrive at
the equation. This equation does not describe as a function of because there are two solutions to this eq uation for
every. The problem with trying to find an inverse f unction for is that two inputs are sent to the same ou tput for each
output. The function discussed earlier did not ha ve this problem. For that function, each input was sent t o a
different output. A function that sends each input to a di fferent output is called a one-to-one function.
We say a function is a one-to-one function if when.
One way to determine whether a function is one-to-one is by lo oking at its graph. If a function is one-to-one, then no t wo inputs can
be sent to the same output. Therefore, if we draw a hor izontal line anywhere in the -plane, according to the horizontal line test,
it cannot intersect the graph more than once. We not e that the horizontal line test is different from t he vertical line test. The vertical
line test determines whether a graph is the graph of a function. The horizontal line test determines wheth er a function is one-to-one
(Figure).Definition: Inverse Functions
Definition: One-to-One functions

1.9.11.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500A function is one-to-one if and only if every horizo ntal line intersects the graph of no more than once.
Figure: (a) The function is not one-to-one because i t fails the horizontal line test. (b) The function i s
one-to-one because it passes the horizontal line test.
For each of the following functions, use the horizontal li ne test to determine whether it is one-to-one.
a)
b)
Solution
a) Since the horizontal line for any integer intersects the graph more than once, this function is not one-to-one.Horizontal Line Test
Example: Determining Whether a Function Is One-to-One

1.9.11.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
b) Since every horizontal line intersects the graph once (at most), this function is one-to-one.
Is the function graphed in the following image one-to-on e?
Solution
Use the horizontal line test.
Answer
NoExercise

1.9.11.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Finding a Function’s Inverse
We can now consider one-to-one functions and show how t o find their inverses. Recall that a function maps elements in the domain
of to elements in the range of. The inverse funct ion maps each element from the range of back to its corresponding element
from the domain of. Therefore, to find the inverse function of a one-to-one function, given any in t he range of, we need to
determine which in the domain of satisfies. Since is one-to-one, there is exactly one such value. We can find that
value by solving the equation for. Doing so, we are able to write as a function of where the domain of this function
is the range of and the range of this new function is the domain of. Consequently, this function is the inverse of, and we write
. Since we typically use the variable to denote the independent variable and y to denote the dependent variable, we
often interchange the roles of and, and write. Rep resenting the inverse function in this way is also hel pful later when
we graph a function and its inverse on the same axes.
1. Solve the equation for.
2. Interchange the variables and and write.
Find the inverse for the function State the domain and ran ge of the inverse function. Verify that
Solution
Follow the steps outlined in the strategy.
Step 1. If then and
Step 2. Rewrite as and let.Therefore,.
Since the domain of is, the range of is. Since the r ange of is, the domain of is.
You can verify that by writing
Note that for to be the inverse of, both and for all in the domain of the inside
function.
Find the inverse of the function. State the domain and rang e of the inverse function.
Hint
Use the Problem-Solving Strategy for finding inverse funct ions.
Answer
. The domain of is. The range of is.
Graphing Inverse Functions
Let’s consider the relationship between the graph of a function and the graph of its inverse. Consider the graph of shown in
Figure and a point on the graph. Since, then. Ther efore, when we graph, the point is on
the graph. As a result, the graph of is a reflection o f the graph of about the line.Problem-Solving Strategy: Finding an Inverse Function
Example: Finding an Inverse Function
Exercise

1.9.11.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500
Figure: (a) The graph of this function shows point o n the graph of. (b) Since is on the graph of, the point
is on the graph of. The graph of is a reflection o f the graph of about the line.
For the graph of in the following image, sketch a gra ph of by sketching the line and using symmetry. Id entify the
domain and range of.
Solution
Reflect the graph about the line. The domain of i s. The range of is. By using the preceding strategy
for finding inverse functions, we can verify that the inv erse function is, as shown in the graph.
Example: Sketching Graphs of Inverse Functions

1.9.11.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Sketch the graph of and the graph of its inverse using t he symmetry property of inverse functions.
Hint
The graphs are symmetric about the line
Answer
Restricting Domains
As we have seen, does not have an inverse function be cause it is not one-to-one. However, we can choose a su bset of the
domain of such that the function is one-to-one. Thi s subset is called a restricted domain. By restricting the domain of, we can
define a new function such that the domain of is t he restricted domain of and for all in the domai n of. Then we
can define an inverse function for on that domain. For example, since is one-to-one on the interval, we can define
a new function such that the domain of is and for all in its domain. Since is a one-to-one function, it has an
inverse function, given by the formula. On the other hand, the function is also one-to-one on the domain
. Therefore, we could also define a new function such that the domain of is and for all in the domain
of. Then is a one-to-one function and must also ha ve an inverse. Its inverse is given by the formula (Figure
Figure: (a) For restricted to,. (b) For restricted to,.
Consider the function.
a. Sketch the graph of and use the horizontal line test to show that is not one-to-one.Exercise
Example: Restricting the Domain

1.9.11.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500b. Show that is one-to-one on the restricted domain. Deter mine the domain and range for the inverse of on this
restricted domain and find a formula for.
Solution
a) The graph of is the graph of shifted left unit. Since there exists a horizontal line intersecting the graph more than
once, is not one-to-one.
b) On the interval is one-to-one.
The domain and range of are given by the range and domain of, respectively. Therefore, the domain of is and
the range of is. To find a formula for, solve th e equation for If, then.
Since we are restricting the domain to the interval whe re, we need. Therefore,. Interchanging
and, we write and conclude that.
Consider restricted to the domain. Verify that i s one-to-one on this domain. Determine the domain an d
range of the inverse of and find a formula for.
Hint
The domain and range of is given by the range and domain of, respectively. To find, solve for.
Answer
The domain of is. The range of is. The inverse fu nction is given by the formula.Exercise

1.9.11.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500Key Concepts
For a function to have an inverse, the function must be on e-to-one. Given the graph of a function, we can determine whet her the
function is one-to-one by using the horizontal line test.
If a function is not one-to-one, we can restrict the dom ain to a smaller domain where the function is one-to-one and then define
the inverse of the function on the smaller domain.
For a function and its inverse for all in the domai n of and for all in the domain of.
Since the trigonometric functions are periodic, we need to restrict their domains to define the inverse trigonome tric functions.
The graph of a function and its inverse are symmetri c about the line
Key Equations
Inverse function
for all in and for all in.
Glossary
horizontal line test
a function is one-to-one if and only if every horizon tal line intersects the graph of, at most, once
inverse function
for a function, the inverse function satisfies if
inverse trigonometric functions
the inverses of the trigonometric functions are defined o n restricted domains where they are one-to-one functions
one-to-one function
a function is one-to-one if if
restricted domain
a subset of the domain of a function
Key Concepts
A function is a mapping from a set of inputs to a set o f outputs with exactly one output for each input.
If no domain is stated for a function the domain is consi dered to be the set of all real numbers for which the fu nction
is defined.
When sketching the graph of a function each vertical l ine may intersect the graph, at most, once.
A function may have any number of zeros, but it has, at mo st, one -intercept.
To define the composition, the range of must be cont ained in the domain of.
Even functions are symmetric about the -axis whereas odd fu nctions are symmetric about the origin.
Key Equations
Composition of two functions
Absolute value function
Glossary
absolute value function

1.9.11.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109500composite function
given two functions and, a new function, denoted, such th at
decreasing on the interval
a function decreasing on the interval if, for all if
dependent variable
the output variable for a function
domain
the set of inputs for a function
even function
a function is even if for all in the domain of
function
a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for mapping e ach input to exactly one output
graph of a function
the set of points such that is in the domain of and
increasing on the interval
a function increasing on the interval if for all if
independent variable
the input variable for a function
odd function
a function is odd if for all in the domain of
range
the set of outputs for a function
symmetry about the origin
the graph of a function is symmetric about the origin if is on the graph of whenever is on the graph
symmetry about the -axis
the graph of a function is symmetric about the -axis i f is on the graph of whenever is on the graph
table of values
a table containing a list of inputs and their corresponding outputs
vertical line test
given the graph of a function, every vertical line inter sects the graph, at most, once
zeros of a function
when a real number is a zero of a function
This page titled 1.9.11: Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed”
Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.1: Review of Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
1.4: Inverse Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095011.9.12: Basic Functions
Calculate the slope of a linear function and interpret i ts meaning.
Recognize the degree of a polynomial.
Find the roots of a quadratic polynomial.
Describe the graphs of basic odd and even polynomial fun ctions.
Identify a rational function.
Describe the graphs of power and root functions.
Explain the difference between algebraic and transcende ntal functions.
Graph a piecewise-defined function.
Sketch the graph of a function that has been shifted, str etched, or reflected from its initial graph position.
We have studied the general characteristics of funct ions, so now let’s examine some specific classes of func tions. We begin by
reviewing the basic properties of linear and quadratic functions, and then generalize to include higher-d egree polynomials. By
combining root functions with polynomials, we can def ine general algebraic functions and distinguish them from the transcendental
functions we examine later in this chapter. We finis h the section with examples of piecewise-defined functi ons and take a look at
how to sketch the graph of a function that has been shi fted, stretched, or reflected from its initial form.
Linear Functions and Slope
The easiest type of function to consider is a linear function. Linear functions have the form, where and are
constants. In Figure, we see examples of linear funct ions when a is positive, negative, and zero. Note that i f, the
graph of the line rises as increases. In other words, is increasing on. If, the graph of the line falls as
increases. In this case, is decreasing on. If, the lin e is horizontal.
Figure: These linear functions are increasing or decre asing on and one function is a horizontal line.
As suggested by Figure, the graph of any linear funct ion is a line. One of the distinguishing features of a line is its slope.
The slope is the change in for each unit change in. The slo pe measures both the steepness and the direction of a line. If the slope
is positive, the line points upward when moving from l eft to right. If the slope is negative, the line poi nts downward when moving
from left to right. If the slope is zero, the line is horizontal. To calculate the slope of a line, we nee d to determine the ratio of the
change in versus the change in. To do so, we choose any two points and on the line and calculate. In
Figure, we see this ratio is independent of the points ch osen.Learning Objectives

1.9.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: For any linear function, the slope is indepe ndent of the choice of points and on
the line.
Consider line passing through points and. Let an d denote the changes in and
,respectively. The slope of the line is
We now examine the relationship between slope and the f ormula for a linear function. Consider the linear fun ction given by the
formula. As discussed earlier, we know the graph of a linear function is given by a line. We can use our d efinition of
slope to calculate the slope of this line. As shown, we can determine the slope by calculating for any po ints
and on the line. Evaluating the function at, we see that is a point on this line. Evaluating this fun ction at
, we see that is also a point on this line. Therefore, the sl ope of this line is
We have shown that the coefficient is the slope of t he line. We can conclude that the formula describes a line with
slope. Furthermore, because this line intersects the -axis at the point, we see that the -intercept for this linear function is
. We conclude that the formula tells us the slope,, and the -intercept,, for this line. Since we often us e the
symbol to denote the slope of a line, we can write
to denote the slope-intercept form of a linear function.
Sometimes it is convenient to express a linear functio n in different ways. For example, suppose the graph of a linear function
passes through the point and the slope of the line is. Since any other point on the graph of must sa tisfy the
equation
this linear function can be expressed by writingDefinition: Slope of a Linear Function

1.9.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501We call this equation the point-slope equation for that linear function.
Since every nonvertical line is the graph of a linea r function, the points on a nonvertical line can be d escribed using the slopeintercept or point-slope equations. However, a vertica l line does not represent the graph of a function a nd cannot be expressed in
either of these forms. Instead, a vertical line is d escribed by the equation for some constant. Since neither the slopeintercept form nor the point-slope form allows for vertic al lines, we use the notation
where are both not zero, to denote the standard form of a line.
Consider a line passing through the point with slope. Th e equation
is the point-slope equation for that line.
Consider a line with slope and -intercept The equatio n
is an equation for that line in slope-intercept form.
The standard form of a line is given by the equation
where and are both not zero. This form is more general be cause it allows for a vertical line,.
Consider the line passing through the points and, as sh own in Figure.
Figure: Finding the equation of a linear function wi th a graph that is a line between two given points.
1. Find the slope of the line.
2. Find an equation for this linear function in point-slope form.
3. Find an equation for this linear function in slope-inte rcept form.
Solution
1. The slope of the line isDefinition: Point-Slope Equation, and the Slope-Intercept Form and Standard Form of the Equation of a Line
Example: Finding the Slope and Equations of Lines

1.9.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095012. To find an equation for the linear function in p oint-slope form, use the slope and choose any point on the line. If
we choose the point, we get the equation
3. To find an equation for the linear function in s lope-intercept form, solve the equation in part b. for. When we do this, we
get the equation
Consider the line passing through points and.
a. Find the slope of the line.
b. Find an equation of that line in point-slope form.
c. Find an equation of that line in slope-intercept form.
Hint
The slope.
Answer a
Answer b
The point-slope form is.
Answer c
The slope-intercept form is.
Jessica leaves her house at 5:50 a.m. and goes for a 9- mile run. She returns to her house at 7:08 a.m. Answer th e following
questions, assuming Jessica runs at a constant pace.
a. Describe the distance (in miles) Jessica runs as a line ar function of her run time (in minutes).
b. Sketch a graph of.
c. Interpret the meaning of the slope.
Solution
a. At time, Jessica is at her house, so. At time min utes, Jessica has finished running mi, so
. The slope of the linear function is
The -intercept is, so the equation for this linear func tion is
b. To graph, use the fact that the graph passes through t he origin and has slope Exercise
Example:

1.9.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
c. The slope describes the distance (in miles) Jessica run s per minute, or her average velocity.
Polynomials
A linear function is a special type of a more general class of functions: polynomials. A polynomial funct ion is any function that can
be written in the form
for some integer and constants, where. In the case when, we allow for; if, the
function is called the zero function. The value is called the degree of the polynomial; the constant is called the
leading coefficient. A linear function of the form is a polynomial of degree 1 if and degree 0 if. A
polynomial of degree 0 is also called a constant function. A polynomial function of degree 2 is called a quadratic function. In
particular, a quadratic function has the form
where. A polynomial function of degree is called a cubic function.
Power Functions
Some polynomial functions are power functions. A power function is any function of the form, where and are any
real numbers. The exponent in a power function can be any real number, but here we consider the case when t he exponent is a
positive integer. (We consider other cases later.) If the exponent is a positive integer, then is a polyn omial. If is even,
then is an even function because if is even. If i s odd, then is an odd function
because if is odd (Figure).

1.9.12.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) For any even integer, is an even functio n. (b) For any odd integer, is an odd function.
Behavior at Infinity
To determine the behavior of a function as the inpu ts approach infinity, we look at the values as the i nputs,, become larger.
For some functions, the values of approach a finite number. For example, for the function, the values
become closer and closer to zero for all values of as they get larger and larger. For this function, we s ay “ approaches two as
goes to infinity,” and we write as. The line is a horizontal asymptote for the function
because the graph of the function gets closer to the line as gets larger.
For other functions, the values may not approach a f inite number but instead may become larger for all values of as they get
larger. In that case, we say “ approaches infinity as approaches infinity,” and we write as. For example, f or
the function, the outputs become larger as the in puts get larger. We can conclude that the function
approaches infinity as approaches infinity, and we wr ite as. The behavior as and the meaning of
as or can be defined similarly. We can describe what happens to the values of as and as
as the end behavior of the function.
To understand the end behavior for polynomial funct ions, we can focus on quadratic and cubic functions. The behavior for higherdegree polynomials can be analyzed similarly. Consid er a quadratic function. If, the values as
. If, the values as. Since the graph of a quadrat ic function is a parabola, the parabola opens
upward if.; the parabola opens downward if (Figure).
Now consider a cubic function. If, then as and as. If,
then as and as. As we can see from both of these gr aphs, the leading term of the polynomial
determines the end behavior (Figure).

1.9.12.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) For a quadratic function, if the leading coefficient,the parabola opens upward. If, the pa rabola opens
downward. (b) For a cubic function, if the leading coefficient, the values as and the values as
. If the leading coefficient, the opposite is true.
Zeros of Polynomial Functions
Another characteristic of the graph of a polynomial function is where it intersects the -axis. To determine where a function
intersects the -axis, we need to solve the equation fo r. In the case of the linear function, the -inter cept is
given by solving the equation. In this case, we see th at the -intercept is given by. In the case of a qu adratic
function, finding the -intercept(s) requires finding the zeros of a quadratic equation:. In some cases, it is easy to
factor the polynomial to find the zeros. If not, we mak e use of the quadratic formula.
Consider the quadratic equation
where. The solutions of this equation are given by the quadratic formula
If the discriminant, Equation tells us there are two real numbers that satisfy the quadratic equation. If
, this formula tells us there is only one solution, and it is a real number. If, no real numbers satisf y the
quadratic equation.
In the case of higher-degree polynomials, it may be more complicated to determine where the graph inters ects the -axis. In some
instances, it is possible to find the -intercepts by factoring the polynomial to find its zeros. In othe r cases, it is impossible to
calculate the exact values of the -intercepts. Howeve r, as we see later in the text, in cases such as this, we can use analytical tools
to approximate (to a very high degree) where the -in tercepts are located. Here we focus on the graphs of p olynomials for which
we can calculate their zeros explicitly.
For the following functions,
a.
b. The Quadratic Formula
Example: Graphing Polynomial Functions

1.9.12.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501i. describe the behavior of as,
ii. find all zeros of, and
iii. sketch a graph of.
Solution
1. The function is a quadratic function.
1. Because, as
2. To find the zeros of, use the quadratic formula. The zero s are
3. To sketch the graph of,use the information from your previous answers and combine it with the fact t hat the
graph is a parabola opening downward.
2. The function is a cubic function.
1. Because, as,. As,.
2. To find the zeros of, we need to factor the polynomial. Fir st, when we factor out of all the terms, we find
Then, when we factor the quadratic function, we find
Therefore, the zeros of are.
3. Combining the results from parts i. and ii., draw a rough sketch of.

1.9.12.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Consider the quadratic function Find the zeros of. Doe s the parabola open upward or downward?
Hint
Use the quadratic formula.
Answer
The zeros are. The parabola opens upward.
Algebraic Functions
By allowing for quotients and fractional powers in pol ynomial functions, we create a larger class of functi ons. An algebraic
function is one that involves addition, subtraction, multipli cation, division, rational powers, and roots. Two types of algebraic
functions are rational functions and root functions.
Just as rational numbers are quotients of integers, ra tional functions are quotients of polynomials. In p articular, a rational function
is any function of the form,where and are polynomials. For example,
and
are rational functions. A root function is a power function of the form, where is a positive integer greater than one.
For example, is the square-root function and is th e cube-root function. By allowing for
compositions of root functions and rational function s, we can create other algebraic functions. For example, is an
algebraic function.
For each of the following functions, find the domain and ra nge.
a.
b. Exercise
Example: Finding Domain and Range for Algebraic Functions

1.9.12.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501Solution
1. It is not possible to divide by zero, so the doma in is the set of real numbers such that. To find t he range, we need
to find the values for which there exists a real number such that
When we multiply both sides of this equation by, we see that m ust satisfy the equation
From this equation, we can see that must satisfy
If y=, this equation has no solution. On the other hand, as long as,
satisfies this equation. We can conclude that the range o f is.
2. To find the domain of, we need. When we factor, we write. This inequality holds if
and only if both terms are positive or both terms are negativ e. For both terms to be positive, we need to find such tha t
and
These two inequalities reduce to and. Therefore, the set must be part of the domain. For both
terms to be negative, we need
and
These two inequalities also reduce to and. There ar e no values of that satisfy both of these inequalit ies. Thus,
we can conclude the domain of this function is
If, then. Therefore,, and the range of is
Find the domain and range for the function
Hint
The denominator cannot be zero. Solve the equation for to find the range.
Answer
The domain is the set of real numbers such that. Th e range is the set.
The root functions have defining characteristics dep ending on whether is odd or even. For all even integ ers, the
domain of is the interval. For all odd integers, the domain of is the set of all real numbers. Since
for odd integers, is an odd function if is odd. See t he graphs of root functions for different values of
in Figure.Exercise

1.9.12.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) If is even, the domain of is. (b) If is odd, the domain of is and the
function is an odd function.
For each of the following functions, determine the domain o f the function.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. You cannot divide by zero, so the domain is the set of va lues such that. Therefore, the domain is.
b. You need to determine the values of for which the de nominator is zero. Since for all real numbers, the
denominator is never zero. Therefore, the domain is
c. Since the square root of a negative number is not a re al number, the domain is the set of values for which.
Therefore, the domain is
d. The cube root is defined for all real numbers, so the do main is the interval
Find the domain for each of the following functions: and.
Hint
Determine the values of when the expression in the de nominator of is nonzero, and find the values of whe n the
expression inside the radical of is nonnegative.
Answer
The domain of is. The domain of is
Transcendental Functions
Thus far, we have discussed algebraic functions. Some f unctions, however, cannot be described by basic algebr aic operations.
These functions are known as transcendental functions because they are said to “transcend,” or go beyond, algebra. The most
common transcendental functions are trigonometric, e xponential, and logarithmic functions. A trigonometric function relates the
ratios of two sides of a right triangle. They are (W e discuss trigonometric functions later in
the chapter.) An exponential function is a function of the form, where the base. A logarithmic function i s a
function of the form for some constant where if a nd only if. (We also discuss
exponential and logarithmic functions later in the chap ter.)Example: Finding Domains for Algebraic Functions
Exercise

1.9.12.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501Classify each of the following functions, a. through c., a s algebraic or transcendental.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. Since this function involves basic algebraic operation s only, it is an algebraic function.
b. This function cannot be written as a formula that involves only basic algebraic operations, so it is transcendenta l. (Note that
algebraic functions can only have powers that are rationa l numbers.)
c. As in part b, this function cannot be written using a formula involving basic algebraic operations only; therefore, t his
function is transcendental.
Is an algebraic or a transcendental function?
Answer
Algebraic
Piecewise-Defined Functions
Sometimes a function is defined by different formulas on different parts of its domain. A function with this property is known as a
piecewise-defined function. The absolute value functio n is an example of a piecewise-defined function beca use the formula
changes with the sign of:
Other piecewise-defined functions may be represented b y completely different formulas, depending on the p art of the domain in
which a point falls. To graph a piecewise-defined func tion, we graph each part of the function in its respec tive domain, on the same
coordinate system. If the formula for a function is d ifferent for and, we need to pay special attention to what happens at
when we graph the function. Sometimes the graph needs t o include an open or closed circle to indicate the value of the
function at. We examine this in the next example.
Sketch a graph of the following piecewise-defined function:
Solution
Graph the linear function on the interval and grap h the quadratic function on the interval.
Since the value of the function at is given by the formula, we see that. To indicate this on the
graph, we draw a closed circle at the point. The valu e of the function is given by for all, but not at
. To indicate this on the graph, we draw an open circle a t.Example: Classifying Algebraic and Transcendental Functions
Exercise:
Example: Graphing a Piecewise-Defined Function

1.9.12.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: This piecewise-defined function is linear for and quadratic for
2) Sketch a graph of the function
Solution:
In a big city, drivers are charged variable rates f or parking in a parking garage. They are charged $1 0 for the first hour or any
part of the first hour and an additional $2 for eac h hour or part thereof up to a maximum of $30 for t he day. The parking garage
is open from 6 a.m. to 12 midnight.
a. Write a piecewise-defined function that describes the cost to park in the parking garage as a function of ho urs parked.
b. Sketch a graph of this function
Solution
1.Since the parking garage is open 18 hours each day, the domain for this function is. The cost to park a car at
this parking garage can be described piecewise by the functi on
2.The graph of the function consists of several horizon tal line segments.Example: Parking Fees Described by a Piecewise-Defined Function

1.9.12.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
The cost of mailing a letter is a function of the we ight of the letter. Suppose the cost of mailing a lett er is for the first ounce
and for each additional ounce. Write a piecewise-defi ned function describing the cost as a function of t he weight for
, where is measured in cents and is measured in ounces.
Hint
The piecewise-defined function is constant on the interva ls
Answer
Transformations of Functions
We have seen several cases in which we have added, subt racted, or multiplied constants to form variations of simple functions. In
the previous example, for instance, we subtracted 2 from the argument of the function to get the function.
This subtraction represents a shift of the function two units to the right. A shift, horizontally or vert ically, is a type of
transformation of a function. Other transformations include horizontal and vertical scal ings, and reflections about the axes.
A vertical shift of a function occurs if we add or s ubtract the same constant to each output. For, the graph of is a
shift of the graph of up units, whereas the graph of is a shift of the graph of down units. For example, t he
graph of the function is the graph of shifted up units; the graph of the function is the graph of
shifted down units (Figure).Exercise

1.9.12.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) For, the graph of is a vertical shift up units of the graph of. (b) For, the graph
of is a vertical shift down c units of the graph of.
A horizontal shift of a function occurs if we add or subtract the same constant to each input. For, the graph of is a
shift of the graph of to the left units; the grap h of is a shift of the graph of to the right unit s. Why does the
graph shift left when adding a constant and shift rig ht when subtracting a constant? To answer this questio n, let’s look at an
example.
Consider the function and evaluate this function a t. Since and, the graph of
is the graph of shifted left units. Similarly, the graph of is the graph of shifted right units
(Figure).
Figure: (a) For, the graph of is a horizontal shift left units of the graph of. (b) For, the
graph of is a horizontal shift right units of the gr aph of
A vertical scaling of a graph occurs if we multiply a ll outputs of a function by the same positive consta nt. For, the graph of
the function is the graph of scaled vertically by a factor of. If, the values of the outputs for t he function are
larger than the values of the outputs for the funct ion; therefore, the graph has been stretched vertic ally. If, then the
outputs of the function are smaller, so the graph h as been compressed. For example, the graph of the func tion is
the graph of stretched vertically by a factor of 3, whereas the graph of is the graph of compressed
vertically by a factor of (Figure).

1.9.12.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) If, the graph of is a vertical stretch of the graph of. (b) If, the graph of
is a vertical compression of the graph of.
The horizontal scaling of a function occurs if we mul tiply the inputs by the same positive constant. For, the graph of the
function is the graph of scaled horizontally by a factor of. If, the graph of is the graph of co mpressed
horizontally. If, the graph of is the graph of str etched horizontally. For example, consider the functi on
and evaluate at. Since, the graph of is the gra ph of compressed horizontally. The
graph of is a horizontal stretch of the graph of (Figu re).
Figure: (a) If, the graph of is a horizontal compr ession of the graph of. (b) If, the graph
of is a horizontal stretch of the graph of.
We have explored what happens to the graph of a func tion when we multiply by a constant to get a new fu nction.
We have also discussed what happens to the graph of a function when we multiply the independent variable by to get a
new function. However, we have not addressed what happe ns to the graph of the function if the constant is negative. If we
have a constant, we can write as a positive number m ultiplied by; but, what kind of transformation do we get when we
multiply the function or its argument by When we mu ltiply all the outputs by, we get a reflection abou t the -axis. When
we multiply all inputs by, we get a reflection about the -axis. For example, the graph of is the graph of
reflected about the -axis. The graph of is the graph of reflected about the -axis (Figure).

1.9.12.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: (a) The graph of is the graph of reflected about the -axis. (b) The graph of is the
graph of reflected about the -axis.
If the graph of a function consists of more than on e transformation of another graph, it is important to transform the graph in the
correct order. Given a function, the graph of the re lated function can be obtained from the graph of
by performing the transformations in the following or der.
Horizontal shift of the graph of. If, shift left. If sh ift right.
Horizontal scaling of the graph of by a factor of. If, r eflect the graph about the -axis.
Vertical scaling of the graph of by a factor of. If, r eflect the graph about the -axis.
Vertical shift of the graph of. If, shift up. If, shift d own.
We can summarize the different transformations and their related effects on the graph of a function in the followin g table.
Transformation of Effect of the graph of
Vertical shift up units
Vertical shift down units
Shift left by units
Shift right by units
Vertical stretch if;
vertical compression if
Horizontal stretch if;
horizontal compression if
Reflection about the -axis
Reflection about the -axis
For each of the following functions, a. and b., sketch a gra ph by using a sequence of transformations of a well-known fu nction.
a.
b.
Solution
1.Starting with the graph of, shift units to the left, reflect about the -axis, and then shift down units.Example: Transforming a Function

1.9.12.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501
Figure: The function can be viewed as a sequence of three transformations of the function.
2. Starting with the graph of reflect about the -axis, stre tch the graph vertically by a factor of 3, and move up 1 unit.
Figure: The function can be viewed as a sequence of t hree transformations of the function.
Describe how the function can be graphed using the graph o f and a sequence of transformations
Answer
Shift the graph to the left 1 unit, reflect about the -ax is, then shift down 4 units.
Key Concepts
The power function is an even function if n is even and, and it is an odd function if is odd.
The root function has the domain if n is even and t he domain if is odd. If is odd, then
is an odd function.
The domain of the rational function, where and are po lynomial functions, is the set of such that
Functions that involve the basic operations of addition, s ubtraction, multiplication, division, and powers are alge braic functions.
All other functions are transcendental. Trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions are examples of t ranscendental
functions.
A polynomial function with degree satisfies as. T he sign of the output as depends on the
sign of the leading coefficient only and on whether is even or odd.
Vertical and horizontal shifts, vertical and horizonta l scalings, and reflections about the - and -axes are ex amples of
transformations of functions.Exercise

1.9.12.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501Key Equations
Point-slope equation of a line
Slope-intercept form of a line
Standard form of a line
Polynomial function
Glossary
algebraic function
a function involving any combination of only the basic op erations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, divisio n, powers, and
roots applied to an input variable
cubic function
a polynomial of degree 3; that is, a function of the form, where
degree
for a polynomial function, the value of the largest expo nent of any term
linear function
a function that can be written in the form
logarithmic function
a function of the form for some base such that if an d only if
mathematical model
A method of simulating real-life situations with mathema tical equations
piecewise-defined function
a function that is defined differently on different par ts of its domain
point-slope equation
equation of a linear function indicating its slope an d a point on the graph of the function
polynomial function
a function of the form
power function
a function of the form for any positive integer
quadratic function
a polynomial of degree 2; that is, a function of the form where
rational function
a function of the form, where and are polynomials
root function

1.9.12.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109501a function of the form for any integer
slope
the change in for each unit change in
slope-intercept form
equation of a linear function indicating its slope an d -intercept
transcendental function
a function that cannot be expressed by a combination of b asic arithmetic operations
transformation of a function
a shift, scaling, or reflection of a function
This page titled 1.9.12: Basic Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed”
Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: Basic Classes of Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095021.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
Convert angle measures between degrees and radians.
Recognize the triangular and circular definitions of the basic trigonometric functions.
Write the basic trigonometric identities.
Identify the graphs and periods of the trigonometric funct ions.
Describe the shift of a sine or cosine graph from the eq uation of the function.
Trigonometric functions are used to model many phen omena, including sound waves, vibrations of strings, alte rnating electrical
current, and the motion of pendulums. In fact, almost any repetitive, or cyclical, motion can be modeled by some combination of
trigonometric functions. In this section, we define the six basic trigonometric functions and look at som e of the main identities
involving these functions.
Radian Measure
To use trigonometric functions, we first must understa nd how to measure the angles. Although we can use both ra dians and
degrees, radians are a more natural measurement because they are rela ted directly to the unit circle, a circle with radiu s 1. The
radian measure of an angle is defined as follows. Give n an angle, let be the length of the corresponding arc on the unit circle
(Figure). We say the angle corresponding to the arc of le ngth 1 has radian measure 1.
Figure: The radian measure of an angle is the arc le ngth of the associated arc on the unit circle.
Since an angle of corresponds to the circumference o f a circle, or an arc of length, we conclude that a n angle with a degree
measure of has a radian measure of. Similarly, we se e that is equivalent to radians. Table shows the
relationship between common degree and radian values.
Table: Common Angles Expressed in Degrees and Radians
Degrees Radians Degrees Radians
0 0 120
30 135
45 150
60 180
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
SolutionLearning Objectives
Converting between Radians and Degrees

1.9.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502Use the fact that ° is equivalent to radians as a conversion factor (Table):
a. rad
b. rad = ⋅ = °
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
Hint
radians is equal to 180°
Answer
a.
b. 330°
The Six Basic Trigonometric Functions
Trigonometric functions allow us to use angle measure s, in radians or degrees, to find the coordinates of a point on any circle—not
only on a unit circle—or to find an angle given a p oint on a circle. They also define the relationship between the sides and angles of
a triangle.
To define the trigonometric functions, first consider the unit circle centered at the origin and a point on the unit circle.
Let be an angle with an initial side that lies alon g the positive -axis and with a terminal side that is t he line segment. An
angle in this position is said to be in standard po sition (Figure). We can then define the values of th e six trigonometric
functions for in terms of the coordinates and.
Figure: The angle is in standard position. The values of the trigonometric functions for are defined in t erms of the
coordinates and.
Let be a point on the unit circle centered at the origin. Let be an angle with an initial side along the positive axis and a terminal side given by the line segment. The trigonometric functions are then defined asExercise
Definition: Trigonometric functions

1.9.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502If and are undefined. If, then and are undefined.
We can see that for a point on a circle of radius with a corresponding angle, the coordinates and satisfy
and
The values of the other trigonometric functions can be expressed in terms of, and (Figure).
Figure: For a point on a circle of radius, the coor dinates and satisfy and.
Table shows the values of sine and cosine at the maj or angles in the first quadrant. From this table, we can determine the
values of sine and cosine at the corresponding angles in the other quadrants. The values of the other trigo nometric functions are
calculated easily from the values of and
Table: Values of and at Major Angles in the First Quadrant
0 0 1
1 0
Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
Solution:
a) On the unit circle, the angle corresponds to the po int. Therefore,Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions

1.9.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502
b) An angle corresponds to a revolution in the negative di rection, as shown. Therefore,
c) An angle = = +. Therefore, this angle corresponds to more than one revolution, as shown. Knowing the fact t hat an
angle of corresponds to the point, we can conclude that
Evaluate and.
HintExercise

1.9.13.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502Look at angles on the unit circle.
Answer
As mentioned earlier, the ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle can be expressed in terms of the t rigonometric functions
evaluated at either of the acute angles of the trian gle. Let be one of the acute angles. Let be the l ength of the adjacent leg, be
the length of the opposite leg, and be the length o f the hypotenuse. By inscribing the triangle into a circle of radius, as shown
in Figure, we see that, and satisfy the following relation ships with:
Figure: By inscribing a right triangle in a circle, we can express the ratios of the side lengths in terms of the trigonometric
functions evaluated at.
A wooden ramp is to be built with one end on the groun d and the other end at the top of a short staircase. I f the top of the
staircase is ft from the ground and the angle betwe en the ground and the ramp is to be °, how long does the ramp need to
be?
Solution
Let denote the length of the ramp. In the following image, we see that needs to satisfy the equation. Solving
this equation for, we see that ≈ ft.
A house painter wants to lean a -ft ladder against a house. If the angle between the base of the ladder a nd the ground is to be
°, how far from the house should she place the base of the lad der?
Hint
Draw a right triangle with hypotenuse 20.
AnswerExample: Constructing a Wooden Ramp
Exercise

1.9.13.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10950210 ft
Trigonometric Identities
A trigonometric identity is an equation involving trigonometric functions t hat is true for all angles for which the functions a re
defined. We can use the identities to help us solve or si mplify equations. The main trigonometric identities are listed next.
Reciprocal identities
Pythagorean identities
Addition and subtraction formulas
Double-angle formulas
For each of the following equations, use a trigonometric identity to find all solutions.
a.
b.
Solution
a) Using the double-angle formula for, we see that is a so lution of
if and only if
which is true if and only ifTrigonometric Identities
Example: Solving Trigonometric Equations

1.9.13.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502To solve this equation, it is important to note that we need to factor the left-hand side and not divide both sides of the
equation by. The problem with dividing by is that it is possible that is zero. In fact, if we did divi de both
sides of the equation by, we would miss some of the so lutions of the original equation. Factoring the left- hand side
of the equation, we see that is a solution of this equatio n if and only if
Since when
and when
we conclude that the set of solutions to this equation i s
and
b) Using the double-angle formula for and the reciproca l identity for, the equation can be written as
To solve this equation, we multiply both sides by to eliminate the denominator, and say that if satisfi es this
equation, then satisfies the equation
However, we need to be a little careful here. Even if s atisfies this new equation, it may not satisfy the orig inal equation
because, to satisfy the original equation, we would need to be able to divide both sides of the equation by. However,
if, we cannot divide both sides of the equation by. Therefore, it is possible that we may arrive at ex traneous
solutions. So, at the end, it is important to check fo r extraneous solutions. Returning to the equation, i t is important that
we factor out of both terms on the left-hand side i nstead of dividing both sides of the equation by. Fa ctoring the
left-hand side of the equation, we can rewrite this equat ion as
Therefore, the solutions are given by the angles suc h that or. The solutions of the first equation are
The solutions of the second equation are After chec king for
extraneous solutions, the set of solutions to the equatio n is
and
with
Find all solutions to the equation
HintExercise

1.9.13.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502Use the double-angle formula for cosine (Equation).
Answer
for.
Prove the trigonometric identity
Solution:
We start with the Pythagorean identity (Equation)
Dividing both sides of this equation by we obtain
Since and, we conclude that
Prove the trigonometric identity
Answer
Divide both sides of the identity by.
Graphs and Periods of the Trigonometric Functions
We have seen that as we travel around the unit circl e, the values of the trigonometric functions repeat. We can see this pattern in the
graphs of the functions. Let be a point on the unit circle and let be the corresponding angle. Since th e angle and
correspond to the same point, the values of the tr igonometric functions at and at are the same. Conseq uently, the
trigonometric functions are periodic functions. The period of a function is defined to be the sm allest positive value such that
for all values in the domain of. The sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have a period of. Since the
tangent and cotangent functions repeat on an interval of length, their period is (Figure).Example: Proving a Trigonometric Identity
Exercise

1.9.13.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502
Figure: The six trigonometric functions are periodic.
Just as with algebraic functions, we can apply transform ations to trigonometric functions. In particular, consi der the following
function:
In Figure, the constant causes a horizontal or pha se shift. The factor changes the period. This transf ormed sine function
will have a period. The factor results in a vertic al stretch by a factor of. We say is the “amplitude of.” The
constant causes a vertical shift.
Figure: A graph of a general sine function.
Notice in Figure that the graph of is the graph of shifted to the left units. Therefore, we can write
Similarly, we can view the graph of as the graph of sh ifted right units, and state that

1.9.13.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502A shifted sine curve arises naturally when graphing the number of hours of daylight in a given location as a function of the day of
the year. For example, suppose a city reports that June 2 1 is the longest day of the year with 15.7 hours and December 21 is the
shortest day of the year with 8.3 hours. It can be shown that the function
is a model for the number of hours of daylight as a func tion of day of the year (Figure).
Figure: The hours of daylight as a function of day of the year can be modeled by a shifted sine curve.
Sketch a graph of
Solution
This graph is a phase shift of to the right by uni ts, followed by a horizontal compression by a factor of 2, a
vertical stretch by a factor of 3, and then a vertical shi ft by 1 unit. The period of is.
Describe the relationship between the graph of and the graph of.
HintExample: Sketching the Graph of a Transformed Sine Curve
Exercise

1.9.13.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502The graph of can be sketched using the graph of and a s equence of three transformations.
Answer
To graph, the graph of needs to be compressed hor izontally by a factor of 4, then stretched
vertically by a factor of 3, then shifted down 5 units. The function will have a period of and an amplitude of 3.
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
The six basic trigonometric functions are periodic, and therefore they are not one-to-one. However, if we r estrict the domain of a
trigonometric function to an interval where it is on e-to-one, we can define its inverse. Consider the sin e function. The sine function
is one-to-one on an infinite number of intervals, b ut the standard convention is to restrict the domain to the interval. By
doing so, we define the inverse sine function on the do main such that for any in the interval, the inve rse sine
function tells us which angle in the interval sati sfies. Similarly, we can restrict the domains of the ot her
trigonometric functions to define inverse trigonometric functions, which are functions that tell us which angle in a c ertain interval
has a specified trigonometric value.
The inverse sine function, denoted or, and the inv erse cosine function, denoted or, are defined on the
domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
The inverse tangent function, denoted or, and inver se cotangent function, denoted or, are defined on
the domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
The inverse cosecant function, denoted or, and inve rse secant function, denoted or, are defined on the
domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
To graph the inverse trigonometric functions, we use the graphs of the trigonometric functions restricted to the domains defined
earlier and reflect the graphs about the line (Figure).Definition: inverse trigonometric functions

1.9.13.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502
Figure: The graph of each of the inverse trigonometr ic functions is a reflection about the line of the c orresponding
restricted trigonometric function.
When evaluating an inverse trigonometric function, t he output is an angle. For example, to evaluate, we n eed to find an
angle such that. Clearly, many angles have this pro perty. However, given the definition of, we need the an gle
that not only solves this equation, but also lies in the int erval. We conclude that.
We now consider a composition of a trigonometric funct ion and its inverse. For example, consider the two expr essions
and
For the first one, we simplify as follows:
For the second one, we have
The inverse function is supposed to “undo” the origina l function, so why isn’t Recalling our definition of inverse
functions, a function and its inverse satisfy the conditions for all in the domain of and for
all in the domain of, so what happened here? The is sue is that the inverse sine function,, is the inver se of the restricted
sine function defined on the domain. Therefore, for in the interval, it is true that. However, for
values of outside this interval, the equation does not ho ld, even though is defined for all real numbers.
What about Does that have a similar issue? The answer is no. Since the domain of is the interval, we
conclude that if and the expression is not defined for other values of. To summarize,
if
and

1.9.13.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502 if
Similarly, for the cosine function,
if
and
if
Similar properties hold for the other trigonometric f unctions and their inverses.
Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. Evaluating is equivalent to finding the angle such that and. The angle
satisfies these two conditions. Therefore,.
b. First we use the fact that Then. Therefore,.
c. To evaluate,first use the fact that. Then we need to f ind the angle such that
and. Since satisfies both these conditions, we have.
d. Since, we need to evaluate. That is, we need to find the angle such that and
. Since satisfies both these conditions, we can conclude that
In many areas of science, engineering, and mathematic s, it is useful to know the maximum value a function c an obtain, even if
we don’t know its exact value at a given instant. For instance, if we have a function describing the strengt h of a roof beam, we
would want to know the maximum weight the beam can supp ort without breaking. If we have a function that descri bes the
speed of a train, we would want to know its maximum spe ed before it jumps off the rails. Safe design often dep ends on
knowing maximum values.
This project describes a simple example of a function with a maximum value that depends on two equation coe fficients. We
will see that maximum values can depend on several facto rs other than the independent variable.
1. Consider the graph in Figure of the function Desc ribe its overall shape. Is it periodic? How do you
know?
Figure: The graph of.Example: Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions
The Maximum Value of a Function

1.9.13.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502Using a graphing calculator or other graphing device, estimate the - and -values of the maximum point for the graph (the first
such point where). It may be helpful to express the -value as a multiple of
2. Now consider other graphs of the form for various v alues of and Sketch the graph when and
and find the - and -values for the maximum point. (Remember to express the -value as a multiple of, i f possible.)
Has it moved?
3. Repeat for Is there any relationship to what you foun d in part (2)?
4. Complete the following table, adding a few choices of y our own for and
0 1 3 4
1 0 4 3
1 1 1
1 2 1
2 1 12 5
2 2 5 12
5. Try to figure out the formula for the -values.
6. The formula for the -values is a little harder. The most helpful points from the table are (Hint: Co nsider
inverse trigonometric functions.)
7. If you found formulas for parts (5) and (6), show t hat they work together. That is, substitute the -value f ormula you found into
and simplify it to arrive at the -value formula you foun d.
Key Concepts
Radian measure is defined such that the angle associate d with the arc of length 1 on the unit circle has radian mea sure 1. An
angle with a degree measure of ° has a radian measure of rad.
For acute angles,the values of the trigonometric functio ns are defined as ratios of two sides of a right triangle in wh ich one of
the acute angles is.
For a general angle, let be a point on a circle of radi us corresponding to this angle. The trigonometric f unctions can
be written as ratios involving,, and.
The trigonometric functions are periodic. The sine, c osine, secant, and cosecant functions have period. The tangent and
cotangent functions have period.
Key Equations
Generalized sine function
Glossary
periodic function
a function is periodic if it has a repeating pattern as the values of move from left to right
radians
for a circular arc of length on a circle of radius 1, th e radian measure of the associated angle is
trigonometric functions
functions of an angle defined as ratios of the lengths of the sides of a right triangle

1.9.13.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109502trigonometric identity
an equation involving trigonometric functions that is true for all angles for which the functions in the equa tion are defined
This page titled 1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: Trigonometric Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
1.4: Inverse Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.14.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095031.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Identify the form of an exponential function.
Explain the difference between the graphs of and.
Recognize the significance of the number.
Identify the form of a logarithmic function.
Explain the relationship between exponential and logari thmic functions.
Describe how to calculate a logarithm to a different base.
In this section we examine exponential and logarithm ic functions. We use the properties of these functio ns to solve equations
involving exponential or logarithmic terms, and we study th e meaning and importance of the number.
Exponential Functions
Recall the properties of exponents: If is a positive integer, then we define (with factors of). If is a n egative
integer, then for some positive integer, and we defi ne. Also, is defined to be. If is a rational number,
then, where and are integers and. For example,.
For any base,, the exponential function is defined for all real numbers and. Therefore, the domain of
is and the range is. To graph, we note that for, is increasing on and as,
whereas as. On the other hand, if, is decreasing on and as whereas
as (Figure).
Figure: If, then is increasing on. If, then is de creasing on.
Note that exponential functions satisfy the general l aws of exponents. To remind you of these laws, we state them as r ules.
For any constants,, and for all and
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Use the laws of exponents to simplify each of the following exp ressions.
a. Learning Objectives
Laws of Exponents
Example: Using the Laws of Exponents

1.9.14.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503b.
Solution
a. We can simplify as follows:
b. We can simplify as follows:
The Number e
A special type of exponential function appears freque ntly in real-world applications involves the Euler numb er:
The letter was first used to represent this number b y the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler during the 17 20s. Although
Euler did not discover the number, he showed many impo rtant connections between and logarithmic functions. We still use
the notation today to honor Euler’s work because it appears in many areas of mathematics and because we can use it in many
practical applications.
Functions involving base arise often in applications, we call the function the natural exponential function. Since
, we know is increasing on. In Figure, we show a graph of along with a tangent line to the
graph of at. The function is the only exponentia l function with tangent line at that has a slope o f As we
see later in the text, having this property makes th e natural exponential function the most simple expo nential function to use in
many instances.
Figure: The graph of has a tangent line with slope at.
Logarithmic Functions
Using our understanding of exponential functions, we ca n discuss their inverses, which are the logarithmic f unctions. These come
in handy when we need to consider any phenomenon that varies over a wide range of values, such as the pH scale in chemistry or
decibels in sound levels.
The exponential function is one-to-one, with domain and range. Therefore, it has an inve rse function,
called the logarithmic function with base. For any, the logarithmic function with base, denoted, has do main
and range,and satisfies
if and only if.
For example,Leonhard Euler

1.9.14.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503since,
since,
since for any base.
Furthermore, since and are inverse functions,
and
The most commonly used logarithmic function is the f unction. Since this function uses natural as its bas e, it is called the
natural logarithm. Here we use the notation or to mean. For example,
Since the functions and are inverses of each other,
and,
and their graphs are symmetric about the line (Figure).
Figure: The functions and are inverses of each other, so their graphs are symmetric about the line.
In general, for any base,, the function is symmet ric about the line with the function. Using
this fact and the graphs of the exponential functions, we graph functions for several values of (Figure).
Figure: Graphs of are depicted for.

1.9.14.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Before solving some equations involving exponential an d logarithmic functions, let’s review the basic properties of logarithms.
If, and is any real number, then
Product property
Quotient property
Power property
Solve each of the following equations for.
a.
b.
Solution
a. Applying the natural logarithm function to both sides of the equation, we have
Using the power property of logarithms,
Therefore,
b. Multiplying both sides of the equation by,we arrive at th e equation
Rewriting this equation as
we can then rewrite it as a quadratic equation in:
Now we can solve the quadratic equation. Factoring this equation, we obtain
Therefore, the solutions satisfy and. Taking the nat ural logarithm of both sides gives us the solutions
Solve each of the following equations for.
a.
b. Properties of Logarithms
Example: Solving Equations Involving Exponential Functions
Example: Solving Equations Involving Logarithmic Functions

1.9.14.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503c.
Solution
a. By the definition of the natural logarithm function,
if and only if.
Therefore, the solution is.
b. Using the product (Equation) and power (Equation) properties of logarithmic functions, rewrite the le fthand side of the equation as
Therefore, the equation can be rewritten as
or
The solution is.
c. Using the power property (Equation) of logarithmic fun ctions, we can rewrite the equation as.
Using the quotient property (Equation), this becomes
Therefore,, which implies. We should then check for any ex traneous solutions.
When evaluating a logarithmic function with a calcul ator, you may have noticed that the only options are or, called the
common logarithm, or, which is the natural logarithm. However, exponen tial functions and logarithm functions can be
expressed in terms of any desired base. If you need to use a calculator to evaluate an expression with a d ifferent base, you can
apply the change-of-base formulas first. Using this c hange of base, we typically write a given exponential or logarithmic function
in terms of the natural exponential and natural logarit hmic functions.
Let, and.
1. for any real number.
If, this equation reduces to.
2. for any real number.
If, this equation reduces to.
Use a calculating utility to evaluate with the change-o f-base formula presented earlier.
SolutionRule: Change-of-Base Formulas
Example: Changing Bases

1.9.14.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Use the second equation with and:.
In 1935, Charles Richter developed a scale (now known a s the Richter scale) to measure the magnitude of an earthquake. The
scale is a base-10 logarithmic scale, and it can be described as follows: Consider one earthquake with mag nitude on the
Richter scale and a second earthquake with magnitude on the Richter scale. Suppose, which means the earth quake
of magnitude is stronger, but how much stronger is it t han the other earthquake?
Figure: (credit: modification of work by Robb Hanna wacker, NPS)
A way of measuring the intensity of an earthquake is by using a seismograph to measure the amplitude of t he earthquake
waves. If is the amplitude measured for the first ea rthquake and is the amplitude measured for the seco nd earthquake,
then the amplitudes and magnitudes of the two earthquake s satisfy the following equation:
Consider an earthquake that measures 8 on the Richter scale a nd an earthquake that measures 7 on the Richter scale. Then,
Therefore,
which implies or. Since is 10 times the size of, we say that the first earthquake is 10 times as
intense as the second earthquake. On the other hand, i f one earthquake measures 8 on the Richter scale and another measures 6,
then the relative intensity of the two earthquakes sati sfies the equation
Therefore,.That is, the first earthquake is 100 times mor e intense than the second earthquake.
How can we use logarithmic functions to compare the re lative severity of the magnitude 9 earthquake in Jap an in 2011 with the
magnitude 7.3 earthquake in Haiti in 2010?
Solution
To compare the Japan and Haiti earthquakes, we can use an equ ation presented earlier:
Therefore,, and we conclude that the earthquake in J apan was approximately 50 times more intense than th e
earthquake in Haiti.
Use the Properties of Logarithms
Now that we have learned about exponential and logarit hmic functions, we can introduce some of the propertie s of logarithms.
These will be very helpful as we continue to solve both exp onential and logarithmic equations.
The first two properties derive from the definition of logarithms. Since, we can convert this to logarithm ic form and get
. Also, since, we get.Example: The Richter Scale for Earthquakes

1.9.14.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Properties of Logarithms
In the next example we could evaluate the logarithm by converting to exponential form, as we have done pre viously, but
recognizing and then applying the properties saves tim e.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Solution
a.
Use the property,.
b.
Use the property,.
The next two properties can also be verified by convertin g them from exponential form to logarithmic form, or th e reverse.
The exponential equation converts to the logarithm ic equation, which is a true statement for positive values
for only.
The logarithmic equation converts to the exponential e quation, which is also a true statement.
These two properties are called inverse properties bec ause, when we have the same base, raising to a power “undo es” the log and
taking the log “undoes” raising to a power. These two properties show the composition of functions. Both ended up with the
identity function which shows again that the exponential a nd logarithmic functions are inverse functions.
Inverse Properties of Logarithms
For and,
In the next example, apply the inverse properties of logar ithms.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
SolutionDefinition
Example
Definition
Example

1.9.14.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503a.
Use the property,.
b.
Use the property,.
There are three more properties of logarithms that wi ll be useful in our work. We know exponential functio ns and logarithmic
function are very interrelated. Our definition of lo garithm shows us that a logarithm is the exponent of the equivalent exponential.
The properties of exponents have related properties for e xponents.
In the Product Property of Exponents,, we see that to multiply the same base, we add the exponents. The Product
Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a product, we add the log of the factors.
Product Property of Logarithms
If and then
The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
We use this property to write the log of a product as a sum of the logs of each factor.
Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logari thm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify, if possible:
a.
b.
Solution
a.
Use the Product Property,.
b.
Use the Product Property,.
Simplify be evaluating,.Definition
Example

1.9.14.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Similarly, in the Quotient Property of Exponents,, we see that to divide the same base, we subtract the expo nents. The
Quotient Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a quotient, we subtract the log of the
numerator and denominator.
Quotient Property of Logarithms
If and then
The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the lo garithms.
Note that.
We use this property to write the log of a quotient as a diff erence of the logs of each factor.
Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logar ithm as a difference of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Solution
a.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Simplify.
b.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Simplify.
The third property of logarithms is related to the Po wer Property of Exponents,, we see that to raise a powe r to a
power, we multiply the exponents. The Power Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a number
raised to a power, we multiply the power times the log of th e number.
Power Property of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,Definition
Example
Definition

1.9.14.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503The log of a number raised to a power as the product product of the power times the log of the number.
We use this property to write the log of a number ra ised to a power as the product of the power times the log of the number. We
essentially take the exponent and throw it in front of t he logarithm.
Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Solution
a.
Use the Power Property,.
b.
Use the Power Property,.
We summarize the Properties of Logarithms here for ea sy reference. While the natural logarithms are a sp ecial case of these
properties, it is often helpful to also show the natural logarithm version of each property.
Properties of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,
Table 10.4.1
Property Base Base

Inverse Properties
Product Property of Logarithms
Quotient Property of Logarithms
Power Property of Logarithms
Now that we have the properties we can use them to “expa nd” a logarithmic expression. This means to write the logarithm as a sum
or difference and without any powers.
We generally apply the Product and Quotient Properties bef ore we apply the Power Property.Example

1.9.14.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Solution
Use the Product Property,.
Use the Power Property,, on the last two terms. Simplify.
When we have a radical in the logarithmic expression, it is helpful to first write its radicand as a rational expone nt.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Solution
Rewrite the radical with a rational exponent.
Use the Power Property,.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Use the Product Property,, in the second term.
Use the Power Property,, inside the parentheses.
Simplify by distributing.
The opposite of expanding a logarithm is to condens e a sum or difference of logarithms that have the s ame base into a single
logarithm. We again use the properties of logarithms to help us, but in reverse.
To condense logarithmic expressions with the same base into one logarithm, we start by using the Power Propert y to get the
coefficients of the log terms to be one and then the Pr oduct and Quotient Properties as needed.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Solution
The log expressions all have the same base,.
The first two terms are added, so we use the Product Property,.
Since the logs are subtracted, we use the Quotient Property,.Example
Example
Example

1.9.14.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Solution
The log expressions have the same base,.
Use the Power Property,.
The terms are added, so we use the Product Property,.
Use the Change-of-Base Formula
To evaluate a logarithm with any other base, we can use the Change-of-Base Formula. We will show how this is derived.
The Change-of-Base Formula introduces a new base. Thi s can be any base we want where. Because our calculat ors
have keys for logarithms base and base, we will rewrite the Change-of-Base Formula with the new base as or.
Change-of-Base Formula
For any logarithmic bases and,
When we use a calculator to find the logarithm value, we usually round to three decimal places. This gives us an approximate value
and so we use the approximately equal symbol.
Rounding to three decimal places, approximate.
SolutionExample
Definition
Example

1.9.14.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Table 10.4.2

Use the Change-of-Base Formula.
Identify and. Choose for.
Enter the expression in the calculator using the log
button for base. Round to three decimal places.
In the previous section, we derived two important prope rties of logarithms, which allowed us to solve some basi c exponential and
logarithmic equations.
Inverse Properties:
Exponential Property:
Change of Base:
While these properties allow us to solve a large numb er of problems, they are not sufficient to solve all problems involving
exponential and logarithmic equations.
Sum of Logs Property:
Difference of Logs Property:
It’s just as important to know what properties logarith ms do not satisfy as to memorize the valid propertie s listed above. In
particular, the logarithm is not a linear function, which m eans that it does not distribute:
To help in this process we offer a proof of Equation to help solidify our new rules and show how they fol low from
properties you’ve already seen.
Let and.
By definition of the logarithm, and.
Using these expressions,properties of logs
properties of logs
Proof

1.9.14.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Using exponent rules on the right,
Taking the log of both sides, and utilizing the inverse pro perty of logs,
Replacing and with their definition establishes the res ult
The proof for the difference property is very similar.
With these properties, we can rewrite expressions involv ing multiple logs as a single log, or break an express ion involving a single
log into expressions involving multiple logs.
Write as a single logarithm.
Solution
Using the sum of logs property on the first two terms,
This reduces our original expression to
Then using the difference of logs property,
Evaluate without a calculator by first rewriting as a single logarithm.
Solution
On the first term, we can use the exponent property of logs to write
With the expression reduced to a sum of two logs,, we can ut ilize the sum of logs property
Since, we can evaluate this log without a calculator:
Rewrite as a sum or difference of logs
Solution
First, noticing we have a quotient of two expressions, we can utilize the difference property of logs to writeExample
Example
Example

1.9.14.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Then seeing the product in the first term, we use the sum pr operty
Finally, we could use the exponent property on the first term
Log properties in Solving Equations
The logarithm properties often arise when solving prob lems involving logarithms. First, we’ll look at a simple r log equation.
Solve.
Solution
To solve for, we need to get it out from inside the log functio n. There are two ways we can approach this.
Method 1: Rewrite as an exponential.
Recall that since the common log is base 10, can be rewritten as the exponential. Likewise,
can be rewritten in exponential form as
Method 2: Exponentiate both sides.
If, then. Using this idea, since, then. Use the inv erse property of logs to
rewrite the left side and get.
Using either method, we now need to solve. Evaluate to get
Add 6 to both sides
Divide both sides by 2
Occasionally the solving process will result in extrane ous solutions – answers that are outside the domain of the original
equation. In this case, our answer looks fine.
Solve.
Solution
In order to rewrite in exponential form, we need a sin gle logarithmic expression on the left side of the equation. Using the
difference property of logs, we can rewrite the left side:
Rewriting in exponential form reduces this to an algebraic equation:Example
Example

1.9.14.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Multiply both sides by
Combine like terms
Divide by 50
Checking this answer in the original equation, we can verify there are no domain issues, and this answer is correct.
Solve.
Solution
Use the sum of logs property on the right
Expand
We have a log on both side of the equation this time. Rewriting in exponential form would be tricky, so ins tead we can
exponentiate both sides.
Use the inverse property of logs
Move terms to one side
Factor
Checking our answers, notice that evaluating the ori ginal equation at would result in us evaluating, wh ich is
undefined. That answer is outside the domain of the o riginal equation, so it is an extraneous solution a nd we discard it.
There is one solution:.
More complex exponential equations can often be solv ed in more than one way. In the following example, we will solve the same
problem in two ways – one using logarithm properties, and the other using exponential properties.Example

1.9.14.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503In 2008, the population of Kenya was approximately 38.8 million, and was growing by 2.64% each year, while the population
of Sudan was approximately 41.3 million and growing by 2.24% each year(World Bank, World Development Indicat ors, as
reported on http://www.google.com/publicdata, retrieved August 24, 2010). If these trends continu e, when will the population
of Kenya match that of Sudan?
Solution
We start by writing an equation for each population in te rms of, the number of years after 2008.
To find when the populations will be equal, we can set the equa tions equal
For our first approach, we take the log of both sides of the equation.
Utilizing the sum property of logs, we can rewrite each sid e,
Then utilizing the exponent property, we can pull the vari ables out of the exponent
Moving all the terms involving to one side of the equa tion and the rest of the terms to the other side,
Factoring out the on the left,
Dividing to solve for
It will be 15.991 years until the populations will be equal.
Solve the problem above by rewriting before taking the log.
Solution
Starting at the equation
Divide to move the exponential terms to one side of th e equation and the constants to the other side
Using exponent rules to group on the left,Example
Example

1.9.14.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Taking the log of both sides
Utilizing the exponent property on the left,
Dividing gives
While the answer does not immediately appear identic al to that produced using the previous method, note that by using the
difference property of logs, the answer could be rewritten:
While both methods work equally well, it often require s fewer steps to utilize algebra before taking logs, rather than relying solely
on log properties.
Applications
While we have explored some basic applications of ex ponential and logarithmic functions, in this sectio n we explore some
important applications in more depth.
Radioactive Decay
In Nuclear Physics we discuss radioactive decay – the i dea that radioactive isotopes change over time. One o f the common terms
associated with radioactive decay is half-life.
The half-life of a radioactive isotope is the time it takes for half the substance to decay.
Given the basic exponential growth/decay equation, h alf-life can be found by solving for when half the o riginal amount
remains; by solving, or more simply. Notice how the initial amount is irrelevant when solving for half-life.
Bismuth-210 is an isotope that decays by about 13% each d ay. What is the half-life of Bismuth-210?
Solution
We were not given a starting quantity, so we could eith er make up a value or use an unknown constant to rep resent the
starting amount. To show that starting quantity does not affect the result, let us denote the initial qua ntity by the constant a.
Then the decay of Bismuth-210 can be described by the equa tion.
To find the half-life, we want to determine when the remain ing quantity is half the original:. Solving,
Divide by,Definition: Half Life
Example

1.9.14.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Take the log of both sides
Use the exponent property of logs
Divide to solve for
This tells us that the half-life of Bismuth-210 is approx imately 5 days.
Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. If yo u begin with 200 mg of cesium-137, how much will remain after 30 years?
60 years? 90 years?
Solution
Since the half-life is 30 years, after 30 years, half the o riginal amount, 100 mg, will remain.
After 60 years, another 30 years have passed, so duri ng that second 30 years, another half of the substance will decay,
leaving 50 mg.
After 90 years, another 30 years have passed, so another hal f of the substance will decay, leaving 25 mg.
Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. Find the annua l decay rate.
Solution
Since we are looking for an annual decay rate, we will use an equation of the form. We know that after 30
years, half the original amount will remain. Using this inform ation
Dividing by
Taking the 30 root of both sides
Subtracting one from both sides,
This tells us cesium-137 is decaying at an annual rate of 2.2 84% per year.Example
Example

1.9.14.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope that is present i n organic materials, and is commonly used for datin g historical artifacts.
Carbon-14 has a half-life of 5730 years. If a bone fra gment is found that contains 20% of its original car bon-14, how old is the
bone?
Solution
To find how old the bone is, we first will need to find an equation for the decay of the carbon-14. We coul d either use a
continuous or annual decay formula, but opt to use t he continuous decay formula since it is more common in scientific
texts. The half life tells us that after 5730 years, half the original substance remains. Solving for the rate,
Dividing by
Taking the natural log of both sides
Use the inverse property of logs on the right side
Divide by 5730
Now we know the decay will follow the equation. To find how old the bone fragment is that contains 20%
of the original amount, we solve for so that.
The bone fragment is about 13,300 years old.
Doubling Time
For decaying quantities, we asked how long it takes for half the substance to decay. For growing quantities we might ask how long
it takes for the quantity to double.Example

1.9.14.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503The doubling time of a growing quantity is the time it takes for the quantit y to double.
Given the basic exponential growth equation, doublin g time can be found by solving for when the original quantity has
doubled; by solving, or more simply. Like with dec ay, the initial amount is irrelevant when solving fo r doubling
time.
Cancer cells sometimes increase exponentially. If a c ancerous growth contained 300 cells last month and 3 60 cells this month,
how long will it take for the number of cancer cells to dou ble?
Solution
Defining to be time in months, with corresponding to this month, we are given two pieces of data: this mont h, (0,
360), and last month, (-1, 300).
From this data, we can find an equation for the growth. Using t he form, we know immediately a = 360, giving
. Substituting in (-1, 300),
This gives us the equation
To find the doubling time, we look for the time when we will hav e twice the original amount, so when.
months for the number of cancer cells to double.
Use of a new social networking website has been growing e xponentially, with the number of new members doubling e very 5
months. If the site currently has 120,000 users and this trend continues, how many users will the site have in 1 year?
Solution
We can use the doubling time to find a function tha t models the number of site users, and then use that equa tion to answer
the question. While we could use an arbitrary a as we have before for the initial amount, in this cas e, we know the initial
amount was 120,000.Definition: Doubling Time
Example
Example

1.9.14.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503If we use a continuous growth equation, it would look like, measured in thousands of users after t months.
Based on the doubling time, there would be 240 thousa nd users after 5 months. This allows us to solve for the continuous
growth rate:
Now that we have an equation,, we can predict the number of users a fter 12 months:
So after 1 year, we would expect the site to have around 6 33,140 users.
Newton’s Law of Cooling
When a hot object is left in surrounding air that is at a lower temperature, the object’s temperature will decrease exponentially,
leveling off towards the surrounding air temperature. This "leveling off" will correspond to a horizontal asymptote in the graph of
the temperature function. Unless the room temperature is zero, this will correspond to a vertical shift of the generic exponential
decay function.
The temperature of an object,, in surrounding air with t emperature will behave according to the formula
Where
is time
is a constant determined by the initial temperature of the object
is a constant, the continuous rate of cooling of the obj ect
While an equation of the form could be used, the continuou s growth form is more common.
A cheesecake is taken out of the oven with an ideal internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit, and is placed into a 35
degree refrigerator. After 10 minutes, the cheesecake has cooled to 150 degrees. If you must wait until th e cheesecake has
cooled to 70 degrees before you eat it, how long will you have to wait?
Solution
Since the surrounding air temperature in the refriger ator is 35 degrees, the cheesecake’s temperature will decay
exponentially towards 35, following the equation
We know the initial temperature was 165, so. Substituting in these values,Definition: Newton’s Law of Cooling
Example

1.9.14.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503We were given another pair of data,, which we can use to sol ve for
Together this gives us the equation for cooling:
Now we can solve for the time it will take for the temperatur e to cool to 70 degrees.
It will take about 107 minutes, or one hour and 47 m inutes, for the cheesecake to cool. Of course, if you like your
cheesecake served chilled, you’d have to wait a bit longer.
Logarithmic Scales
For quantities that vary greatly in magnitude, a stand ard scale of measurement is not always effective, an d utilizing logarithms can
make the values more manageable. For example, if the average distances from the sun to the major bodies in our solar system are
listed, you see they vary greatly.

1.9.14.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Planet Distance (millions of km)
Mercury 58
Venus 108
Earth 150
Mars 228
Jupiter 779
Saturn 1430
Uranus 2880
Neptune 4500
Placed on a linear scale – one with equally spaced values – the se values get bunched up.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
However, computing the logarithm of each value and plo tting these new values on a number line results in a m ore manageable
graph, and makes the relative distances more apparen t.(It is interesting to note the large gap between Mars and Jupiter on the log
number line. The asteroid belt is located there, whi ch scientists believe is a planet that never formed b ecause of the effects of the
gravity of Jupiter.)
Planet Distance (millions of km) log(distance)
Mercury 58 1.76
Venus 108 2.03
Earth 150 2.18
Mars 228 2.36
Jupiter 779 2.89
Saturn 1430 3.16
Uranus 2880 3.46
Neptune 4500 3.65

1.9.14.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503
Sometimes, as shown above, the scale on a logarithmic num ber line will show the log values, but more commonly th e original
values are listed as powers of 10, as shown below.
Estimate the value of point on the log scale above
The point appears to be half way between -2 and -1 in log value, so if is the value of this point,
Rewriting in exponential form,
Place the number 6000 on a logarithmic scale.
Solution
Since, this point would belong on the log scale about here:
Notice that on the log scale above Example 8, the vis ual distance on the scale between points and and b etween and is the
same. When looking at the values these points corresp ond to, notice is ten times the value of, and is ten times the value of.
A visual difference between points corresponds to a relat ive (ratio) change between the corresponding values.
Logarithms are useful for showing these relative chang es. For example, comparing $1,000,000 to $10,000, the fir st is 100 times
larger than the second.
Likewise, comparing $1000 to $10, the first is 100 times larger than the second.Example
Example

1.9.14.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503When one quantity is roughly ten times larger than another, we say it is one order of magnitude larger. In both cases described
above, the first number was two orders of magnitude larger th an the second.
Notice that the order of magnitude can be found as t he common logarithm of the ratio of the quantities. On the log scale above, B is
one order of magnitude larger than, and is one order o f magnitude larger than.
Given two values and, to determine how many orders of magnitude is greater than,
Difference in orders of magnitude = log(
On the log scale above Example 8, how many orders of magn itude larger is than?
Solution
The value corresponds to
The value corresponds to
The relative change is. The log of this value is 3.
is three orders of magnitude greater than, which c an be seen on the log scale by the visual difference between the
points on the scale.
Earthquakes
An example of a logarithmic scale is the Moment Magni tude Scale (MMS) used for earthquakes. This scale is commo nly and
mistakenly called the Richter Scale, which was a very similar s cale succeeded by the MMS.
For an earthquake with seismic moment, a measurement of earth movement, the MMS value, or magnitude of the
earthquake, is
Where is a baseline measure for the seismic moment.
If one earthquake has a MMS magnitude of 6.0, and anoth er has a magnitude of 8.0, how much more powerful (in t erms of
earth movement) is the second earthquake?
Solution
Since the first earthquake has magnitude 6.0, we can fi nd the amount of earth movement for that quake, which we'll denote
. The value of is not particularity relevant, so we will not replace it with its value.Definition: Orders of magnitude
Example
Moment Magnitude Scale
Example

1.9.14.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503This tells us the first earthquake has about times more earth movement than the baseline measure.
Doing the same with the second earthquake,, with a magnitude of 8.0,
Comparing the earth movement of the second earthquake to the first,
The second value's earth movement is 1000 times as lar ge as the first earthquake.
One earthquake has magnitude of 3.0. If a second eart hquake has twice as much earth movement as the first earthquake, find
the magnitude of the second quake.
Solution
Since the first quake has magnitude 3.0,
Solving for,
Since the second earthquake has twice as much earth mov ement, for the second quake,Example

1.9.14.28 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Finding the magnitude,
The second earthquake with twice as much earth movement will have a magnitude of about 3.2.
In fact, using log properties, we could show that whene ver the earth movement doubles, the magnitude will incr ease by about
0.201:
This illustrates the most important feature of a log scale: that the quantity being considered will to t he scale value,
and vice versa.
Key Concepts
Inverse Properties of Logarithms
For and
Product Property of Logarithms
If and, then,
The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
Quotient Property of Logarithms
If and, then,
The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the lo garithms.
Power Property of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,
The log of a number raised to a power is the product of the power times the log of the number.

1.9.14.29 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109503Properties of Logarithms Summary
If and is any real number then,
Table 10.4.1
Property Base Base

Inverse Properties
Product Property of Logarithms
Quotient Property of Logarithms
Power Property of Logarithms
Change-of-Base Formula
For any logarithmic bases and, and,
Key Concepts
The exponential function is increasing if and decre asing if. Its domain is and its range is.
The logarithmic function is the inverse of. Its dom ain is and its range is
The natural exponential function is and the natural l ogarithmic function is
Given an exponential function or logarithmic function in base, we can make a change of base to convert this function to any
base, We typically convert to base.
This page titled 1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
1.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
10.5: Use the Properties of Logarithms by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.
4.4: Logarithmic Properties by David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.opentextbookstore.com/details.php?id=30.
4.6: Exponential and Logarithmic Models by David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.opentextbookstore.com/details.php?id=30.

1.9.15.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095041.9.15: Derivatives
Recognize the meaning of the tangent to a curve at a poin t.
Calculate the slope of a tangent line.
Identify the derivative as the limit of a difference quoti ent.
Calculate the derivative of a given function at a point.
Describe the velocity as a rate of change.
Explain the difference between average velocity and inst antaneous velocity.
Estimate the derivative from a table of values.
Tangent Lines
We define the tangent line to the graph of a function as f ollows.
Let be a function defined in an open interval cont aining. The tangent line to at is the line passin g through the point
having slope
provided this limit exists.
Equivalently, we may define the tangent line to at to be the line passing through the point ha ving slope
provided this limit exists.
Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of at
Solution
First find the slope of the tangent line. In this example, u se Equation.
Next, find a point on the tangent line. Since the line is tangent to the graph of at, it passes through t he point
. We have, so the tangent line passes through the poi nt.
Using the point-slope equation of the line with the sl ope and the point, we obtain the line.
Simplifying, we have. The graph of and its tangent li ne at are shown in Figure.Learning Objectives
Definition: Tangent Line
Example: Finding a Tangent Line
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.15.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504
Figure: The tangent line to at.
Use Equation to find the slope of the line tangent to t he graph of at.
Solution
The steps are very similar to Example. See Equation for the definition.
We obtained the same value for the slope of the tan gent line by using the other definition, demonstrati ng that the formulas
can be interchanged.
Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of at.
Solution
We can use Equation, but as we have seen, the results are t he same if we use Equation.
We now know that the slope of the tangent line is. T o find the equation of the tangent line, we also nee d a point on the
line. We know that. Since the tangent line passes thro ugh the point we can use the point-slope equation of a
line to find the equation of the tangent line. Thus the tangent line has the equation. The graphs of and
are shown in Figure.Example: The Slope of a Tangent Line Revisited
Example: Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.15.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504
Figure:The line is tangent to at.
The Derivative of a Function at a Point
The type of limit we compute in order to find the sl ope of the line tangent to a function at a point oc curs in many applications
across many disciplines. These applications include ve locity and acceleration in physics, marginal profit functions in business, and
growth rates in biology. This limit occurs so freque ntly that we give this value a special name: the derivative. The process of
finding a derivative is called differentiation.
Let be a function defined in an open interval cont aining. The derivative of the function at, denoted by, is
defined by
provided this limit exists.
Alternatively, we may also define the derivative of at as
For, use a table to estimate using Equation.
Solution
Create a table using values of just below and just abov e.
2.9 5.9
2.99 5.99
2.999 5.999
3.001 6.001
3.01 6.01
3.1 6.1
After examining the table, we see that a good estimate is.Definition: Derivative
Example: Estimating a Derivative

1.9.15.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504For, find by using Equation.
Solution
Substitute the given function and value directly into the e quation.
For, find by using Equation.
Solution
Using this equation, we can substitute two values of the f unction into the equation, and we should get the same v alue as in
Example.
The results are the same whether we use Equation or Equation.
Velocities and Rates of Change
Now that we can evaluate a derivative, we can use it in v elocity applications. Recall that if is the positi on of an object moving
along a coordinate axis, the average velocity of the object over a time interval if or if is give n by
As the values of approach, the values of approach the value we call the instantaneous velocity at. That is, instantaneous
velocity at, denoted, is given by
To better understand the relationship between averag e velocity and instantaneous velocity, see Figure. In this figure, the
slope of the tangent line (shown in red) is the instan taneous velocity of the object at time whose positi on at time is given by
the function. The slope of the secant line (shown in gree n) is the average velocity of the object over the time interval.
Figure: The slope of the secant line is the average ve locity over the interval. The slope of the tangent line is the
instantaneous velocity.
We can use Equation to calculate the instantaneous velocity, or we can estimate the velocity of a movi ng object by using a
table of values. We can then confirm the estimate by using Equation.Example: Finding a Derivative
Erroneous nesting of equation structures
Example: Revisiting the Derivative
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.15.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504A lead weight on a spring is oscillating up and down. I ts position at time with respect to a fixed horizon tal line is given by
(Figure). Use a table of values to estimate. Check the est imate by using Equation.
Figure: A lead weight suspended from a spring in verti cal oscillatory motion.
Solution
We can estimate the instantaneous velocity at by com puting a table of average velocities using values of approaching
, as shown in Table.
Table: Average velocities using values of approachin g 0
−0.1 0.998334166
−0.01 0.9999833333
−0.001 0.999999833
0.001 0.999999833
0.01 0.9999833333
0.1 0.998334166
From the table we see that the average velocity over the time interval is, the average velocity over t he
time interval is, and so forth. Using this table of valu es, it appears that a good estimate is.
By using Equation, we can see that
Thus, in fact,.
As we have seen throughout this section, the slope of a tangent line to a function and instantaneous velocit y are related concepts.
Each is calculated by computing a derivative and ea ch measures the instantaneous rate of change of a f unction, or the rate of
change of a function at any point along the function.
The instantaneous rate of change of a function at a value is its derivative.
Reaching a top speed of mph, the Hennessey Venom GT i s one of the fastest cars in the world. In tests it went from to
mph in seconds, from to mph in seconds, from to mph in seconds, and from to mph in
seconds. Use this data to draw a conclusion about the rat e of change of velocity (that is, its acceleration) as it approaches
mph. Does the rate at which the car is accelerating appear to be increasing, decreasing, or constant?Example: Estimating Velocity
Definition: Instantaneous Rate of Change
Example: Chapter Opener: Estimating Rate of Change of Velocity

1.9.15.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504
Figure: (credit: modification of work by Codex41, Fl ickr)
Solution
First observe that mph = ft/s, mph ≈ ft/s, mph ≈ ft/ s, and mph ≈ ft/s. We can
summarize the information in a table.
Table: at different values of
0 0
3.05 88
5.88 147.67
14.51 293.33
19.96 337.19
Now compute the average acceleration of the car in fe et per second on intervals of the form as approac hes,
as shown in the following table.
Average acceleration
0.0 16.89
3.05 14.74
5.88 13.46
14.51 8.05
The rate at which the car is accelerating is decreasing as i ts velocity approaches mph (ft/s).
A homeowner sets the thermostat so that the temperatur e in the house begins to drop from at p.m., reaches a low of
during the night, and rises back to by a.m. the nex t morning. Suppose that the temperature in the house is given by
for, where is the number of hours past p.m. Find the instantaneous rate of change of the
temperature at midnight.
Solution
Since midnight is hours past p.m., we want to compute. R efer to Equation.
The instantaneous rate of change of the temperature at midnight is per hour.Example: Rate of Change of Temperature
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.15.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504A toy company can sell electronic gaming systems at a price of dollars per gaming system. The cost of
manufacturing systems is given by dollars. Find the rate of change of profit when games are
produced. Should the toy company increase or decrease pr oduction?
Solution
The profit earned by producing gaming systems is, where is the revenue obtained from the sale of
games. Since the company can sell games at per game,
Consequently,
Therefore, evaluating the rate of change of profit gives
Since the rate of change of profit and, the company sho uld increase production.
Derivative
Consider the function that is plotted in Figure A2.1.1. For any value of, we can define the slope of the fu nction as the
“steepness of the curve”. For values of the functio n increases as increases, so we say that the slope is posi tive. For values of
, the function decreases as increases, so we say that the slope is negative. A synonym for the word slope is “derivative”,
which is the word that we prefer to use in calculus. The derivative of a function is given the symbol to in dicate that we are
referring to the slope of when plotted as a function of.
We need to specify which variable we are taking the d erivative with respect to when the function has more t han one variable but
only one of them should be considered independent. For example, the function will have different value s if and
are changed, so we have to be precise in specifying that we are taking the derivative with respect to. T he following notations are
equivalent ways to say that we are taking the derivative of with respect to:
The notation with the prime () can be useful to indicate t hat the derivative itself is also a function of.
The slope (derivative) of a function tells us how rap idly the value of the function is changing when the independent variable is
changing. For, as gets more and more positive, the f unction gets steeper and steeper; the derivative is t hus increasing
with. The sign of the derivative tells us if the fun ction is increasing or decreasing, whereas its absolute value tells how quickly the
function is changing (how steep it is).
We can approximate the derivative by evaluating how much changes when changes by a small amount, say,. In the limit
of, we get the derivative. In fact, this is the formal defini tion of the derivative:
where is the small change in that corresponds to th e small change,, in. This makes the notation for the derivative
more clear, is in the limit where, and is, in the sa me limit of.
As an example, let us determine the function that is the de rivative of. We start by calculating:Example: Rate of Change of Profit
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.15.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504We now calculate:
and take the limit:
We have thus found that the function,, is the deriva tive of the function. This is illustrated in Figure A2.2.1.
Note that:
For, is positive and increasing with increasing, just as we described earlier (the function is increasing an d
getting steeper).
For, is negative and decreasing in magnitude as inc reases. Thus decreases and gets less steep as increas es.
At, indicating that, at the origin, the function is (momentarily) flat.
Figure: and its derivative, plotted for between and.
Common derivatives and properties
It is beyond the scope of this document to derive th e functional form of the derivative for any function using Equation A2.2.1.
Table A2.2.1 below gives the derivatives for common functions. In all cases, is the independent variable, and all oth er variables
should be thought of as constants:
Function, Derivative,
Table: Common derivatives of functions.
If two functions of 1 variable, and, are combined i nto a third function,, then there are simple rules fo r finding the
derivative,, based on the derivatives and. These are s ummarized in Table A2.2.2 below.

1.9.15.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504Function, Derivative,
(The product rule)
(The quotient rule)
(The Chain Rule)
Table: Derivatives of combined functions.
Use the properties from Table A2.2.2 to show that the derivative of is.
Solution
Since, we can write:
Using the fourth row in Table A2.2.2, and the common derivatives from Table A2.2.1, we have:
as required.
Use the properties from Table A2.2.2 to calculate the derivative of.
Solution
To calculate the derivative of, we need to use the Chain Rule. is found by first taking and then takin g that
result squared. We can thus identify:
Using the common derivatives from Table A2.2.1, we have:
Applying the Chain Rule, we have:Example
Example

1.9.15.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504where means apply the derivative of to the function. Since the derivative of is, when we
apply it to instead of, we get.
Partial derivatives and gradients
So far, we have only looked at the derivative of a fu nction of a single independent variable and used it to quantify how much the
function changes when the independent variable chang es. We can proceed analogously for a function of mul tiple variables,,
by quantifying how much the function changes along t he direction associated with a particular variable. T his is illustrated in Figure
A2.2.2 for the function, which looks somewhat like a saddle.
Figure: plotted for between and and for between and. The point labeled on the figure
shows the value of the function at. The two lines show the function evaluated when one of or is held consta nt.
Suppose that we wish to determine the derivative of the function at and. In this case, it does not make sense to
simply determine the “derivative”, but rather, we mu st specify in which direction we want the derivative. That is, we need to
specify in which direction we are interested in quantify ing the rate of change of the function.
One possibility is to quantify the rate of change in the direction. The solid line in Figure A2.2.2 shows the part of the function
surface where is fixed at -2, that is, the function ev aluated as. The point on the figure shows the value of the
function when and. By looking at the solid line at point, we can see that as increases, the value of the function is
gently decreasing. The derivative of with respect to when is held constant and evaluated at and is thu s
negative. Rather than saying “The derivative of wit h respect to when is held constant” we say “The partial derivative of
with respect to ”.
Since the partial derivative is different than the o rdinary derivative (as it implies that we are holding independent variables fixed),
we give it a different symbol, namely, we use instead of:
Calculating the partial derivative is very easy, as we just treat all variables as constants except for the variable with respect to which
we are differentiating. For the function, we have:1

1.9.15.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504At, the partial derivative of is indeed negative, consistent with our observation that, along the solid line, at point,
the function is decreasing.
A function will have as many partial derivatives as i t has independent variables. Also note that, just like a normal derivative, a
partial derivative is still a function. The partial derivative with respect to a variable tells us how ste ep the function is in the direction
in which that variable increases and whether it is increasi ng or decreasing.
Determine the partial derivatives of.
Solution
In this case, we have three partial derivatives to e valuate. Note that are constants and can be thought of as numbers that
we do not know.
Since the partial derivatives tell us how the functio n changes in a particular direction, we can use them to find the direction in
which the function changes the most rapidly. For example, suppose that the surface from Figure A2. 2.2 corresponds to a real
physical surface and that we place a ball at point. We wish to know in which direction the ball will roll. The direction that it will
roll in is the opposite of the direction where incr eases the most rapidly (i.e. it will roll in the dire ction where
decreases the most rapidly). The direction in which the function increases the most rapidly is called th e “gradient” and denoted by
Since the gradient is a direction, it cannot be repre sented by a single number. Rather, we use a “vector” to indicate this direction.
Since has two independent variables, the gradient will be a vector with two components. The components of th e gradient are
given by the partial derivatives:
where and are the unit vectors in the and direct ions, respectively (sometimes, the unit vectors are deno ted and). The
direction of the gradient tells us in which direction the function increases the fastest, and the magnitude of the gradient tells us how
much the function increases in that direction.
Determine the gradient of the function at the point a nd.
Solution
We have already found the partial derivatives that we n eed to evaluate at and:Example
Example

1.9.15.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504Evaluating the gradient at and:
The gradient vector points in the direction. That is, the function increases the most in the direction where you would
take 1 pace in the negative direction and 2 paces in the positive direction. You can confirm this by l ooking at point in
Figure A2.2.2 and imagining in which direction you would hav e to go to climb the surface to get the steepest climb.
The gradient is itself a function, but it is not a r eal function (in the sense of a real number), since it evaluates to a vector. It is a
mapping from real numbers to a vector. As you take m ore advanced calculus courses, you will eventually e ncounter “vector
calculus”, which is just the calculus for functions o f multiple variables to which you were just introduced. The key point to
remember here is that the gradient can be used to f ind the vector that points in the direction of maxi mal increase of the
corresponding multi-variate function. This is precise ly the quantity that we need in physics to determine in which direction a ball
will roll when placed on a surface (it will roll in the dir ection opposite to the gradient vector).
Common uses of derivatives in physics
The simplest case of using a derivative is to describe t he speed of an object. If an object covers a distanc e in a period of time
, it’s “average speed”,, is defined as the distance covered by the object divided by the amount of tim e it took to cover that
distance:
If the object changes speed (for example it is slowin g down) over the distance, we can still define its “in stantaneous speed”,,
by measuring the amount of time,, that it takes the object to cover a very small distance,. The instantaneous speed is defined
in the limit where:
which is precisely the derivative of with respect to. is a function that gives the position,, of the ob ject along some axis
as a function of time. The speed of the object is thus th e rate of change of its position.
Similarly, if the speed is changing with time, then we can define the “acceleration”,, of an object as the rate of change of its
speed:
Footnotes
1. To take the derivative is to “differentiate”!
Key Takeaways
The derivative of a function,, with respect to can be wri tten as:

1.9.15.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504and measures the rate of change of the function with respect to. The derivative of a function is gener ally itself a function. The
derivative is defined as:
Graphically, the derivative of a function represents the slope of the function, and it is positive if the f unction is increasing, negative
if the function is decreasing and zero if the functi on is flat. Derivatives can always be determined anal ytically for any continuous
function.
A partial derivative measures the rate of change of a multi-variate function,, with respect to one of i ts independent variables.
The partial derivative with respect to one of the va riables is evaluated by taking the derivative of the function with respect to that
variable while treating all other independent variab les as if they were constant. The partial derivative of a function (with respect to
) is written as:
The gradient of a function,, is a vector in the direction in which that function is increasing most rapidly. It i s given by:
Given a function,, its anti-derivative with respect to,, is written:
is such that its derivative with respect to is:
The anti-derivative of a function is only ever define d up to a constant,. We usually write this as:
since the derivative of will also be equal to. The a nti-derivative is also called the “indefinite integral ” of.
The definite integral of a function, between and, is written:
and is equal to the difference in the anti-derivative ev aluated at and:
where the constant no longer matters, since it cancel s out. Physical quantities only ever depend on defini te integrals, since they
must be determined without an arbitrary constant.
Definite integrals are very useful in physics because they are related to a sum. Given a function, one can relate the sum of
terms of the form over a range of values from to to the integral of over that range:
Key Concepts
The slope of the tangent line to a curve measures the in stantaneous rate of change of a curve. We can calculate it by finding the
limit of the difference quotient or the difference quot ient with increment.
The derivative of a function at a value is found usi ng either of the definitions for the slope of the tangen t line.

1.9.15.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109504Velocity is the rate of change of position. As such, the vel ocity at time is the derivative of the position at time.
Average velocity is given by
Instantaneous velocity is given by
We may estimate a derivative by using a table of values.
Key Equations
Difference quotient
Difference quotient with increment h
Slope of tangent line
Derivative of f(x) at a
Average velocity
Instantaneous velocity

This page titled 1.9.15: Derivatives is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Howard Martin revised by
Alan Ng.
3.1: Defining the Derivative by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
26.2: Derivatives by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.
26.4: Summary by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.9.16.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095051.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
Define the derivative function of a given function.
Graph a derivative function from the graph of a given func tion.
State the connection between derivatives and continuity.
Describe three conditions for when a function does not h ave a derivative.
Explain the meaning of a higher-order derivative.
As we have seen, the derivative of a function at a give n point gives us the rate of change or slope of the tangent line to the function
at that point. If we differentiate a position functio n at a given time, we obtain the velocity at that tim e. It seems reasonable to
conclude that knowing the derivative of the function at every point would produce valuable information a bout the behavior of the
function. However, the process of finding the derivativ e at even a handful of values using the techniques o f the preceding section
would quickly become quite tedious. In this section we define the derivative function and learn a process for finding it.
1.9.16.1 Derivative Functions
The derivative function gives the derivative of a fu nction at each point in the domain of the original function for which the
derivative is defined. We can formally define a derivat ive function as follows.
Let be a function. The derivative function, denoted by, is the function whose domain consists of those values of such
that the following limit exists:
A function is said to be differentiable at if exists. More generally, a function is said to be differentiable on if it is
differentiable at every point in an open set, and a differ entiable function is one in which exists on its domain.
In the next few examples we use Equation to find the de rivative of a function.
Find the derivative of.
Solution
Start directly with the definition of the derivative fu nction.
Substitute and into.

Multiply numerator and denominator by without
distributing in the denominator.
Multiply the numerators and simplify.
Cancel the.
Evaluate the limitLearning Objectives
Definition: Derivative Function
Example: Finding the Derivative of a Square-Root Function

1.9.16.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505Find the derivative of the function.
Solution
Follow the same procedure here, but without having to multipl y by the conjugate.
Substitute and into

Expand.
Simplify
Factor out from the numerator
Cancel the common factor of
Evaluate the limit
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Use Equation and follow the example.
Answer
We use a variety of different notations to express t he derivative of a function. In Example we showed tha t if,
then. If we had expressed this function in the form, we could have expressed the derivative as
or. We could have conveyed the same information by writing. Thus, for the function,
each of the following notations represents the derivati ve of:
In place of we may also use. Use of the notation (c alled Leibniz notation) is quite common in engineer ing and
physics. To understand this notation better, recall t hat the derivative of a function at a point is the limit of the slopes of secant lines
as the secant lines approach the tangent line. The s lopes of these secant lines are often expressed in the form where is the
difference in the values corresponding to the differ ence in the values, which are expressed as (Figure). T hus the
derivative, which can be thought of as the instantaneous rate of change of with respect to, is expressed as
.Example: Finding the Derivative of a Quadratic Function
Exercise

1.9.16.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505
Figure: The derivative is expressed as.
1.9.16.2 Graphing a Derivative
We have already discussed how to graph a function, so given the equation of a function or the equation of a derivative function, we
could graph it. Given both, we would expect to see a cor respondence between the graphs of these two functions, since gives
the rate of change of a function (or slope of the tange nt line to).
In Example, we found that for,. If we graph these f unctions on the same axes, as in Figure,
we can use the graphs to understand the relationship be tween these two functions. First, we notice that is inc reasing over its
entire domain, which means that the slopes of its tange nt lines at all points are positive. Consequently, we e xpect for all
values of x in its domain. Furthermore, as increases, the slopes of the tangent lines to are decreasing and we expect to see a
corresponding decrease in. We also observe that is undefined and that, corresponding to a vertical
tangent to at.
Figure: The derivative is positive everywhere because the function is increasing.
In Example, we found that for. The graphs of these functions are shown in Figure.
Observe that is decreasing for. For these same values of,. For values of, is increasing and
. Also, has a horizontal tangent at and.

1.9.16.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505
Figure: The derivative where the function is decre asing and where is increasing. The
derivative is zero where the function has a horizonta l tangent
Use the following graph of to sketch a graph of.
Solution
The solution is shown in the following graph. Observe t hat is increasing and on. Also, is decreasing
and on and on. Also note that has horizontal tan gents at and, and and
.Example: Sketching a Derivative Using a Function

1.9.16.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505
Sketch the graph of. On what interval is the graph of ab ove the -axis?
Hint
The graph of is positive where is increasing.
Answer
1.9.16.3 Derivatives and Continuity
Now that we can graph a derivative, let’s examine the b ehavior of the graphs. First, we consider the relationshi p between
differentiability and continuity. We will see that if a function is differentiable at a point, it must be continuous there; however, a
function that is continuous at a point need not be differentiable at that point. In fact, a function may be continuous at a point and
fail to be differentiable at the point for one of several reasons.
Let be a function and be in its domain. If is diff erentiable at, then is continuous at.
If is differentiable at, then exists and, if we l et, we have, and as, we can see that
Then
can be rewritten as
We want to show that is continuous at by showing that Thus,Exercise
Differentiability Implies Continuity
Proof

1.9.16.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505Therefore, since is defined and, we conclude that is continuous at.
We have just proven that differentiability implies continuity, but now we consider whether continuity imp lies differentiability. To
determine an answer to this question, we examine the function. This function is continuous everywhere; howev er, is
undefined. This observation leads us to believe that continui ty does not imply differentiability. Let’s explore furt her. For,
This limit does not exist because
and.
See Figure.
Figure: The function is continuous at but is not dif ferentiable at.
Let’s consider some additional situations in which a co ntinuous function fails to be differentiable. Consider t he function:
Thus does not exist. A quick look at the graph of clarifies the situation. The function has a vertical t angent line at
(Figure).

1.9.16.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505
Figure: The function has a vertical tangent at. It is continuous at but is not differentiable at.
The function also has a derivative that exhibits intere sting behavior at.
We see that
This limit does not exist, essentially because the sl opes of the secant lines continuously change directi on as they approach zero
(Figure).
Figure: The function is not differentiable at.
In summary:
1. We observe that if a function is not continuous, it cannot be differentiable, since every differentiable fun ction must be
continuous. However, if a function is continuous, it may stil l fail to be differentiable.
2. We saw that failed to be differentiable at becau se the limit of the slopes of the tangent lines on the left and right
were not the same. Visually, this resulted in a sharp corner o n the graph of the function at From this we conclude that in order
to be differentiable at a point, a function must be “smo oth” at that point.
3. As we saw in the example of, a function fails to be differen tiable at a point where there is a vertical tangent line.
4. As we saw with a function may fail to be differentiable at a p oint in more complicated ways as
well.
A toy company wants to design a track for a toy car t hat starts out along a parabolic curve and then conv erts to a straight line
(Figure). The function that describes the track is t o have the form where and
are in inches. For the car to move smoothly along the track, the function must be both continuous and di fferentiable
at. Find values of and that make both continuous and differentiable.Example: A Piecewise Function that is Continuous and Differentiable

1.9.16.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505
Figure: For the car to move smoothly along the track, the function must be both continuous and differentia ble.
Solution
For the function to be continuous at,. Thus, since
and, we must have. Equivalently, we have.
For the function to be differentiable at,
must exist. Since is defined using different rules on the right and the left, we must evaluate this limit fr om the right and the
left and then set them equal to each other:
We also have
This gives us. Thus and.
Find values of a and b that make both continuous and diff erentiable at.
Hint
Use Example as a guide.
Answer
and
1.9.16.4 Higher-Order Derivatives
The derivative of a function is itself a function, so we can find the derivative of a derivative. For examp le, the derivative of a
position function is the rate of change of position, or velocity. The derivative of velocity is the rate of change of velocity, which is
acceleration. The new function obtained by differenti ating the derivative is called the second derivative. Furthermore, we can
continue to take derivatives to obtain the third de rivative, fourth derivative, and so on. Collectively, these are referred to as higherorder derivatives. The notation for the higher-order derivatives of ca n be expressed in any of the following forms:
It is interesting to note that the notation for may be v iewed as an attempt to express more compactly.Erroneous nesting of equation structures
Erroneous nesting of equation structures
Exercise

1.9.16.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505Analogously,.
For, find.
Solution
First find.
Substitute and into

Simplify the numerator.
Factor out the in the numerator and cancel with the in the
denominator.
Take the limit.
Next, find by taking the derivative of
Use with in place of
Substitute and
Simplify.
Take the limit.
Find for.
Hint
We found in a previous checkpoint. Use Equation to f ind the derivative of
Answer
The position of a particle along a coordinate axis at time (in seconds) is given by (in meters). Find th e
function that describes its acceleration at time.
Solution
Since and, we begin by finding the derivative of:
Next,Example: Finding a Second Derivative
Exercise
Example: Finding Acceleration
Erroneous nesting of equation structures
Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.16.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109505Thus,.
For, find
Hint
Use Example as a guide.
Answer
1.9.16.5 Key Concepts
The derivative of a function is the function whose val ue at is.
The graph of a derivative of a function is related t o the graph of. Where has a tangent line with positi ve slope,
. Where has a tangent line with negative slope,. Whe re has a horizontal tangent line,
If a function is differentiable at a point, then it is con tinuous at that point. A function is not differentiable at a point if it is not
continuous at the point, if it has a vertical tangent li ne at the point, or if the graph has a sharp corner or cusp.
Higher-order derivatives are derivatives of derivatives, from the second derivative to the derivative.
1.9.16.6 Key Equations
The derivative function
1.9.16.7 Glossary
derivative function
gives the derivative of a function at each point in the do main of the original function for which the derivative is d efined
differentiable at
a function for which exists is differentiable at
differentiable on
a function for which exists for each in the open set is differentiable on
differentiable function
a function for which exists is a differentiable function
higher-order derivative
a derivative of a derivative, from the second derivative t o the derivative, is called a higher-order derivativ e
1.9.16.8 Contributors and Attributions
Template:ContribOpenStaxCalc
Paul Seeburger (Monroe Community College) added explanatio n of the alternative definition of the derivative used in the proof
of that differentiability implies continuity.
This page titled 1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.2: The Derivative as a Function by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.Exercise

1.9.17.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095061.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
Explain how the sign of the first derivative affects the shape of a function’s graph.
State the first derivative test for critical points.
Use concavity and inflection points to explain how the sign o f the second derivative affects the shape of a function ’s graph.
Explain the concavity test for a function over an open interval.
Explain the relationship between a function and its fir st and second derivatives.
State the second derivative test for local extrema.
Earlier in this chapter we stated that if a function has a local extremum at a point, then must be a c ritical point of. However,
a function is not guaranteed to have a local extremum at a critical point. For example, has a critical po int at since
is zero at, but does not have a local extremum at. Using the results from the previous section, we are n ow
able to determine whether a critical point of a func tion actually corresponds to a local extreme value. In this section, we also see
how the second derivative provides information about the shape of a graph by describing whether the graph of a function curves
upward or curves downward.
The First Derivative Test
Corollary of the Mean Value Theorem showed that if th e derivative of a function is positive over an inter val then the function is
increasing over. On the other hand, if the derivati ve of the function is negative over an interval, th en the function is decreasing
over as shown in the following figure.
Figure: Both functions are increasing over the interv al. At each point, the derivative. Both function s are
decreasing over the interval. At each point, the d erivative
A continuous function has a local maximum at point if and only if switches from increasing to decreasin g at point. Similarly,
has a local minimum at if and only if switches fro m decreasing to increasing at. If is a continuous function over an interval
containing and differentiable over, except possib ly at, the only way can switch from increasing to dec reasing (or vice
versa) at point is if changes sign as increases thr ough. If is differentiable at, the only way that can change sign as
increases through is if. Therefore, for a function that is continuous over an interval containing an d differentiable
over, except possibly at, the only way can switch f rom increasing to decreasing (or vice versa) is if or isLearning Objectives

1.9.17.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506undefined. Consequently, to locate local extrema for a function, we look for points in the domain of su ch that or
is undefined. Recall that such points are called crit ical points of.
Note that need not have a local extrema at a critic al point. The critical points are candidates for loca l extrema only. In Figure
, we show that if a continuous function has a local e xtremum, it must occur at a critical point, but a fun ction may not have
a local extremum at a critical point. We show that i f has a local extremum at a critical point, then t he sign of switches as
increases through that point.
Figure: The function has four critical points:,and. The function has local maxima at and, and a loc al
minimum at. The function does not have a local ext remum at. The sign of changes at all local extrema.
Using Figure, we summarize the main results regarding local extrema.
If a continuous function has a local extremum, it must o ccur at a critical point.
The function has a local extremum at the critical poin t if and only if the derivative switches sign as inc reases through.
Therefore, to test whether a function has a local extrem um at a critical point, we must determine the sign of to t he left
and right of.
This result is known as the first derivative test.
Suppose that is a continuous function over an interval containing a critical point. If is differentiabl e over, except
possibly at point, then satisfies one of the following des criptions:
i. If changes sign from positive when to negative when, t hen is a local maximum of.
ii. If changes sign from negative when to positive when, then is a local minimum of.
iii. If has the same sign for and, then is neither a local maximum nor a local minimum of
Now let’s look at how to use this strategy to locate all loca l extrema for particular functions.
Use the first derivative test to find the location of all local extrema for Use a graphing utility to
confirm your results.
Solution
Step 1. The derivative is To find the critical points, we need to find where Factoring the
polynomial, we conclude that the critical points must satisf yFirst Derivative Test
Example: Using the First Derivative Test to Find Local Extrema

1.9.17.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506Therefore, the critical points are Now divide the int erval into the smaller intervals and
Step 2. Since is a continuous function, to determine th e sign of over each subinterval, it suffices to choose a point over
each of the intervals and and determine the sign of at each of these points. For example, let’s choose
,, and as test points.
Table:: First Derivative Test for
Interval Test PointSign of
at Test PointConclusion
(+)(−)(−)=+ is increasing.
(+)(−)(+)=- is decreasing.
(+)(+)(+)=+ is increasing.
Step 3. Since switches sign from positive to negative as increases through, has a local maximum at. Since
switches sign from negative to positive as increases through, has a local minimum at. These analytica l results agree
with the following graph.
Figure: The function has a maximum at and a minimu m at
Use the first derivative test to locate all local extrema fo r
HintExercise

1.9.17.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506Find all critical points of and determine the signs of over particular intervals determined by the critical p oints.
Answer
has a local minimum at and a local maximum at.
Use the first derivative test to find the location of all local extrema for Use a graphing utility to co nfirm
your results.
Solution
Step 1. The derivative is
The derivative when Therefore, at. The derivative is undefined at
Therefore, we have three critical points:,, and. C onsequently, divide the interval into the smaller
intervals, and.
Step 2: Since is continuous over each subinterval, it su ffices to choose a test point in each of the interva ls from step 1 and
determine the sign of at each of these points. The points, and are test points for these intervals.
Table:: First Derivative Test for
Interval Test PointSign of at Test
PointConclusion
is decreasing.
is increasing.
is increasing.
is decreasing.
Step 3: Since is decreasing over the interval and i ncreasing over the interval, has a local minimum at
. Since is increasing over the interval and the in terval, does not have a local extremum at. Since is
increasing over the interval and decreasing over th e interval, has a local maximum at. The analytic al results
agree with the following graph.
Figure: The function has a local minimum at and a local maximum at
Use the first derivative test to find all local extrema fo r.
HintExample: Using the First Derivative Test
Exercise

1.9.17.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506The only critical point of is
Answer
has no local extrema because does not change sign at.
Concavity and Points of Inflection
We now know how to determine where a function is increa sing or decreasing. However, there is another issue to consider regarding
the shape of the graph of a function. If the graph c urves, does it curve upward or curve downward? This noti on is called the
concavity of the function.
Figure shows a function with a graph that curves upwa rd. As increases, the slope of the tangent line incr eases. Thus,
since the derivative increases as increases, is an increasing function. We say this function is concave up. Figure
shows a function that curves downward. As increases, the s lope of the tangent line decreases. Since the deriva tive decreases as
increases, is a decreasing function. We say this func tion is concave down.
Let be a function that is differentiable over an o pen interval. If is increasing over, we say is concave up over. If
is decreasing over, we say is concave down over.
Figure: (a), (c) Since is increasing over the interv al, we say is concave up over Since is
decreasing over the interval, we say is concave down over
In general, without having the graph of a function, how can we determine its concavity? By definition, a function is
concave up if is increasing. From Corollary, we know t hat if is a differentiable function, then is increa sing if its
derivative. Therefore, a function that is twice dif ferentiable is concave up when. Similarly, a function is
concave down if is decreasing. We know that a differe ntiable function is decreasing if its derivative. Therefore,
a twice-differentiable function is concave down when. Applying this logic is known as the concavity test.Definition: concavity test

1.9.17.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506Let be a function that is twice differentiable over an i nterval.
i. If for all, then is concave up over
ii. If for all then is concave down over.
We conclude that we can determine the concavity of a function by looking at the second derivative of. In addition, we observe
that a function can switch concavity (Figure). However, a continuous function can switch concavity only at a point if
or is undefined. Consequently, to determine the i ntervals where a function is concave up and concave down, we
look for those values of where or is undefined. Whe n we have determined these points, we divide the domain of
into smaller intervals and determine the sign of ov er each of these smaller intervals. If changes sign as we pass through a
point, then changes concavity. It is important to remember that a function may not change concavity at a point even if
or is undefined. If, however, does change concavity at a point and is continuous at, we say the point is an
inflection point of.
If is continuous at and changes concavity at, the p oint is an inflection point of.
Figure: Since for, the function is concave up over the interval. Since for, the
function is concave down over the interval. The po int is an inflection point of.
For the function determine all intervals where is co ncave up and all intervals where is concave
down. List all inflection points for. Use a graphing utili ty to confirm your results.
Solution
To determine concavity, we need to find the second de rivative The first derivative is so the second
derivative is If the function changes concavity, it occurs either when or is undefined. Since
is defined for all real numbers, we need only find where. Solving the equation, we see that is the
only place where could change concavity. We now test points over the intervals and to determine the
concavity of. The points and are test points for the se intervals.
Table:: Test for Concavity for Test for Concavity
Definition: inflection point
Example: Testing for Concavity

1.9.17.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506Interval Test PointSign of at Test
PointConclusion
− is concave down
+ is concave up
We conclude that is concave down over the interval and concave up over the interval. Since changes
concavity at, the point is an inflection point. Figur e confirms the analytical results.
Figure: The given function has a point of inflection at where the graph changes concavity.
For, find all intervals where is concave up and all int ervals where is concave down.
Hint
Find where
Answer
is concave up over the interval and concave down ov er the interval
We now summarize, in Table, the information that the first and second derivatives of a function provide about the graph
of, and illustrate this information in Figure.
Table:: What Derivatives Tell Us about Graphs
Sign of Sign of Is increasing or decreasing? Concavity
Positive Positive Increasing Concave up
Positive Negative Increasing Concave down
Negative Positive Decreasing Concave up
Negative Negative Decreasing Concave downExercise

1.9.17.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506
Figure:Consider a twice-differentiable function ove r an open interval. If for all, the function is
increasing over. If for all, the function is decre asing over. If for all, the function is concave up. If
for all, the function is concave down on.
The Second Derivative Test
The first derivative test provides an analytical too l for finding local extrema, but the second derivati ve can also be used to locate
extreme values. Using the second derivative can sometim es be a simpler method than using the first derivative.
We know that if a continuous function has a local ext remum, it must occur at a critical point. However, a function need not have a
local extremum at a critical point. Here we examine ho w the second derivative test can be used to determine whether a function
has a local extremum at a critical point. Let be a twice-differentiable function such that and is cont inuous over an
open interval containing. Suppose. Since is conti nuous over for all (Figure). Then, by
Corollary, is a decreasing function over. Since, we conclude that for all if and if
. Therefore, by the first derivative test, has a local ma ximum at.
On the other hand, suppose there exists a point such t hat but. Since is continuous over an open interval
containing, then for all (Figure). Then, by Coroll ary, is an increasing function over. Since,
we conclude that for all, if and if. Therefore, by the first derivative test, has a local minimum
at
Figure: Consider a twice-differentiable function suc h that is continuous. Since and, there is an
interval containing such that for all in, is inc reasing if and is decreasing if. As a result, has a l ocal
maximum at. Since and, there is an interval conta ining such that for all in, is decreasing if
and is increasing if. As a result, has a local minimu m at.

1.9.17.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506Suppose and is continuous over an interval containin g.
i. If, then has a local minimum at.
ii. If, then has a local maximum at.
iii. If then the test is inconclusive.
Note that for case iii. when, then may have a local maximum, local minimum, or neither at. For example, t he
functions and all have critical points at. In ea ch case, the second derivative is zero at.
However, the function has a local minimum at whereas the function has a local maximum at, and
the function does not have a local extremum at.
Let’s now look at how to use the second derivative te st to determine whether has a local maximum or local minimum at a critical
point where
Use the second derivative to find the location of all loca l extrema for
Solution
To apply the second derivative test, we first need to find critical points where. The derivative is.
Therefore, when.
To determine whether has a local extremum at any of these points, we need to evaluate the sign of at the se points. The
second derivative is
In the following table, we evaluate the second derivat ive at each of the critical points and use the secon d derivative test to
determine whether has a local maximum or local minimum a t any of these points.
Table:: Second Derivative Test for
Conclusion
Local maximum
Second derivative test is inconclusive
Local minimum
By the second derivative test, we conclude that has a local maximum at and has a local minimum at. T he
second derivative test is inconclusive at. To dete rmine whether has a local extrema at we apply the f irst
derivative test. To evaluate the sign of for and, let and be the two test
points. Since and, we conclude that is decreasing on both intervals and, therefore, does not have a
local extrema at as shown in the following graph.Second Derivative Test
Example: Using the Second Derivative Test

1.9.17.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506
Figure:The function has a local maximum at and a l ocal minimum at
Consider the function. The points satisfy. Use the second derivative test to
determine whether has a local maximum or local minimum a t those points.
Hint
Answer
has a local maximum at and a local minimum at.
We have now developed the tools we need to determine where a function is increasing and decreasing, as wel l as acquired an
understanding of the basic shape of the graph. In the next section we discuss what happens to a function as At that point,
we have enough tools to provide accurate graphs of a larg e variety of functions.
Key Concepts
If is a critical point of and for and for, then has a local maximum at.
If is a critical point of and for and for then has a local minimum at.
If over an interval, then is concave up over.
If over an interval, then is concave down over.
If and, then has a local minimum at.
If and, then has a local maximum at.
If and, then evaluate at a test point to the left of and a test point to the right of, to determine
whether has a local extremum at.
Glossary
concave down
if is differentiable over an interval and is dec reasing over, then is concave down over
concave up
if is differentiable over an interval and is inc reasing over, then is concave up over Exercise

1.9.17.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109506concavity
the upward or downward curve of the graph of a function
concavity test
suppose is twice differentiable over an interval; if ov er, then is concave up over; if over, then is
concave down over
first derivative test
let be a continuous function over an interval contai ning a critical point such that is differentiable ove r except possibly
at; if changes sign from positive to negative as increa ses through, then has a local maximum at; if changes sig n
from negative to positive as increases through, then has a local minimum at; if does not change sign as i ncreases
through, then does not have a local extremum at
inflection point
if is continuous at and changes concavity at, the p oint is an inflection point of
second derivative test
suppose and ' is continuous over an interval containin g; if, then has a local minimum at; if,
then has a local maximum at; if, then the test is inc onclusive
This page titled 1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
4.5: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.18.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095071.9.18: Differentiation Rules
State the constant, constant multiple, and power rules.
Apply the sum and difference rules to combine derivative s.
Use the product rule for finding the derivative of a produ ct of functions.
Use the quotient rule for finding the derivative of a qu otient of functions.
Extend the power rule to functions with negative exponent s.
Combine the differentiation rules to find the derivative o f a polynomial or rational function.
State the chain rule for the composition of two functions.
Apply the chain rule together with the power rule.
Apply the chain rule and the product/quotient rules cor rectly in combination when both are necessary.
Recognize the chain rule for a composition of three or m ore functions.
Describe the proof of the chain rule.
Finding derivatives of functions by using the defini tion of the derivative can be a lengthy and, for cer tain functions, a rather
challenging process. For example, previously we found that
by using a process that involved multiplying an expressio n by a conjugate prior to evaluating a limit.
The process that we could use to evaluate using the def inition, while similar, is more complicated.
In this section, we develop rules for finding derivative s that allow us to bypass this process. We begin with the ba sics.
1.9.18.1 The Basic Rules
The functions and where is a positive integer are the building blocks from which all polynomials and rational
functions are constructed. To find derivatives of pol ynomials and rational functions efficiently without r esorting to the limit
definition of the derivative, we must first develop formul as for differentiating these basic functions.
1.9.18.2 The Constant Rule
We first apply the limit definition of the derivati ve to find the derivative of the constant function,. For this function, both
and, so we obtain the following result:
The rule for differentiating constant functions is called the constant rule. It states that the derivative of a constant function is zero;
that is, since a constant function is a horizontal li ne, the slope, or the rate of change, of a constant fu nction is. We restate this rule
in the following theorem.
Let be a constant. If, then
Alternatively, we may express this rule asLearning Objectives
The Constant Rule

1.9.18.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Find the derivative of
Solution
This is just a one-step application of the rule:
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Use the preceding example as a guide
Answer
1.9.18.3 The Power Rule
We have shown that
At this point, you might see a pattern beginning to d evelop for derivatives of the form. We continue our examination of
derivative formulas by differentiating power functio ns of the form where is a positive integer. We deve lop formulas for
derivatives of this type of function in stages, beg inning with positive integer powers. Before stating an d proving the general rule for
derivatives of functions of this form, we take a loo k at a specific case,. As we go through this derivation, pay special
attention to the portion of the expression in boldf ace, as the technique used in this case is essentially the same as the technique used
to prove the general case.
Find.
Solution:

Notice that the first term in the expansion of is an d
the second term is. All other terms contain powers of that
are two or greater
In this step the terms have been cancelled, leaving o nly terms
containing.
Factor out the common factor of.
After cancelling the common factor of,the only ter m not
containing is.
Let go to.Example: Applying the Constant Rule
Exercise
Example: Differentiating

1.9.18.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Find
Hint
Use and follow the procedure outlined in the preceding exam ple.
Answer
As we shall see, the procedure for finding the derivat ive of the general form is very similar. Although it is often unwise to
draw general conclusions from specific examples, we no te that when we differentiate, the power on becomes t he
coefficient of in the derivative and the power on in the derivative decreases by 1. The following theor em states that the power
rule holds for all positive integer powers of. We will eve ntually extend this result to negative integer power s. Later, we will see
that this rule may also be extended first to ration al powers of and then to arbitrary powers of. Be awa re, however, that this rule
does not apply to functions in which a constant is raised to a variable power, such as.
Let be a positive integer. If,then
Alternatively, we may express this rule as
Find the derivative of the function by applying the power rule.
Solution
Using the power rule with, we obtain
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Use the power rule with
Answer
1.9.18.4 The Sum, Difference, and Constant Multiple Rules
We find our next differentiation rules by looking a t derivatives of sums, differences, and constant mult iples of functions. Just as
when we work with functions, there are rules that make it easier to find derivatives of functions that we add, s ubtract, or multiply
by a constant. These rules are summarized in the following theorem.Exercise
The Power Rule
Example: Applying the Power Rule
Exercise

1.9.18.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Let and be differentiable functions and be a constan t. Then each of the following equations holds.
Sum Rule. The derivative of the sum of a function and a fun ction is the same as the sum of the derivative of a nd the
derivative of.
that is,
Difference Rule. The derivative of the difference of a function a nd a function is the same as the difference of the derivative
of and the derivative of:
that is,
Constant Multiple Rule. The derivative of a constant multiplied by a funct ion is the same as the constant multiplied by the
derivative:
that is,
Find the derivative of and compare it to the derivati ve of
Solution
We use the power rule directly:
Since has derivative, we see that the derivative of is 3 times the derivative of. This relationship is
illustrated in Figure.
Figure: The derivative of is 3 times the derivative of.Sum, Difference, and Constant Multiple Rules
Example: Applying the Constant Multiple Rule

1.9.18.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Find the derivative of.
Solution
We begin by applying the rule for differentiating t he sum of two functions, followed by the rules for diff erentiating constant
multiples of functions and the rule for differentia ting powers. To better understand the sequence in which the differentiation
rules are applied, we use Leibniz notation throughout the s olution:
Find the derivative of
Hint
Use the preceding example as a guide.
Answer
Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of at
Solution
To find the equation of the tangent line, we need a point and a slope. To find the point, compute
This gives us the point. Since the slope of the tange nt line at 1 is, we must first find. Using the defin ition of a
derivative, we have
so the slope of the tangent line is. Using the point-slop e formula, we see that the equation of the tangent line is
Putting the equation of the line in slope-intercept fo rm, we obtain
Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of at. Use the point-slope form.
Hint
Use the preceding example as a guide.Example: Applying Basic Derivative Rules
Exercise
Example: Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line
Exercise

1.9.18.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Answer
1.9.18.5 The Product Rule
Now that we have examined the basic rules, we can begin l ooking at some of the more advanced rules. The firs t one examines the
derivative of the product of two functions. Although it might be tempting to assume that the derivative o f the product is the product
of the derivatives, similar to the sum and differenc e rules, the product rule does not follow this pattern. To see why we cannot use
this pattern, consider the function, whose derivative is an d not
Let and be differentiable functions. Then
That is,
This means that the derivative of a product of two fu nctions is the derivative of the first function times the second function plus
the derivative of the second function times the first f unction.
For, use the product rule to find if, and.
Solution
Since, and hence
For find by applying the product rule. Check the re sult by first finding the product and then
differentiating.
Solution
If we set and, then and. Thus,
Simplifying, we have
To check, we see that and, consequently,
Use the product rule to obtain the derivative of
Hint
Set and and use the preceding example as a guide.
AnswerProduct Rule
Example: Applying the Product Rule to Constant Functions
Example: Applying the Product Rule to Binomials
Exercise

1.9.18.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095071.9.18.6 The Quotient Rule
Having developed and practiced the product rule, we no w consider differentiating quotients of functions. As we se e in the
following theorem, the derivative of the quotient is not the quotient of the derivatives; rather, it is t he derivative of the function in
the numerator times the function in the denominator minus the derivative of the function in the denomi nator times the function in
the numerator, all divided by the square of the funct ion in the denominator. In order to better grasp why we cannot simply take the
quotient of the derivatives, keep in mind that
Let and be differentiable functions. Then
That is, if
then
We apply this new rule for finding derivatives in the next example.
Use the quotient rule to find the derivative of
Solution
Let and. Thus, and.
Substituting into the quotient rule, we have
Simplifying, we obtain
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Apply the quotient rule with and.The Quotient Rule
Example: Applying the Quotient Rule
Exercise

1.9.18.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Answer
It is now possible to use the quotient rule to extend the power rule to find derivatives of functions of th e form where is a
negative integer.
If is a negative integer, then
Find.
Solution
By applying the extended power rule with, we obtain
Use the extended power rule and the constant multiple rul e to find.
Solution
It may seem tempting to use the quotient rule to fi nd this derivative, and it would certainly not be inc orrect to do so. However,
it is far easier to differentiate this function by first rewriting it as.
Find the derivative of using the extended power rule.
Hint
Rewrite. Use the extended power rule with.
Answer
1.9.18.7 Combining Differentiation Rules
As we have seen throughout the examples in this section, it seldom happens that we are called on to apply just one differentiation
rule to find the derivative of a given function. At this point, by combining the differentiation rules, we may find the derivatives ofExtended Power Rule
Example: Using the Extended Power Rule
Example: Using the Extended Power Rule and the Constant Multiple Rule
Exercise

1.9.18.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507any polynomial or rational function. Later on we will encounter more complex combinations of differentia tion rules. A good rule of
thumb to use when applying several rules is to apply the r ules in reverse of the order in which we would evaluate the fun ction.
For, find.
Solution: Finding this derivative requires the sum rule, the constant multiple rule, and the product rule.
Apply the sum rule.
Apply the constant multiple rule to differentiate a nd the
product rule to differentiate.

For, express in terms of, and their derivatives.
Solution
We can think of the function as the product of the function and the function. That is,.
Thus,
For, find.
Solution
This procedure is typical for finding the derivative of a rational function.
Find
Hint
Apply the difference rule and the constant multiple rule.
AnswerExample: Combining Differentiation Rules
Example: Extending the Product Rule
Example: Combining the Quotient Rule and the Product Rule
Exercise

1.9.18.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Determine the values of for which has a horizontal tang ent line.
Solution
To find the values of for which has a horizontal tangen t line, we must solve.
Since,
we must solve. Thus we see that the function has hori zontal tangent lines at and as shown in
the following graph.
Figure: This function has horizontal tangent lines at and.
The position of an object on a coordinate axis at time is given by What is the initial velocity of the obje ct?
Solution
Since the initial velocity is begin by finding by app lying the quotient rule:
After evaluating, we see that
Find the values of for which the line tangent to the graph of has a tangent line parallel to the line
Hint
Solve.
Answer
Formula One car races can be very exciting to watch an d attract a lot of spectators. Formula One track desig ners have to ensure
sufficient grandstand space is available around the track to accommodate these viewers. However, car racing c an be dangerous,
and safety considerations are paramount. The grands tands must be placed where spectators will not be in da nger should a
driver lose control of a car (Figure).Example: Determining Where a Function Has a Horizontal Tangent
Example: Finding a Velocity
Exercise
Formula One Grandstands

1.9.18.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507
Figure: The grandstand next to a straightaway of the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya race track, located where the
spectators are not in danger.
Safety is especially a concern on turns. If a driver do es not slow down enough before entering the turn, the ca r may slide off
the racetrack. Normally, this just results in a wider tu rn, which slows the driver down. But if the driver loses control
completely, the car may fly off the track entirely, on a path tangent to the curve of the racetrack.
Suppose you are designing a new Formula One track. One sec tion of the track can be modeled by the function
(Figure). The current plan calls for grandstands to be built along the first straightaway and around a po rtion of the
first curve. The plans call for the front corner of the grandstand to be located at the point (). We want to determine
whether this location puts the spectators in danger if a dri ver loses control of the car.
Figure: (a) One section of the racetrack can be mode led by the function. (b) The front corner of the
grandstand is located at ().
1. Physicists have determined that drivers are most likely to lose control of their cars as they are coming into a turn, at the
point where the slope of the tangent line is 1. Find the c oordinates of this point near the turn.
2. Find the equation of the tangent line to the curve at thi s point.
3. To determine whether the spectators are in danger in this scenario, find the -coordinate of the point where the t angent line
crosses the line. Is this point safely to the right o f the grandstand? Or are the spectators in danger?
4. What if a driver loses control earlier than the physi cists project? Suppose a driver loses control at the poi nt ().
What is the slope of the tangent line at this point?
5. If a driver loses control as described in part 4, are the spectators safe?
6. Should you proceed with the current design for the grands tand, or should the grandstands be moved?

1.9.18.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095071.9.18.8 The Chain Rule
Let and be functions. For all in the domain of f or which is differentiable at and is differentiable a t, the
derivative of the composite function
is given by
Alternatively, if is a function of, and is a function of, then
1. To differentiate, begin by identifying and.
2. Find and evaluate it at to obtain.
3. Find
4. Write
Note: When applying the chain rule to the composition of two or more functions, keep in mind that we work our way from the
outside function in. It is also useful to remember th at the derivative of the composition of two function s can be thought of as
having two parts; the derivative of the composition of three functions has three parts; and so on. Also, r emember that we never
evaluate a derivative at a derivative.
1.9.18.9 The Chain and Power Rules Combined
We can now apply the chain rule to composite functio ns, but note that we often need to use it with other rules. For example, to find
derivatives of functions of the form, we need to use the chain rule combined with the power rule. To do so, we can
think of as where. Then. Thus,. This leads us to the
derivative of a power function using the chain rule,
For all values of for which the derivative is defined, if
Then
Find the derivative of.
Solution
First, rewrite.
Applying the power rule with, we haveRule: The Chain Rule
Problem-Solving Strategy: Applying the Chain Rule
Rule: Power Rule for Composition of Functions (General Power Rule)
Example: Using the Chain and Power Rules

1.9.18.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507.
Rewriting back to the original form gives us
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Use the General Power Rule (Equation) with.
Answer
Find the derivative of.
Solution
First recall that, so we can rewrite as.
Applying the power rule with, we obtain
Find the equation of a line tangent to the graph of at.
Solution
Because we are finding an equation of a line, we need a point. The -coordinate of the point is 2. To find the -coordinate,
substitute 2 into. Since, the point is.
For the slope, we need. To find, first we rewrite and ap ply the power rule to obtain
By substituting, we have
Therefore, the line has equation. Rewriting, the equatio n of the line is.
Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of at.
Hint
Use the preceding example as a guide.
AnswerExercise
Example: Using the Chain and Power Rules with a Trigonometric Function
Example: Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line
Exercise

1.9.18.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095071.9.18.10 Combining the Chain Rule with Other Rules
Now that we can combine the chain rule and the power ru le, we examine how to combine the chain rule with the other rules we
have learned. In particular, we can use it with the formulas for the derivatives of trigonometric functions or with the product rule.
Find the derivative of
Solution
Think of as where. Since, we have. Then we do
the following calculation.
Thus, the derivative of is given by
In the following example we apply the rule that we have just derived.
Find the derivative of
Solution
Let. Then. Using the result from the previous example,
Find the derivative of
Solution
Apply the chain rule to to obtain
In this problem, so we have Therefore, we obtain
Find the derivative of
Hint
Apply the chain rule to first and then use.
Answer
At this point we provide a list of derivative formula s that may be obtained by applying the chain rule in conjunction with the
formulas for derivatives of trigonometric functions. Their derivations are similar to those used in the examples above. For
convenience, formulas are also given in Leibniz’s not ation, which some students find easier to remember. (We discuss the chainExample: Using the Chain Rule on a General Cosine Function
Example: Using the Chain Rule on a Cosine Function
Example: Using the Chain Rule on Another Trigonometric Function
Exercise

1.9.18.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507rule using Leibniz’s notation at the end of this sect ion.) It is not absolutely necessary to memorize th ese as separate formulas as
they are all applications of the chain rule to previousl y learned formulas.
For all values of for which the derivative is defined,
Find the derivative of.
Solution
First apply the product rule, then apply the chain rule t o each term of the product.
Find the derivative of.
Hint
Start out by applying the quotient rule. Remember to u se the chain rule to differentiate the denominator.
Answer
1.9.18.11 Composites of Three or More Functions
We can now combine the chain rule with other rules fo r differentiating functions, but when we are differentia ting the composition
of three or more functions, we need to apply the chain rule more than once. If we look at this situation in general terms, we can
generate a formula, but we do not need to remember it, as we can simply apply the chain rule multiple times.
In general terms, first we letUsing the Chain Rule with Trigonometric Functions
Example: Combining the Chain Rule with the Product Rule
Exercise

1.9.18.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Then, applying the chain rule once we obtain
Applying the chain rule again, we obtain
For all values of for which the function is differentiable, if
then
In other words, we are applying the chain rule twice.
Notice that the derivative of the composition of thre e functions has three parts. (Similarly, the derivati ve of the composition of
four functions has four parts, and so on.) Also, remember, we can always work from the outside in, taking one derivative at a
time.
Find the derivative of
Solution
First, rewrite as
Then apply the chain rule several times.
Find the derivative of
Hint
Rewrite and use Example as a guide.
Answer
A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its positi on at time t is given by. What is the velocity of th e
particle at time?Rule: Chain Rule for a Composition of Three Functions
Example: Differentiating a Composite of Three Functions
Exercise
Example: Using the Chain Rule in a Velocity Problem

1.9.18.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Solution
To find, the velocity of the particle at time, we must di fferentiate. Thus,
To find the velocity at, calculate
Let If, and, find
Solution
Use the chain rule, then substitute.
Given. If and, find.
Hint
Follow Example.
Answer
1.9.18.12 The Chain Rule Using Leibniz’s Notation
As with other derivatives that we have seen, we can expre ss the chain rule using Leibniz’s notation. This not ation for the chain rule
is used heavily in physics applications.
For let and Thus,
and
Consequently,Example: Using the Chain Rule with Functional Values
Exercise

1.9.18.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507If is a function of, and is a function of, then
Find the derivative of
Solution
First, let. Thus,. Next, find and. Using the quotient ru le,
and
Finally, we put it all together.
It is important to remember that, when using the Leib niz form of the chain rule, the final answer must be expressed entirely in
terms of the original variable given in the problem.
Find the derivative of
Solution
First, let Then. Next, find and:
and
Finally, we put it all together.
Use Leibniz’s notation to find the derivative of. Mak e sure that the final answer is expressed entirely in terms of the
variable.
HintRule: Chain Rule Using Leibniz’s Notation
Example: Taking a Derivative Using Leibniz’s Notation I
Example: Taking a Derivative Using Leibniz’s Notation II
Exercise

1.9.18.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507Let.
Answer
1.9.18.13 Derivatives Table
For all values of for which the derivative is defined,
General Formulas
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. Trigonometric Functions
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20. Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
21.
22.
23.
24.
Hyperbolic Functions
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30. Inverse Hyperbolic Functions
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
1.9.18.14 Key Concepts
The derivative of a constant function is zero.
The derivative of a power function is a function in which th e power on becomes the coefficient of the term and the power on
in the derivative decreases by 1.
The derivative of a constant multiplied by a function is the same as the constant multiplied by the derivati ve.
The derivative of the sum of a function and a functi on is the same as the sum of the derivative of and th e derivative of.Derivatives Table

1.9.18.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507The derivative of the difference of a function and a function is the same as the difference of the deriva tive of and the
derivative of.
The derivative of a product of two functions is the der ivative of the first function times the second function p lus the derivative
of the second function times the first function.
The derivative of the quotient of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second function minus the
derivative of the second function times the first funct ion, all divided by the square of the second function.
We used the limit definition of the derivative to develo p formulas that allow us to find derivatives without re sorting to the
definition of the derivative. These formulas can be used si ngly or in combination with each other.
The chain rule allows us to differentiate compositions of t wo or more functions. It states that for
In Leibniz’s notation this rule takes the form
We can use the chain rule with other rules that we have learn ed, and we can derive formulas for some of them.
The chain rule combines with the power rule to form a new r ule:
If, then.
When applied to the composition of three functions, th e chain rule can be expressed as follows: If then
1.9.18.15 Glossary
constant multiple rule
the derivative of a constant multiplied by a function is the same as the constant multiplied by the derivati ve:
constant rule
the derivative of a constant function is zero:, where i s a constant
difference rule
the derivative of the difference of a function and a function is the same as the difference of the deriva tive of and the
derivative of:
power rule
the derivative of a power function is a function in which t he power on becomes the coefficient of the term and th e power on
in the derivative decreases by 1: If is an integer, then
product rule
the derivative of a product of two functions is the der ivative of the first function times the second function p lus the derivative of
the second function times the first function:
quotient rule
the derivative of the quotient of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second function minus the
derivative of the second function times the first funct ion, all divided by the square of the second function:
sum rule
the derivative of the sum of a function and a functi on is the same as the sum of the derivative of and th e derivative of:
chain rule

1.9.18.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109507the chain rule defines the derivative of a composite f unction as the derivative of the outer function evaluate d at the inner
function times the derivative of the inner function
This page titled 1.9.18: Differentiation Rules is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.3: Differentiation Rules by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
3.6: The Chain Rule by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.19.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095081.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear Approximation, Calculating
Uncertainty, Maxima and Minima, Optimization
Determine a new value of a quantity from the old value and the amount of change.
Calculate the average rate of change and explain how it di ffers from the instantaneous rate of change.
Apply rates of change to displacement, velocity, and acceler ation of an object moving along a straight line.
Predict the future population from the present value and the population growth rate.
Use derivatives to calculate marginal cost and revenue in a business situation.
Describe the linear approximation to a function at a po int.
Write the linearization of a given function.
Draw a graph that illustrates the use of differentials to appr oximate the change in a quantity.
Calculate the relative uncertainty and percentage unce rtainty in using a differential approximation.
Define absolute extrema.
Define local extrema.
Explain how to find the critical points of a function over a closed interval.
Describe how to use critical points to locate absolute ex trema over a closed interval.
Set up and solve optimization problems in several appl ied fields.
In this section we look at some applications of the deriv ative in Physics.
1.9.19.1 Motion along a Line
Another use for the derivative is to analyze motion along a line. We have described velocity as the rate o f change of position. If we
take the derivative of the velocity, we can find the acceleration, or the rate of change of velocity. It is also important to introduce
the idea of speed, which is the magnitude of velocity. Thus, we can state the f ollowing mathematical definitions.
Let be a function giving the position of an object at ti me t.
The velocity of the object at time is given by.
The speed of the object at time is given by.
The acceleration of the object at is given by.
A ball is dropped from a height of 64 feet. Its height abo ve ground (in feet) seconds later is given by.
a. What is the instantaneous velocity of the ball when it hits the ground?Learning Objectives
Definition
Example: Comparing Instantaneous Velocity and Average Velocity

1.9.19.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508b. What is the average velocity during its fall?
Solution
The first thing to do is determine how long it takes the ball to reach the ground. To do this, set. Solvi ng,
we get, so it takes 2 seconds for the ball to reach the gr ound.
a. The instantaneous velocity of the ball as it strikes the ground is. Since, we obtain ft/s.
b. The average velocity of the ball during its fall is
ft/s.
A particle moves along a coordinate axis in the posi tive direction to the right. Its position at time i s given by.
Find and and use these values to answer the following que stions.
a. Is the particle moving from left to right or from rig ht to left at time?
b. Is the particle speeding up or slowing down at time?
Solution
Begin by finding and.
and.
Evaluating these functions at, we obtain and.
a. Because, the particle is moving from right to left.
b. Because and, velocity and acceleration are acting i n opposite directions. In other words, the particle is
being accelerated in the direction opposite the directi on in which it is traveling, causing to decrease. The pa rticle is
slowing down.
The position of a particle moving along a coordinate axis i s given by
a. Find.
b. At what time(s) is the particle at rest?
c. On what time intervals is the particle moving from left to right? From right to left?
d. Use the information obtained to sketch the path of the pa rticle along a coordinate axis.
Solution
a. The velocity is the derivative of the position functio n:
b. The particle is at rest when, so set. Factoring t he left-hand side of the equation produces
. Solving, we find that the particle is at rest at and.
c. The particle is moving from left to right when and from right to left when. Figure gives the analysis
of the sign of for, but it does not represent the axis along which the particle is moving.
Figure:The sign of determines the direction of the p article.
Since on, the particle is moving from left to right on t hese intervals.
Since on, the particle is moving from right to left on this interval.
d. Before we can sketch the graph of the particle, we n eed to know its position at the time it starts moving and at the
times that it changes direction. We have,, and. This means that the particle begins on theExample: Interpreting the Relationship between and
Example: Position and Velocity

1.9.19.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508coordinate axis at and changes direction at and o n the coordinate axis. The path of the particle is shown on a coordinate
axis in Figure.
Figure: The path of the particle can be determined by analyzing.
A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its posit ion at time is given by. Is the particle moving f rom right to
left or from left to right at time?
Hint
Find and look at the sign.
Answer
left to right
1.9.19.2 Linear Approximation of a Function at a Point
Consider a function that is differentiable at a po int. Recall that the tangent line to the graph of at is given by the
equation
For example, consider the function at. Since is dif ferentiable at and, we see that.
Therefore, the tangent line to the graph of at is give n by the equation
Figure shows a graph of along with the tangent line to at. Note that for near, the graph of the tang ent
line is close to the graph of. As a result, we can use the equation of the tangent line to approximate f or near. For example,
if, the value of the corresponding point on the tangent line is
The actual value of is given by
Therefore, the tangent line gives us a fairly good ap proximation of (Figure). However, note that for value s of far
from, the equation of the tangent line does not gi ve us a good approximation. For example, if, the -val ue of the
corresponding point on the tangent line is
whereas the value of the function at is Exercise

1.9.19.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: (a) The tangent line to at provides a good approximation to for near. (b) At, the value
of on the tangent line to is. The actual value of is, which is approximately.
In general, for a differentiable function, the equ ation of the tangent line to at can be used to ap proximate for near.
Therefore, we can write
for near.
We call the linear function
the linear approximation, or tangent line approximation, of at. This function is also known as the linearization of at
To show how useful the linear approximation can be, we look at h ow to find the linear approximation for at
Find the linear approximation of at and use the approx imation to estimate.
Solution
Since we are looking for the linear approximation at using Equation we know the linear approximation is gi ven
by
We need to find and
Therefore, the linear approximation is given by Figure.
Using the linear approximation, we can estimate by writin gExample: Linear Approximation of

1.9.19.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: The local linear approximation to at prov ides an approximation to for near.
Analysis
Using a calculator, the value of to four decimal pla ces is. The value given by the linear approximatio n,, is
very close to the value obtained with a calculator, s o it appears that using this linear approximation is a good way to estimate
, at least for x near. At the same time, it may seem odd to use a linear approximation when we can just pu sh a few buttons
on a calculator to evaluate. However, how does the calc ulator evaluate? The calculator uses an approximat ion! In
fact, calculators and computers use approximations all the time to evaluate mathematical expressions; they just use higherdegree approximations.
Find the local linear approximation to at. Use it to appr oximate to five decimal places.
Hint
Answer

Find the linear approximation of at and use it to appro ximate
Solution
First we note that since rad is equivalent to, using the linear approximation at seems reasonable. The li near
approximation is given by
We see that
Therefore, the linear approximation of at is given b y Figure.
To estimate using, we must first convert to radian s. We have radians, so the estimate for is
given byExercise
Example: Linear Approximation of

1.9.19.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: The linear approximation to at provides an approximation to for near
Find the linear approximation for at
Hint
Answer
Linear approximations may be used in estimating roo ts and powers. In the next example, we find the linea r approximation for
at, which can be used to estimate roots and powers f or real numbers near. The same idea can be extended to a
function of the form to estimate roots and powers near a different number.
Find the linear approximation of at. Use this approximat ion to estimate
Solution
The linear approximation at is given by
Because
the linear approximation is given by Figure.
We can approximate by evaluating when. We conclude thatExercise
Example: Approximating Roots and Powers

1.9.19.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: (a) The linear approximation of at is. (b) The actual value of is. The linear
approximation of at estimates to be.
Find the linear approximation of at without using the re sult from the preceding example.
Hint
Answer
1.9.19.3 Differentials
We have seen that linear approximations can be used to estimate function values. They can also be used to estimate the amount a
function value changes as a result of a small change in the input. To discuss this more formally, we defi ne a related concept:
differentials. Differentials provide us with a way of estimating the amount a function changes as a result of a small ch ange in input
values.
When we first looked at derivatives, we used the Leibn iz notation to represent the derivative of with re spect to. Although
we used the expressions and in this notation, they did not have meaning on their own. Here we see a meani ng to the
expressions and. Suppose is a differentiable functio n. Let be an independent variable that can be assig ned any
nonzero real number, and define the dependent variable by
It is important to notice that is a function of bot h and. The expressions and are called different ials. We can divide both
sides of Equation by which yields
This is the familiar expression we have used to denote a derivative. Equation is known as the differential form of Equation
For each of the following functions, find and evaluate whe n and
a.
b. Exercise
Example: Computing Differentials

1.9.19.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Solution
The key step is calculating the derivative. When we have t hat, we can obtain directly.
a. Since we know, and therefore
When and
b. Since This gives us
When and
For, find.
Hint
Answer
We now connect differentials to linear approximation s. Differentials can be used to estimate the change in the value of a function
resulting from a small change in input values. Cons ider a function that is differentiable at point. Suppose the input changes by
a small amount. We are interested in how much the ou tput changes. If changes from to, then the change in is (also
denoted), and the change in is given by
Instead of calculating the exact change in, however, it is often easier to approximate the change in b y using a linear
approximation. For near can be approximated by the line ar approximation (Equation)
Therefore, if is small,
That is,
In other words, the actual change in the function i f increases from to is approximately the differe nce between
and, where is the linear approximation of at. By de finition of, this difference is equal to. In summary,
Therefore, we can use the differential to approximat e the change in if increases from to. We can
see this in the following graph.Exercise

1.9.19.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: The differential is used to approximate the actual change in if increases from to.
We now take a look at how to use differentials to app roximate the change in the value of the function th at results from a small
change in the value of the input. Note the calculati on with differentials is much simpler than calculating actual values of functions
and the result is very close to what we would obtain with the m ore exact calculation.
Let Compute and at if
Solution
The actual change in if changes from to is given b y
The approximate change in is given by. Since we have
For find and at if
Hint
Answer
1.9.19.4 Calculating the Amount of Uncertainty
Any type of measurement is prone to a certain amount of uncertainty. In many applications, certain quant ities are calculated based
on measurements. For example, the area of a circle is ca lculated by measuring the radius of the circle. An unc ertainty in the
measurement of the radius leads to an uncertainty i n the computed value of the area. Here we examine thi s type of uncertainty and
study how differentials can be used to estimate the uncert ainty.
Consider a function with an input that is a measured quantity. Suppose the exact value of the measured qu antity is, but the
measured value is. We say the measurement uncertain ty is (or). As a result, an uncertainty occurs in th e calculated
quantity. This type of uncertainty is known as a propagated uncertainty and is given by
Since all measurements are prone to some degree of un certainty, we do not know the exact value of a measured quantity, so we
cannot calculate the propagated uncertainty exactly. However, given an estimate of the accuracy of a measu rement, we can use
differentials to approximate the propagated uncerta inty Specifically, if is a differentiable function at,the propagated
uncertainty isExample: Approximating Change with Differentials
Exercise

1.9.19.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Unfortunately, we do not know the exact value However, we can use the measured value and estimate
In the next example, we look at how differentials can be used to estimate the uncertainty in calculating the volume of a box if we
assume the measurement of the side length is made with a c ertain amount of accuracy.
Suppose the side length of a cube is measured to be cm wit h an accuracy of cm.
a. Use differentials to estimate the uncertainty in the com puted volume of the cube.
b. Compute the volume of the cube if the side length is (i) cm and (ii) cm to compare the estimated uncertainty with the
actual potential uncertainty.
Solution
a. The measurement of the side length is accurate to within cm. Therefore,
The volume of a cube is given by, which leads to
Using the measured side length of cm, we can estimate that
Therefore,
b. If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of th e cube is
If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of the cube is
Therefore, the actual volume of the cube is between a nd. Since the side length is measured to be 5 cm,
the computed volume is Therefore, the uncertainty in t he computed volume is
That is,
We see the estimated uncertainty is relatively close t o the actual potential uncertainty in the computed vol ume.
Estimate the uncertainty in the computed volume of a cube if the side length is measured to be cm with a n accuracy of
cm.
Hint
Answer
The volume measurement is accurate to within.Example: Volume of a Cube
Exercise

1.9.19.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508The measurement uncertainty and the propagated unc ertainty are absolute uncertaintys. We are typicall y interested in
the size of an uncertainty relative to the size of t he quantity being measured or calculated. Given an ab solute uncertainty for a
particular quantity, we define the relative uncertainty as, where is the actual value of the quantity. The percentage
uncertainty is the relative uncertainty expressed as a percenta ge. For example, if we measure the height of a ladder to be in.
when the actual height is in., the absolute uncertai nty is 1 in. but the relative uncertainty is, or. By comparison,
if we measure the width of a piece of cardboard to be in. when the actual width is in., our absolute uncer tainty is in.,
whereas the relative uncertainty is, or Therefore, t he percentage uncertainty in the measurement of the cardboard is
larger, even though in. is less than in.
An astronaut using a camera measures the radius of Ear th as mi with an uncertainty of mi. Let’s use diffe rentials to
estimate the relative and percentage uncertainty of using this radius measurement to calculate the vol ume of Earth, assuming
the planet is a perfect sphere.
Solution: If the measurement of the radius is accurate t o within we have
Since the volume of a sphere is given by we have
Using the measured radius of mi, we can estimate
To estimate the relative uncertainty, consider. Sin ce we do not know the exact value of the volume, use the measured
radius mi to estimate. We obtain. Therefore the rela tive uncertainty satisfies
which simplifies to
The relative uncertainty is and the percentage uncert ainty is.
Determine the percentage uncertainty if the radius of Ea rth is measured to be mi with an uncertainty of mi.
Hint
Use the fact that to find.
Answer
1.9.19.5 Absolute Extrema
Consider the function over the interval. As. There fore, the function does not have a
largest value. However, since for all real numbers an d when, the function has a smallest value,,
when. We say that is the absolute minimum of and i t occurs at. We say that does not have
an absolute maximum (Figure).Example: Relative and Percentage uncertainty
Exercise

1.9.19.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: The given function has an absolute minimum of at. The function does not have an absolute maximum.
Let be a function defined over an interval and le t. We say has an absolute maximum on at if for all
. We say has an absolute minimum on at if for all. If has an absolute maximum o n at or an
absolute minimum on at, we say has an absolute extremum on at.
Before proceeding, let’s note two important issues re garding this definition. First, the term absolute here does not refer to absolute
value. An absolute extremum may be positive, negative, or zero. Second, if a function has an absolute extr emum over an interval
at, the absolute extremum is. The real number i s a point in the domain at which the absolute extremum occurs. For
example, consider the function over the interval. Sinc e
for all real numbers, we say has an absolute maximu m over at. The absolute maximum is. It occurs at
, as shown in Figure (b).
A function may have both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum, just one extremum, or neither. Figur e shows
several functions and some of the different possibi lities regarding absolute extrema. However, the followin g theorem, called the
Extreme Value Theorem, guarantees that a continuous function over a clo sed, bounded interval has both an absolute
maximum and an absolute minimum.Definition: Absolute Extrema

1.9.19.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: Graphs (a), (b), and (c) show several possibilit ies for absolute extrema for functions with a domain o f
Graphs (d), (e), and (f) show several possibilities for a bsolute extrema for functions with a domain that is a bounded interval.
If is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval, then there is a point in at which has an absolute
maximum over and there is a point in at which has a n absolute minimum over.
The proof of the extreme value theorem is beyond th e scope of this text. Typically, it is proved in a cou rse on real analysis. There
are a couple of key points to note about the statem ent of this theorem. For the extreme value theorem to apply, the function must be
continuous over a closed, bounded interval. If the in terval is open or the function has even one point o f discontinuity, the function
may not have an absolute maximum or absolute minimum over. For example, consider the functions shown in Figure (d),
(e), and (f). All three of these functions are defined over bounded intervals. However, the function in graph (e) is the only one that
has both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum over its domain. The extreme value theorem cannot b e applied to the
functions in graphs (d) and (f) because neither of t hese functions is continuous over a closed, bounded interval. Although the
function in graph (d) is defined over the closed in terval, the function is discontinuous at. The func tion has an absolute
maximum over but does not have an absolute minimum. The function in graph (f) is continuous over the hal f-open interval
, but is not defined at, and therefore is not cont inuous over a closed, bounded interval. The function has an absolute
minimum over, but does not have an absolute maximu m over. These two graphs illustrate why a function o ver a bounded
interval may fail to have an absolute maximum and/or abs olute minimum.Theorem: Extreme Value Theorem

1.9.19.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Before looking at how to find absolute extrema, let’ s examine the related concept of local extrema. Thi s idea is useful in
determining where absolute extrema occur.
1.9.19.6 Local Extrema and Critical Points
Consider the function shown in Figure. The graph ca n be described as two mountains with a valley in the mi ddle. The
absolute maximum value of the function occurs at th e higher peak, at. However, is also a point of intere st. Although
is not the largest value of, the value is larger than for all near 0. We say has a local maximum at.
Similarly, the function does not have an absolute m inimum, but it does have a local minimum at because is less than
for near 1.
Figure: This function has two local maxima and one l ocal minimum. The local maximum at is also the absolu te
maximum.
A function has a local maximum at if there exists an open interval containing suc h that is contained in the domain of
and for all. A function has a local minimum at if there exists an open interval containing su ch that is
contained in the domain of and for all. A functi on has a local extremum at if has a local maximum at
or has a local minimum at.
Note that if has an absolute extremum at and is d efined over an interval containing, then is also considered a local
extremum. If an absolute extremum for a function o ccurs at an endpoint, we do not consider that to be a local extremum, but
instead refer to that as an endpoint extremum.
Given the graph of a function, it is sometimes easy to see where a local maximum or local minimum occurs. However, it is not
always easy to see, since the interesting features on the graph of a function may not be visible because they occur at a very small
scale. Also, we may not have a graph of the function. I n these cases, how can we use a formula for a function to determine where
these extrema occur?
To answer this question, let’s look at Figure again. Th e local extrema occur at and Notice that at
and, the derivative. At, the derivative does not exist, since the function has a corner there. In f act, if
has a local extremum at a point, the derivative m ust satisfy one of the following conditions: either or is
undefined. Such a value is known as a critical point and it i s important in finding extreme values for functions.
Let be an interior point in the domain of. We say t hat is a critical point of if or is undefined.
As mentioned earlier, if has a local extremum at a po int, then must be a critical point of. This fact i s known as Fermat’s
theorem.Definition: Local Extrema
Definition: Critical Points

1.9.19.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508If has a local extremum at and is differentiable a t, then
Suppose has a local extremum at and is differentiabl e at. We need to show that. To do this, we will show t hat
and, and therefore. Since has a local extremum a t, has a local maximum or local minimum at
. Suppose has a local maximum at. The case in which has a local minimum at can be handled similarly. Th ere then
exists an open interval I such that for all. Since is differentiable at, from the definition of the de rivative,
we know that
Since this limit exists, both one-sided limits also exist a nd equal. Therefore,
and
Since is a local maximum, we see that for near. T herefore, for near, but, we have.
From Equation we conclude that. Similarly, it can be shown t hat Therefore,
From Fermat’s theorem, we conclude that if has a loca l extremum at, then either or is undefined. In o ther words,
local extrema can only occur at critical points.
Note this theorem does not claim that a function mus t have a local extremum at a critical point. Rather, it states that critical points
are candidates for local extrema. For example, consi der the function. We have when. Therefore,
is a critical point. However, is increasing over, and thus does not have a local extremum at. In
Figure, we see several different possibilities for crit ical points. In some of these cases, the functions hav e local extrema at
critical points, whereas in other cases the function s do not. Note that these graphs do not show all possibil ities for the behavior of a
function at a critical point.Theorem: Fermat’s Theorem
Proof

1.9.19.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: (a–e) A function has a critical point at i f or is undefined. A function may or may not have a local
extremum at a critical point.
Later in this chapter we look at analytical methods f or determining whether a function actually has a loca l extremum at a critical
point. For now, let’s turn our attention to finding critical points. We will use graphical observations to determine whether a critical
point is associated with a local extremum.
For each of the following functions, find all critica l points. Use a graphing utility to determine whether the function has a local
extremum at each of the critical points.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. The derivative is defined for all real numbers. Therefore, we only need to find the values for where
. Since, the critical points are and From the grap h of in Figure
, we see that has a local maximum at and a local minimu m at.
Figure: This function has a local maximum and a local minimum.
b. Using the chain rule, we see the derivative isExample: Locating Critical Points

1.9.19.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Therefore, has critical points when and when. We co nclude that the critical points are. From the
graph of in Figure, we see that has a local (and a bsolute) minimum at, but does not have a local ext remum at
or.
Figure: This function has three critical points:,, a nd. The function has a local (and absolute)
minimum at, but does not have extrema at the other two critical points.
c. By the quotient rule, we see that the derivative is
The derivative is defined everywhere. Therefore, we o nly need to find values for where. Solving, we see
that which implies. Therefore, the critical points are. From the graph of in Figure, we see
that f has an absolute maximum at and an absolute minimum at Hence, has a local maximum at and a
local minimum at. (Note that if has an absolute extr emum over an interval at a point that is not an e ndpoint of,
then has a local extremum at
Figure: This function has an absolute maximum and an a bsolute minimum.
Find all critical points for
Hint
Calculate
Answer
1.9.19.7 Locating Absolute Extrema
The extreme value theorem states that a continuous fu nction over a closed, bounded interval has an absolut e maximum and an
absolute minimum. As shown in Figure, one or both of the se absolute extrema could occur at an endpoint. If an absolute
extremum does not occur at an endpoint, however, it mu st occur at an interior point, in which case the abso lute extremum is a local
extremum. Therefore, by Fermat's Theorem, the point at which the local extremum occurs must be a critical point. We summarize
this result in the following theorem.Exercise

1.9.19.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Let be a continuous function over a closed, bounde d interval. The absolute maximum of over and the absolute minimum
of over must occur at endpoints of or at critical poi nts of in.
With this idea in mind, let’s examine a procedure for locati ng absolute extrema.
Consider a continuous function defined over the closed i nterval
1. Evaluate at the endpoints and
2. Find all critical points of that lie over the interval and evaluate at those critical points.
3. Compare all values found in (1) and (2). From "Location of Absolute Extrema," the absolute extrema must occur at
endpoints or critical points. Therefore, the largest of th ese values is the absolute maximum of. The smallest of th ese
values is the absolute minimum of.
Now let’s look at how to use this strategy to find the absolu te maximum and absolute minimum values for continuous fun ctions.
For each of the following functions, find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum over the specified in terval and state
where those values occur.
a. over
b. over.
Solution
a. Step 1. Evaluate at the endpoints and.
and
Step 2. Since is defined for all real numbers Theref ore, there are no critical points where the derivati ve is
undefined. It remains to check where. Since at and is in the interval is a
candidate for an absolute extremum of over. We evalua te and find
Step 3. We set up the following table to compare the values fou nd in steps 1 and 2.
Conclusion

Absolute maximum
Absolute minimum
From the table, we find that the absolute maximum of o ver the interval [1, 3] is, and it occurs at. The ab solute
minimum of over the interval is, and it occurs at as shown in Figure.Theorem: Location of Absolute Extrema
Problem-Solving Strategy: Locating Absolute Extrema over a Closed Interval
Example: Locating Absolute Extrema

1.9.19.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: This function has both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum.
b. Step 1. Evaluate at the endpoints and.
and
Step 2. The derivative of is given by
for. The derivative is zero when, which implies. Th e derivative is undefined at. Therefore, the
critical points of are. The point is an endpoint, so we already evaluated in step 1. The point is
not in the interval of interest, so we need only evaluate. We find that
Step 3. We compare the values found in steps 1 and 2, in the f ollowing table.
Conclusion
Absolute maximum
Absolute minimum

We conclude that the absolute maximum of over the interval is zero, and it occurs at. The absolute m inimum is
and it occurs at as shown in Figure.
Figure: This function has an absolute maximum at an en dpoint of the interval.

1.9.19.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum of over t he interval.
Hint
Look for critical points. Evaluate at all critical po ints and at the endpoints.
Answer
The absolute maximum is and it occurs at. The absolu te minimum is and it occurs at.
At this point, we know how to locate absolute extrema for continuous functions over closed intervals. We have also defined local
extrema and determined that if a function has a lo cal extremum at a point, then must be a critical point of. However, being
a critical point is not a sufficient condition for to have a local extremum at. Later in this chapter, we show how to determine
whether a function actually has a local extremum at a critical point. First, however, we need to introduce t he Mean Value Theorem,
which will help as we analyze the behavior of the graph of a function.
1.9.19.8 Solving Optimization Problems over a Closed, Bounded Interval
The basic idea of the optimization problems that fo llow is the same. We have a particular quantity that we are interested in
maximizing or minimizing. However, we also have some a uxiliary condition that needs to be satisfied. For exa mple, in Example
, we are interested in maximizing the area of a recta ngular garden. Certainly, if we keep making the side l engths of the
garden larger, the area will continue to become large r. However, what if we have some restriction on how much fencing we can use
for the perimeter? In this case, we cannot make the g arden as large as we like. Let’s look at how we can maxim ize the area of a
rectangle subject to some constraint on the perimeter.
A rectangular garden is to be constructed using a r ock wall as one side of the garden and wire fencing fo r the other three sides
(Figure). Given of wire fencing, determine the dimen sions that would create a garden of maximum area. What is
the maximum area?
Figure: We want to determine the measurements and t hat will create a garden with a maximum area using of
fencing.
Solution
Let denote the length of the side of the garden pe rpendicular to the rock wall and denote the length of the side parallel to
the rock wall. Then the area of the garden is
We want to find the maximum possible area subject to the constraint that the total fencing is. From Figure, the
total amount of fencing used will be Therefore, the co nstraint equation isExercise
Example: Maximizing the Area of a Garden

1.9.19.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Solving this equation for, we have Thus, we can write the area as
Before trying to maximize the area function we need to determine the domain under consideration. To
construct a rectangular garden, we certainly need the lengths of both sides to be positive. Therefore, we need and.
Since, if, then. Therefore, we are trying to deter mine the maximum value of for over the open
interval. We do not know that a function necessaril y has a maximum value over an open interval. However, we do know
that a continuous function has an absolute maximum (and absolute minimum) over a closed interval. There fore, let’s consider
the function over the closed interval. If the max imum value occurs at an interior point, then we have
found the value in the open interval that maximizes the area of the garden.
Therefore, we consider the following problem:
Maximize over the interval
As mentioned earlier, since is a continuous function on a closed, bounded interval, by the extreme value theorem, it has a
maximum and a minimum. These extreme values occur ei ther at endpoints or critical points. At the endpoints,. Since
the area is positive for all in the open interval, the maximum must occur at a critical point. Differen tiating the function
, we obtain
Therefore, the only critical point is (Figure). We con clude that the maximum area must occur when.
Figure: To maximize the area of the garden, we need to find the maximum value of the function.
Then we have To maximize the area of the garden, let and. The area of this
garden is.
Determine the maximum area if we want to make the same rectangular garden as in Figure, but we have of
fencing.
Hint
We need to maximize the function over the interval
Answer
The maximum area is.
Now let’s look at a general strategy for solving optimizati on problems similar to Example.Exercise

1.9.19.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095081. Introduce all variables. If applicable, draw a figure a nd label all variables.
2. Determine which quantity is to be maximized or minimi zed, and for what range of values of the other variables (if this can
be determined at this time).
3. Write a formula for the quantity to be maximized or mini mized in terms of the variables. This formula may involve mo re
than one variable.
4. Write any equations relating the independent variables i n the formula from step. Use these equations to write the q uantity
to be maximized or minimized as a function of one varia ble.
5. Identify the domain of consideration for the function in step based on the physical problem to be solved.
6. Locate the maximum or minimum value of the function f rom step This step typically involves looking for cr itical points
and evaluating a function at endpoints.
Now let’s apply this strategy to maximize the volume of an o pen-top box given a constraint on the amount of material t o be used.
An open-top box is to be made from a by piece of ca rdboard by removing a square from each corner of th e box and
folding up the flaps on each side. What size square should be cut out of each corner to get a box with the maximum volu me?
Solution
Step 1: Let be the side length of the square to be r emoved from each corner (Figure). Then, the remaining four flaps
can be folded up to form an open-top box. Let be the vo lume of the resulting box.
Figure: A square with side length inches is removed fr om each corner of the piece of cardboard. The remai ning flaps
are folded to form an open-top box.
Step 2: We are trying to maximize the volume of a box. T herefore, the problem is to maximize.
Step 3: As mentioned in step 2, are trying to maximize the volume of a box. The volume of a box is
where and are the length, width, and height, respectively.
Step 4: From Figure, we see that the height of the box is inches, the length is inches, and the width is
inches. Therefore, the volume of the box is
Step 5: To determine the domain of consideration, le t’s examine Figure. Certainly, we need Furthermore, th e side
length of the square cannot be greater than or equal to half the length of the shorter side,; otherwise, one of the flaps
would be completely cut off. Therefore, we are trying to determine whether there is a maximum volume of t he box for over
the open interval Since is a continuous function o ver the closed interval, we know will have an absolut e
maximum over the closed interval. Therefore, we consi der over the closed interval and check whether the absolute
maximum occurs at an interior point.Problem-Solving Strategy: Solving Optimization Problems
Example: Maximizing the Volume of a Box

1.9.19.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Step 6: Since is a continuous function over the clos ed, bounded interval, must have an absolute maximum (and
an absolute minimum). Since at the endpoints and for the maximum must occur at a critical
point. The derivative is
To find the critical points, we need to solve the equation
Dividing both sides of this equation by, the problem simpl ifies to solving the equation
Using the quadratic formula, we find that the critical poin ts are
Since is not in the domain of consideration, the only critical point we need to consider is. Therefore, th e
volume is maximized if we let The maximum volume is
as shown in the following graph.
Figure: Maximizing the volume of the box leads to fi nding the maximum value of a cubic polynomial.
Suppose the dimensions of the cardboard in Example a re by Let be the side length of each square and
write the volume of the open-top box as a function of. Dete rmine the domain of consideration for.
Hint
The volume of the box is
Answer
The domain is.Exercise

1.9.19.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508An island is mi due north of its closest point along a straight shoreline. A visitor is staying at a cabin o n the shore that is mi
west of that point. The visitor is planning to go fro m the cabin to the island. Suppose the visitor runs at a rate of mph and
swims at a rate of mph. How far should the visitor run befor e swimming to minimize the time it takes to reach the islan d?
Solution
Step 1: Let be the distance running and let be the distance swimming (Figure). Let be the time it takes to get from
the cabin to the island.
Figure: How can we choose and to minimize the trav el time from the cabin to the island?
Step 2: The problem is to minimize.
Step 3: To find the time spent traveling from the ca bin to the island, add the time spent running and th e time spent swimming.
Since Distance = Rate × Time the time spent running is
and the time spent swimming is
Therefore, the total time spent traveling is
Step 4: From Figure, the line segment of miles forms the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs of lengt h mi and
mi. Therefore, by the Pythagorean theorem,, and we ob tain. Thus, the total time spent
traveling is given by the function
Step 5: From Figure, we see that. Therefore, is the domain of consideration.
Step 6: Since is a continuous function over a closed, bounded interval, it has a maximum and a minimum. Let’s begin by
looking for any critical points of over the interval The derivative is
If, thenExample: Minimizing Travel Time

1.9.19.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Therefore,
Squaring both sides of this equation, we see that if satisfi es this equation, then must satisfy
which implies
We conclude that if is a critical point, then satisfi es
[Note that since we are squaring,]
Therefore, the possibilities for critical points are
Since is not in the domain, it is not a possibility for a critical point. On the other hand, is in the
domain. Since we squared both sides of Equation to arr ive at the possible critical points, it remains to verify that
satisfies Equation. Since does satisfy that equatio n, we conclude that is a critical
point, and it is the only one. To justify that the ti me is minimized for this value of, we just need to check the values of at
the endpoints and, and compare them with the value of at the critical point. We find that
and, whereas
Therefore, we conclude that has a local minimum at mi.
Suppose the island is mi from shore, and the distance f rom the cabin to the point on the shore closest to the island is mi.
Suppose a visitor swims at the rate of mph and runs a t a rate of mph. Let denote the distance the visitor will run before
swimming, and find a function for the time it takes the vis itor to get from the cabin to the island.
Hint
The time
Answer
In business, companies are interested in maximizing revenue. In the following example, we consider a scenario in wh ich a
company has collected data on how many cars it is ab le to lease, depending on the price it charges its cus tomers to rent a car. Let’s
use these data to determine the price the company should charge to maximize the amount of money it brings in.Exercise

1.9.19.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Owners of a car rental company have determined that if they charge customers dollars per day to rent a c ar, where
, the number of cars they rent per day can be mode led by the linear function. If they charge per da y
or less, they will rent all their cars. If they charg e per day or more, they will not rent any cars. Assumin g the owners plan
to charge customers between per day and per day to rent a car, how much should they charge to maximize t heir
revenue?
Solution
Step 1: Let be the price charged per car per day and let be the number of cars rented per day. Let be the revenue per day.
Step 2: The problem is to maximize
Step 3: The revenue (per day) is equal to the number of cars rented per day times the price charged per car per day—that is,
Step 4: Since the number of cars rented per day is mode led by the linear function the revenue can be
represented by the function
Step 5: Since the owners plan to charge between per ca r per day and per car per day, the problem is to f ind the
maximum revenue for in the closed interval.
Step 6: Since is a continuous function over the clos ed, bounded interval, it has an absolute maximum (a nd an
absolute minimum) in that interval. To find the max imum value, look for critical points. The derivative is
Therefore, the critical point is. When When. When
Therefore, the absolute maximum occurs at. The car rental company should charge per day per car to ma ximize
revenue as shown in the following figure.
Figure: To maximize revenue, a car rental company h as to balance the price of a rental against the numbe r of cars
people will rent at that price.
A car rental company charges its customers dollars per day, where. It has found that the number of ca rs rented
per day can be modeled by the linear function How mu ch should the company charge each customer to
maximize revenue?
Hint
where is the number of cars rented and is the price c harged per car.
AnswerExample: Maximizing Revenue
Exercise

1.9.19.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508The company should charge per car per day.
A rectangle is to be inscribed in the ellipse
What should the dimensions of the rectangle be to maximiz e its area? What is the maximum area?
Solution
Step 1: For a rectangle to be inscribed in the ellipse, the sides of the rectangle must be parallel to the axes. Let be the length
of the rectangle and be its width. Let be the area of the rectangle.
Figure: We want to maximize the area of a rectangle inscribed in an ellipse.
Step 2: The problem is to maximize.
Step 3: The area of the rectangle is
Step 4: Let be the corner of the rectangle that lie s in the first quadrant, as shown in Figure. We can wr ite length
and width. Since and, we have. Therefore, the area is
Step 5: From Figure, we see that to inscribe a rectangl e in the ellipse, the -coordinate of the corner in t he first
quadrant must satisfy. Therefore, the problem redu ces to looking for the maximum value of over the o pen
interval. Since will have an absolute maximum (and absolute minimum) over the closed interval, we consid er
over the interval. If the absolute maximum occurs a t an interior point, then we have found an absolute
maximum in the open interval.
Step 6: As mentioned earlier, is a continuous functi on over the closed, bounded interval. Therefore, it has an absolute
maximum (and absolute minimum). At the endpoints and, For,.
Therefore, the maximum must occur at a critical point. Tak ing the derivative of, we obtain
To find critical points, we need to find where We can see that if is a solution ofExample: Maximizing the Area of an Inscribed Rectangle

1.9.19.28 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508then must satisfy
Therefore, Thus, are the possible solutions of Equati on. Since we are considering over the interval
, is a possibility for a critical point, but is not. Therefore, we check whether is a solution of Equation
. Since is a solution of Equation, we conclude that is the only critical point of in the interval
Therefore, must have an absolute maximum at the crit ical point. To determine the dimensions of the recta ngle, we
need to find the length and the width. If then
Therefore, the dimensions of the rectangle are and. The area of this rectangle is
Modify the area function if the rectangle is to be inscribed in the unit circle. What is the domain o f
consideration?
Hint
If is the vertex of the square that lies in the first quadrant, then the area of the square is
Answer
The domain of consideration is.
1.9.19.9 Solving Optimization Problems when the Interval Is Not Closed or Is Unbounded
In the previous examples, we considered functions on clo sed, bounded domains. Consequently, by the extreme va lue theorem, we
were guaranteed that the functions had absolute extr ema. Let’s now consider functions for which the domain is neither closed nor
bounded.
Many functions still have at least one absolute extre ma, even if the domain is not closed or the domain is unbounded. For example,
the function over has an absolute minimum of at. Therefore, we can still consider functions over
unbounded domains or open intervals and determine wh ether they have any absolute extrema. In the next ex ample, we try to
minimize a function over an unbounded domain. We wil l see that, although the domain of consideration is the function has
an absolute minimum.
In the following example, we look at constructing a bo x of least surface area with a prescribed volume. It is not difficult to show
that for a closed-top box, by symmetry, among all boxe s with a specified volume, a cube will have the smalle st surface area.
Consequently, we consider the modified problem of dete rmining which open-topped box with a specified volume h as the smallest
surface area.
A rectangular box with a square base, an open top, and a volume of is to be constructed. What should the di mensions of
the box be to minimize the surface area of the box? What is the minimum surface area?
Solution
Step 1: Draw a rectangular box and introduce the varia ble to represent the length of each side of the squ are base; let
represent the height of the box. Let denote the surface area of the open-top box.Exercise
Example: Minimizing Surface Area

1.9.19.29 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508
Figure: We want to minimize the surface area of a squ are-based box with a given volume.
Step 2: We need to minimize the surface area. Therefore, we need to minimize.
Step 3: Since the box has an open top, we need only det ermine the area of the four vertical sides and the b ase. The area of each
of the four vertical sides is The area of the base is. Th erefore, the surface area of the box is
Step 4: Since the volume of this box is and the volume is g iven as, the constraint equation is
Solving the constraint equation for, we have. Therefore, we can write the surface area as a function of only:
Therefore,.
Step 5: Since we are requiring that, we cannot have. Therefore, we need. On the other hand, is allowed
to have any positive value. Note that as becomes la rge, the height of the box becomes correspondingly sm all so that
. Similarly, as becomes small, the height of the box becomes correspondingly large. We conclude that the d omain is the
open, unbounded interval. Note that, unlike the previ ous examples, we cannot reduce our problem to looking for an
absolute maximum or absolute minimum over a closed, b ounded interval. However, in the next step, we discover why this
function must have an absolute minimum over the interv al
Step 6: Note that as Also, as. Since is a continuous f unction that approaches infinity at
the ends, it must have an absolute minimum at some. T his minimum must occur at a critical point of. The
derivative is
Therefore, when. Solving this equation for, we obtain, so Since this is the only
critical point of, the absolute minimum must occur at (see Figure).
When, Therefore, the dimensions of the box should be and With these
dimensions, the surface area is
Figure: We can use a graph to determine the dimension s of a box of given the volume and the minimum surfac e area.

1.9.19.30 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508Consider the same open-top box, which is to have volu me. Suppose the cost of the material for the base is and
the cost of the material for the sides is and we are trying to minimize the cost of this box. Write the co st as a function of
the side lengths of the base. (Let be the side length of the base and be the height of the box.)
Hint
If the cost of one of the sides is the cost of that side is dollars.
Answer
dollars
1.9.19.10 Key Concepts
To solve an optimization problem, begin by drawing a pictur e and introducing variables.
Find an equation relating the variables.
Find a function of one variable to describe the quantity that is to be minimized or maximized.
Look for critical points to locate local extrema.
1.9.19.11 Glossary
optimization problems
problems that are solved by finding the maximum or minimu m value of a function
1.9.19.12 Key Concepts
A function may have both an absolute maximum and an absol ute minimum, have just one absolute extremum, or have no
absolute maximum or absolute minimum.
If a function has a local extremum, the point at which it occurs must be a critical point. However, a function need not have a
local extremum at a critical point.
A continuous function over a closed, bounded interval h as an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum. Each extre mum
occurs at a critical point or an endpoint.
1.9.19.13 Glossary
absolute extremum
if has an absolute maximum or absolute minimum at, we say has an absolute extremum at
absolute maximum
if for all in the domain of, we say has an absolute ma ximum at
absolute minimum
if for all in the domain of, we say has an absolute mi nimum at
critical point
if or is undefined, we say that c is a critical point of
extreme value theorem
if is a continuous function over a finite, closed int erval, then has an absolute maximum and an absolute min imum
Fermat’s theorem
if has a local extremum at, then is a critical point of
local extremum
if has a local maximum or local minimum at, we say has a local extremum at Exercise

1.9.19.31 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508local maximum
if there exists an interval such that for all, we say has a local maximum at
local minimum
if there exists an interval such that for all, we say has a local minimum at
differential
the differential is an independent variable that can be assigned any nonzero real number; the differential is defined to be
differential form
given a differentiable function the equation is th e differential form of the derivative of with respect to
linear approximation
the linear function is the linear approximation of at
percentage uncertainty
the relative uncertainty expressed as a percentage
propagated uncertainty
the uncertainty that results in a calculated quantity resulting from a measurement uncertainty
relative uncertainty
given an absolute uncertainty for a particular quanti ty, is the relative uncertainty.
tangent line approximation (linearization)
since the linear approximation of at is defined usin g the equation of the tangent line, the linear approximat ion of at
is also known as the tangent line approximation to at
acceleration
is the rate of change of the velocity, that is, the derivat ive of velocity
amount of change
the amount of a function over an interval
average rate of change
is a function over an interval is
marginal cost
is the derivative of the cost function, or the approximat e cost of producing one more item
marginal revenue
is the derivative of the revenue function, or the approx imate revenue obtained by selling one more item
marginal profit
is the derivative of the profit function, or the approxim ate profit obtained by producing and selling one more ite m
population growth rate
is the derivative of the population with respect to time
speed
is the absolute value of velocity, that is, is the spee d of an object at time whose velocity is given by

1.9.19.32 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109508This page titled 1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear Approxi mation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and Minima, Optimization is
shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style
and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
3.4: Derivatives as Rates of Change by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
4.2: Linear Approximations and Differentials by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
4.3: Maxima and Minima by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
4.7: Applied Optimization Problems by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.20.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095091.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals
In the previous section, we were concerned with determi ning the derivative of a function. The derivative is useful because it
tells us how the function varies as a function of. I n physics, we often know how a function varies, but we d o not know the
actual function. In other words, we often have the oppos ite problem: we are given the derivative of a functi on, and wish to
determine the actual function. For this case, we will limit our discussion to functions of a single independent variab le.
Suppose that we are given a function and we know that t his is the derivative of some other function,, which we do not
know. We call the anti-derivative of. The anti-derivative of a function, written, thu s satisfies the property:
Since we have a symbol for indicating that we take the derivative with respect to (), we also have a symbol,, for indicating
that we take the anti-derivative with respect to:
Earlier, we justified the symbol for the derivative by pointing out that it is like but for the case whe n. Similarly, we will
justify the anti-derivative sign,, by showing that it is related to a sum of, in the limit. The sign looks
like an “S” for sum.
While it is possible to exactly determine the deriva tive of a function, the anti-derivative can only b e determined up to a
constant. Consider for example a different function,, where is a constant. The derivative of with respect to
is given by:
Hence, the function is also an anti-derivative of. The constant can often be determined using addition al
information (sometimes called “initial conditions”). Recall the function,, shown in Figure A2.2.1 (left pane l). If you
imagine shifting the whole function up or down, the der ivative would not change. In other words, if the origin of the axes were not
drawn on the left panel, you would still be able to d etermine the derivative of the function (how steep i t is). Adding a constant,,
to a function is exactly the same as shifting the fu nction up or down, which does not change its derivati ve. Thus, when you know
the derivative, you cannot know the value of, unless you are also told that the function must go through a specific point (a socalled initial condition).
In order to determine the derivative of a function, we used Equation A2.2.1. We now need to derive an equivalent prescription f or
determining the anti-derivative. Suppose that we have the two pieces of information required to determine completely,
namely:
1. the function (its derivative).
2. the condition that must pass through a specific po int,.

1.9.20.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509
Figure A2.3.1: Determining the anti-derivative,, given the functi on and the initial condition that passes
through the point.
The procedure for determining the anti-derivative is illustrated above in Figure A2.3.1. We start by drawi ng the point that we
know the function must go through,. We then choose a value of and use the derivative,, to calculate, the
amount by which changes when changes by. Using the derivat ive evaluated at, we have:
We can then estimate the value of the function at the next point,, as illustrated by the black arrow in
Figure A2.3.1
Now that we have determined the value of the function at, we can repeat the procedure to determine the v alue of the
function at the next point,. Again, we use the deriv ative evaluated at,, to determine, and add that to
to get, as illustrated by the grey arrow in Figure A2.3.1:
Using the summation notation, we can generalize the resu lt and write the function evaluated at any point,:
The result above will become exactly correct in the limit:
Let us take a closer look at the sum. Each term in the sum is of the form, and is illustrated in Figure A2.3.2 for the same
case as in Figure A2.3.1 (that is, Figure A2.3.2 shows that we know, and Figure A2.3.1 shows that we are trying to find).

1.9.20.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509
Figure A2.3.2: The function and illustration of the terms and as t he area between the curve and the
axis when.
As you can see, each term in the sum corresponds to th e area of a rectangle between the function and the axis (with a piece
missing). In the limit where, the missing pieces (shown by the hashed areas in Figure A2.3.2) will vanish and wi ll
become exactly the area between and the axis over a length. The sum of the rectangular areas will thus approach the area
between and the axis between and:
Re-arranging Equation A2.3.1 gives us a prescription for determining the anti-deriv ative:
We see that if we determine the area between and the axis from to, we can obtain the difference between the antiderivative at two points,
The difference between the anti-derivative,, evalua ted at two different values of is called the integral of and has the
following notation:
As you can see, the integral has labels that specify the range over which we calculate the area between an d the axis. A
common notation to express the difference is to use br ackets:
Recall that we wrote the anti-derivative with the same symbol earlier:
The symbol without the limits is called the indefinite integral. You can also see that when you take the (definite) integral
(i.e. the difference between evaluated at two points), any constant that is added to will cancel. Physical quantities are
always based on definite integrals, so when we write the constant it is primarily for completeness and to e mphasize that we have
an indefinite integral.
As an example, let us determine the integral of betwee n and, as well as the indefinite integral of, which
is the case that we illustrated in Figures A2.3.1 and A2.3.2. Using Equation A2.3.2, we have:

1.9.20.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509where we have:
Note that is the number of times we have in the inte rval between and. Thus, taking the limit of is the same as
taking the limit. Let us illustrate the sum for the case where, and thus when, corresponding to the illu stration
in Figure A2.3.2:
where in the second line, we noticed that we could facto r out the because it appears in each term. Since we only used 4 points,
this is a pretty coarse approximation of the integral, and we expect it to be an underestimate (as the missin g area represented by the
hashed lines in Figure A2.3.2 is quite large).
If we repeat this for a larger value of N, (), we should obtain a more accurate answer:
Writing this out again for the general case so that we can t ake the limit, and factoring out the:
Now, consider the combination:
that appears above. This corresponds to the arithmetic average of the values from to (sum the values and divide by the
number of values). In the limit where, then the val ue. The average value of in the interval between a nd
is simply given by the value of at the midpoint of the inte rval:
Putting everything together:

1.9.20.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509where in the last line, we substituted in the values of and. Writing this as the integral:
we can immediately identify the anti-derivative and the indefinite integral:
This is of course the result that we expected, and we can chec k our answer by taking the derivative of:
We have thus confirmed that is the anti-derivative of.
The quantity is equal to
A. the area between the function and the axis between and
B. the sum of in the limit between and
C. the difference.
Answer
Common anti-derivative and properties
Table A2.3.1 below gives the anti-derivatives (indefinite integra ls) for common functions. In all cases, is the indepe ndent
variable, and all other variables should be thought of a s constants:
Function, Anti-derivative,
Table A2.3.1: Common indefinite integrals of functions.
Note that, in general, it is much more difficult to o btain the anti-derivative of a function than it is to take its derivative. A few
common properties to help evaluate indefinite integral s are shown in Table A2.3.2 below.Exercise

1.9.20.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509Anti-derivative Equivalent anti-derivative
(sum)
(subtraction)
(multiplication by constant)
(integration by parts)
Table A2.3.2: Some properties of indefinite integrals.
Common uses of integrals in Physics - from a sum to an integral
Integrals are extremely useful in physics because t hey are related to sums. If we assume that our mathem atician friends (or
computers) can determine anti-derivatives for us, using integrals is not that complicated.
The key idea in physics is that integrals are a tool to easily performing sums. As we saw above, integrals correspond to the area
underneath a curve, which is found by summing the (different) areas of an infinite number of infi nitely small rectangles. In physics,
it is often the case that we need to take the sum of an infinite number of small things that keep varying, just as the areas of the
rectangles.
Consider, for example, a rod of length,, and total ma ss, as shown in Figure A2.3.3. If the rod is uniform in density, then if we
cut it into, say, two equal pieces, those two pieces will weigh the same. We can define a “linear mass density”,, for the rod, as the
mass per unit length of the rod:
The linear mass density has dimensions of mass over l ength and can be used to find the mass of any lengt h of rod. For example, if
the rod has a mass of and a length of, then the mass den sity is:
Knowing the mass density, we can now easily find the mass,, of a piece of rod that has a length of, say,. Us ing the mass
density, the mass of the rod is given by:
Now suppose that we have a rod of length that is not u niform, as in Figure A2.3.3, and that does not have a co nstant linear mass
density. Perhaps the rod gets wider and wider, or it ha s a holes in it that make it not uniform. Imagine t hat the mass density of the
rod is instead given by a function,, that depends o n the position along the rod, where is the distance measured from one side
of the rod.
Figure A2.3.3: A rod with a varying linear density. To calculate th e mass of the rod, we consider a small mass element of
length at position. The total mass of the rod is found by summing the mass of the small mass elements.
Now, we cannot simply determine the mass of the rod by multiplying and, since we do not know which value of to use. In
fact, we have to use all of the values of, between and.
The strategy is to divide the rod up into pieces of length. If we label our pieces of rod with an index, we can say that the
piece that is at position has a tiny mass,. We assu me that is small enough so that can be taken as c onstant over the
length of that tiny piece of rod. Then, the tiny piece of rod at, has a mass,, given by:

1.9.20.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509where is evaluated at the position,, of our tiny p iece of rod. The total mass,, of the rod is then th e sum of the masses of
the tiny rods, in the limit where:
But this is precisely the definition of the integral (Equation A2.3.1), which we can easily evaluate with an anti-derivative:
where is the anti-derivative of.
Suppose that the mass density is given by the function:
with anti-derivative (Table A2.3.1):
Let and let’s say that the length of the rod is. The to tal mass of the rod is then:
With a little practice, you can solve this type of pro blem without writing out the sum explicitly. Picture an infinitesimal piece of the
rod of length at position. It will have an infinitesimal mass,, given by:
The total mass of the rod is the then the sum (i.e. the inte gral) of the mass elements
and we really can think of the sign as a sum, when th e things being summed are infinitesimally small. In the above equation, we
still have not specified the range in over which we want to take the sum; that is, we need some sort of in dex for the mass
elements to make this a meaningful definite integra l. Since we already know how to express in terms of, we can substitute
our expression for using one with:
where we have made the integral definite by specifyin g the range over which to sum, since we can use to “la bel” the mass
elements.

1.9.20.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509One should note that coming up with the above integra l is physics. Solving it is math. We will worry much mor e about writing out
the integral than evaluating its value. Evaluating t he integral can always be done by a mathematician fr iend or a computer, but
determining which integral to write down is the physicist’s job!
Key Takeaways
The derivative of a function,, with respect to can be wri tten as:
and measures the rate of change of the function with respect to. The derivative of a function is gener ally itself a function. The
derivative is defined as:
Graphically, the derivative of a function represents the slope of the function, and it is positive if the f unction is increasing, negative
if the function is decreasing and zero if the functi on is flat. Derivatives can always be determined anal ytically for any continuous
function.
A partial derivative measures the rate of change of a multi-variate function,, with respect to one of i ts independent variables.
The partial derivative with respect to one of the va riables is evaluated by taking the derivative of the function with respect to that
variable while treating all other independent variab les as if they were constant. The partial derivative of a function (with respect to
) is written as:
The gradient of a function,, is a vector in the direction in which that function is increasing most rapidly. It i s given by:
Given a function,, its anti-derivative with respect to,, is written:
is such that its derivative with respect to is:
The anti-derivative of a function is only ever define d up to a constant,. We usually write this as:
since the derivative of will also be equal to. The a nti-derivative is also called the “indefinite integral ” of.
The definite integral of a function, between and, is written:
and is equal to the difference in the anti-derivative ev aluated at and:
where the constant no longer matters, since it cancel s out. Physical quantities only ever depend on defini te integrals, since they
must be determined without an arbitrary constant.

1.9.20.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109509Definite integrals are very useful in physics because they are related to a sum. Given a function, one can relate the sum of
terms of the form over a range of values from to to the integral of over that range:
This page titled 1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Howard
Martin revised by Alan Ng.
26.3: Anti-derivatives and integrals by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0.
Original source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.
26.4: Summary by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.9.21.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095101.9.21: Integrals
Integration is the inverse operation to differentiation:
It is not always easy to evaluate a given integral. In fact some integrals are not even doable! However, t here are some methods that
could yield an answer. While you might be happier usin g a computer algebra system, such as Maple or WolframAlpha.com, or a
fancy calculator, you should know a few basic integrals an d know how to use tables for some of the more complicated on es.
First of all, there are some integrals you are expec ted to know without doing any work. These integrals appe ar often and are just an
application of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus t o the previous Table 8.4.1. The basic integrals that students should know off
the top of their heads are given in Table.
These are not the only integrals you should be able to do. We can expand the list by recalling a few of th e techniques that you
learned in calculus, the Method of Substitution, Integ ration by Parts, integration using partial fraction decomposition, and
trigonometric integrals, and trigonometric substitutio n. There are also a few other techniques that you had not seen before. We will
look at several examples.
Evaluate.
Solution:
When confronted with an integral, you should first ask i f a simple substitution would reduce the integral to one you know
how to do.
The ugly part of this integral is the under the square root. So, we let.
Noting that when, we have For our example,.
Looking at the integral, part of the integrand can be written as. Then, the integral becomes
The substitution has converted our integral into an integral over. Also, this integral is doable! It is one of the integrals we
should know. Namely, we can write it as
This is now easily finished after integrating and using th e substitution variable to give
Note that we have added the required integration cons tant and that the derivative of the result easily g ives the original
integrand (after employing the Chain Rule).
Often we are faced with definite integrals, in which we i ntegrate between two limits. There are several ways to use these limits.
However, students often forget that a change of variables gen erally means that the limits have to change.
Table: Table of Common Integrals.Example

1.9.21.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Function Indefinite Integral
Evaluate.
Solution:
This is the last example but with integration limits ad ded. We proceed as before. We let. As goes from o to
takes values from i to So, this substitution gives
When you becomes proficient at integration, you can bypass some of these steps. In the next example we try to demonstrate
the thought process involved in using substitution witho ut explicitly using the substitution variable.
Evaluate.
Solution:
As with the previous example, one sees that the derivati ve of is proportional to, which is in the numerato r of the
integrand. Thus a substitution would give an integran d of the form So, we expect the answer to be proportiona l to Example
Example

1.9.21.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510. The starting point is therefore,
where is a constant to be determined.
We can determine through differentiation since the de rivative of the answer should be the integrand. Thus,
Comparing this result with the integrand, we see that the inte grand is obtained when. Therefore,
We now complete the integral,
The function is called the Gudermannian and connects trigonometric and hyperbolic
functions. This function was named after Christoph Gud ermann (1798-1852), but introduced by Johann Heinric h Lambert (
), who was one of the first to introduce hyperbolic functio ns.
Evaluate.
Solution:
This integral can be performed by first using the definit ion of followed by a simple substitution.
Now, we let and. Then,
Integration by Parts
When the Method of Substitution fails, there are other methods you can try. One of the most used is the Metho d of Integration by
Parts. Recall the Integration by Parts Formula:
The idea behind Integrating by Parts is that you are given the integral on the left and you can relate it to an integral on the right.
Hopefully, the new integral is one you can do, or at least i t is an easier integral than the one you are trying to eval uate.Example
Integration by Parts Formula

1.9.21.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510However, you are not usually given the functions and. You have to determine them. The integral form that y ou really have is a
function of another variable, say. Another form of the I ntegration by Parts Formula can be written as
Note: Often in physics one needs to move a derivative between functions inside an integrand. The key - use integration by parts to
move the derivative from one function to the other und er an integral.
This form is a bit more complicated in appearance, th ough it is clearer than the form as to what is happe ning. The derivative
has been moved from one function to the other. Reca ll that this formula was derived by integrating the product rule for
differentiation. These two formulae can be related by using the differenti al relations
This also gives a method for applying the Integration by Pa rts Formula.
Consider the integral
Solution:
We choose and This gives the correct left side of the Integration by Parts Formula. We next determine
and:
We note that one usually does not need the integrat ion constant. Inserting these expressions into the In tegration by Parts
Formula, we have
We see that the new integral is easier to do than the original integral. Had we picked and, then the
formula still works, but the resulting integral is not easie r.
For completeness, we finish the integration. The result is
As always, you can check your answer by differentiating the res ult, a step students often forget to do. Namely,
So, we do get back the integrand in the original integra l.
(Integration by Parts for Definite Integrals). We can a lso perform integration by parts on definite integral s. The general formula is
written asExample

1.9.21.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Consider the integral
This will require two integrations by parts. First, we let and Then,
Inserting into the Integration by Parts Formula, we have
We note that the resulting integral is easier that t he given integral, but we still cannot do the integral off the top of our head
(unless we look at Example). So, we need to integrate b y parts again. (Note: In your calculus class you may recall that there
is a tabular method for carrying out multiple applicati ons of the formula. We will show this method in the next exam ple.)
We apply integration by parts by letting and. This g ives and. Therefore, we have
The final result is
There are other ways to compute integrals of this type. First of all, there is the Tabular Method to perform integration by parts. A
second method is to use differentiation of parameters und er the integral. We will demonstrate this using examples.
Compute the integral using the Tabular Method.
(Using the Tabular Method). First we identify the two func tions under the integral, and. We then write the two
functions and list the derivatives and integrals of each, respectively. This is shown in Table A.4. Note that we stop ped
First when we reached zero in the left column.
Next, one draws diagonal arrows, as indicated, with alter nating signs attached, starting with. The indefinite integral is then
obtained by summing the products of the functions at the en ds of the arrows along with the signs on each arrow:
To find the definite integral, one evaluates the antider ivative at the given limits.
Actually, the Tabular Method works even if a zero does n ot appear in the left column. One can go as far as po ssible, and if a zero
does not appear, then one needs only integrate, if p ossible, the product of the functions in the last ro w, adding the next sign in the
alternating sign progression. The next example shows how thi s works.Example
Example

1.9.21.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510
Figure: Tabular Method
Figure: Tabular Method, showing a nonterminating exa mple.
Use the Tabular Method to compute.
As before, we first set up the table as shown in Figure.
Putting together the pieces, noting that the derivative s in the left column will never vanish, we have
The integral on the right is a multiple of the one on the left, so we can combine them,
or
Differentiation Under the Integral
Differentiation Under the Integral Sign and Feynman’s trick.
Another method that one can use to evaluate this inte gral is to differentiate under the integral sign. Thi s is mentioned in the Richard
Feynman’s memoir Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!. In t he book Feynman recounts using this "trick" to be abl e to do integrals
that his MIT classmates could not do. This is based on a theorem found in Advanced Calculus texts. Reader’ s unfamiliar with
partial derivatives should be able to grasp their use in t he following example.Example

1.9.21.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Let the functions and be continuous in both, and, in the region of the plane which includes
, where the functions and are continuous and have continu ous derivatives for. Defining
then
for. This is a generalized version of the Fundamental Th eorem of Calculus.
In the next examples we show how we can use this theorem to by pass integration by parts.
Use differentiation under the integral sign to evaluate. First, consider the integral
Then,
Evaluating this result at, we have
The reader can verify this result by employing the previ ous methods or by just differentiating the result.
We will do the integral once more. First, consider the inte gral
Differentiating the integral with respect to twice give sTheorem
Example
Example

1.9.21.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Evaluation of this result at leads to the desired result. Namely,
Trigonometric Integrals
Other types of integrals that you will see often are t rigonometric integrals. In particular, integrals invol ving powers of sines and
cosines. For odd powers, a simple substitution will turn the i ntegrals into simple powers.
For example, consider
Solution
This can be rewritten as
Integration of odd powers of sine and cosine. Let. Then,. Since, we have
A quick check confirms the answer:
Even powers of sines and cosines are a little more comp licated, but doable. In these cases we need the half an gle formulae
(A.24)-(A.25).
(Integration of even powers of sine and cosine).
As an example, we will computeExample
Example

1.9.21.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510.
Solution:
Substituting the half angle formula for, we have
We note that this result appears often in physics. When looking at root mean square averages of sinuso idal waves, one needs the
average of the square of sines and cosines. Recall that the average of a function on interval is given as
So, the average of over one period is
The root mean square is then found by taking the square r oot,.
Recall that RMS averages refer to the root mean square average. This is computed by first computing the av erage, or mean, of the
square of some quantity. Then one takes the square r oot. Typical examples are RMS voltage, RMS current, and t he average energy
in an electromagnetic wave. AC currents oscillate so fast tha t the measured value is the RMS voltage.
Trigonometric Function Substitution
Another class of integrals typically studied in calcu lus are those involving the forms,, or \(\sqrt{x^2 − 1\). These
can be simplified through the use of trigonometric su bstitutions. The idea is to combine the two terms unde r the radical into one
term using trigonometric identities. We will consider some typical examples.
Evaluate.
Solution:
Since, we perform the sine substitution
In any of these computations careful attention has to be paid to simplifying the radical. This is because
For example,. For one typically specifies the domai n In this domain we have
Then,
Using the last example, we haveExample

1.9.21.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510However, we need to write the answer in terms of. We do t his by first using the double angle formula for and
to obtain
Similar trigonometric substitutions result for integra nds involving and. The substitutions are summariz ed in Table
A.6. The simplification of the given form is then obta ined using trigonometric identities. This can also b e accomplished by
referring to the right triangles shown in Figure.
Table: Standard trigonometric substitutions.
Form Substitution Differential
Figure: Geometric relations used in trigonometric subst itution.
Evaluate.
Solution:
Let. Then, and
So, the integral becomes
One has to recall, or look up,
This givesExample

1.9.21.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Evaluate.
Solution:
In this case one needs the secant substitution. This yield s
Evaluate.
Again we can use a secant substitution. This yields
Hyperbolic Function Substitution
Even though trigonometric substitution plays a role in the calculus program, students often see hyperbolic function substitution
used in physics courses. The reason might be because hy perbolic function substitution is sometimes simpler. The idea is the same
as for trigonometric substitution. We use an identity to sim plify the radical.
Evaluate using the substitution.
Solution:
Since, we have Also, we can use the identity to rewrite
The integral can be now be evaluated using these substitut ions and some hyperbolic function identities,
In Example A.17 we used a trigonometric substitution and foundExample
Example
Example

1.9.21.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510This is the same result since.
Evaluate for using hyperbolic function substitutio n.
Solution:
This integral was evaluated in Example using the trigo nometric substitution and the resulting integral of
had to be recalled. Here we will use the substitution
Then,
This is the same result as we had obtained previously, but thi s derivation was a little cleaner.
Also, we can extend this result to values by letting - cos h. This gives
Combining these results, we have shown
We have seen in the last example that the use of hy perbolic function substitution allows us to bypass int egrating the secant function
in Example when using trigonometric substitutions. I n fact, we can use hyperbolic substitutions to evalua te integrals of
powers of secants. Comparing Example and Example, we consider the transformation. The relation
between differentials is found by differentiation, giving
Since
we have, therefore
In the next example we show how useful this transformation is.
(Evaluation of).
Evaluate using hyperbolic function substitution.
Solution:Example
Example

1.9.21.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510From the discussion in the last paragraph, we have
We can express this result in the usual form by using the logarithmic form of the inverse hyperbolic cosine,
The result is
This example was fairly simple using the transformation. Another common integral that arises often is integ rations of
. In a typical calculus class this integral is evalu ated using integration by parts. However. that leads to a tricky manipulation
that is a bit scary the first time it is encountere d (and probably upon several more encounters.) In t he next example, we will show
how hyperbolic function substitution is simpler.
(Evaluation of).
Evaluate using hyperbolic function substitution.
Solution:
First, we consider the transformation with. Then,
This integral was done in Example A.7, leading to
While correct, this is not the form usually encount ered. Instead, we make the slightly different transfor mation.
Since, we find As before, we find
Using this transformation and several identities, the in tegral becomes
There are many other integration methods, some of wh ich we will visit in other parts of the book, such as partial fraction
decomposition and numerical integration. Another topic which we will revisit is power series.Example

1.9.21.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Integrations Table
Basic Integrals
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
Trigonometric Integrals
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

1.9.21.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951026.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
Exponential and Logarithmic Integrals
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
Hyperbolic Integrals
49.
50.
51. Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.21.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951052.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
Inverse Trigonometric Integrals
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
Integrals Involving a + u, a > 0
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76. 2 2

1.9.21.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109510Integrals Involving u − a, a > 0
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
Integrals Involving a − u, a > 0
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
Integrals Involving 2 au − u, a > 0
94.
95.
96.
97.
Integrals Involving a + bu, a ≠ 0
98. 2 2
2 2

1.9.21.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951099.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
This page titled 1.9.21: Integrals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Russell Herman via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.5: Integrals by Russell Herman is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 3.0. Original source:
http://people.uncw.edu/hermanr/mat361/ODEBook/index.htm.
Appendix B: Table of Integrals by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.22.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095111.9.22: Anti-derivatives
Find the general antiderivative of a given function.
Explain the terms and notation used for an indefinite i ntegral.
State the power rule for integrals.
Use antidifferentiation to solve simple initial-value pr oblems.
At this point, we have seen how to calculate derivative s of many functions and have been introduced to a v ariety of their
applications. We now ask a question that turns this p rocess around: Given a function, how do we find a func tion with the
derivative and why would we be interested in such a functio n?
We answer the first part of this question by defining antiderivatives. The antiderivative of a function i s a function with a
derivative. Why are we interested in antiderivative s? The need for antiderivatives arises in many situati ons, and we look at
various examples throughout the remainder of the tex t. Here we examine one specific example that involves r ectilinear motion. In
our examination in Derivatives of rectilinear motion, we showed that given a position function of an object, then its velocity
function is the derivative of —that is,. Furthermore, the acceleration is the derivative of the velocity —
that is,. Now suppose we are given an acceleration fun ction, but not the velocity function or the positi on
function. Since, determining the velocity function requires us to find an antiderivative of the accele ration function.
Then, since determining the position function requ ires us to find an antiderivative of the velocity f unction. Rectilinear
motion is just one case in which the need for antide rivatives arises. We will see many more examples throu ghout the remainder of
the text. For now, let’s look at the terminology and n otation for antiderivatives, and determine the anti derivatives for several types
of functions. We examine various techniques for fin ding antiderivatives of more complicated functions later in the text
(Introduction to Techniques of Integration).
The Reverse of Differentiation
At this point, we know how to find derivatives of variou s functions. We now ask the opposite question. Given a function, how
can we find a function with derivative? If we can find a func tion with derivative we call an antiderivative of.
A function is an antiderivative of the function if
for all in the domain of.
Consider the function. Knowing the power rule of diff erentiation, we conclude that is an antiderivative of
since.
Are there any other antiderivatives of?
Yes; since the derivative of any constant is zero, is also an antiderivative of. Therefore, and are also
antiderivatives.
Are there any others that are not of the form for some cons tant?
The answer is no. From Corollary 2 of the Mean Value Th eorem, we know that if and are differentiable functi ons such that
then for some constant. This fact leads to the followin g important theorem.
Let be an antiderivative of over an interval. The n,
I. for each constant, the function is also an antideri vative of over;Learning Objectives
Definition: Antiderivative
Theorem: General Form of an Antiderivative

1.9.22.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511II. if is an antiderivative of over, there is a consta nt for which over.
In other words, the most general form of the antiderivati ve of over is.
We use this fact and our knowledge of derivatives to find all the antiderivatives for several functions.
For each of the following functions, find all antiderivati ves.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution:
a. Because
then is an antiderivative of. Therefore, every anti derivative of is of the form for some constant,
and every function of the form is an antiderivative o f.
b. Let
For and
For and
Therefore,
Thus, is an antiderivative of. Therefore, every anti derivative of is of the form for some constant
and every function of the form is an antiderivative o f.
c. We have
so is an antiderivative of. Therefore, every antid erivative of is of the form for some
constant and every function of the form is an antider ivative of.
d. Since
then is an antiderivative of. Therefore, every anti derivative of is of the form for some constant and
every function of the form is an antiderivative of.Example: Finding Antiderivatives

1.9.22.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511Find all antiderivatives of.
Hint
What function has a derivative of?
Answer
Indefinite Integrals
We now look at the formal notation used to represent antiderivatives and examine some of their propertie s. These properties allow
us to find antiderivatives of more complicated func tions. Given a function, we use the notation or to denote the
derivative of. Here we introduce notation for antide rivatives. If is an antiderivative of, we say that is the most
general antiderivative of and write
The symbol is called an integral sign, and is call ed the indefinite integral of.
Given a function, the indefinite integral of, denoted
is the most general antiderivative of. If is an antide rivative of, then
The expression is called the integrand and the vari able is the variable of integration.
Given the terminology introduced in this definition, the act of finding the antiderivatives of a function is usually referred to as
integrating.
For a function and an antiderivative, the function s, where is any real number, is often referred to as the family of
antiderivatives of. For example, since is an antideri vative of and any antiderivative of is of the form we write
The collection of all functions of the form where is any real number, is known as the family of antideri vatives of.
Figure shows a graph of this family of antiderivatives.Exercise
Definition: Indefinite Integrals

1.9.22.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511
Figure: The family of antiderivatives of consists of a ll functions of the form, where is any real number.
For some functions, evaluating indefinite integrals foll ows directly from properties of derivatives. For example, fo r,
which comes directly from
This fact is known as the power rule for integrals.
For
Evaluating indefinite integrals for some other func tions is also a straightforward calculation. The followin g table lists the indefinite
integrals for several common functions. A more complete l ist appears in Appendix B.
Table: Integration FormulasPower Rule for Integrals

1.9.22.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511Differentiation Formula Indefinite Integral
for
From the definition of indefinite integral of, we know
if and only if is an antiderivative of.
Therefore, when claiming that
it is important to check whether this statement is correct by verifying that
Each of the following statements is of the form Ver ify that each statement is correct by showing that
a.
b.
Solution:
a. Since
the statementExample: Verifying an Indefinite Integral

1.9.22.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511is correct.
Note that we are verifying an indefinite integral for a sum. Furthermore, and are antiderivatives of and,
respectively, and the sum of the antiderivatives is a n antiderivative of the sum. We discuss this fact ag ain later in this
section.
b. Using the product rule, we see that
Therefore, the statement
is correct.
Note that we are verifying an indefinite integral for a product. The antiderivative is not a product of the
antiderivatives. Furthermore, the product of antideriva tives, is not an antiderivative of since
In general, the product of antiderivatives is not an a ntiderivative of a product.
Verify that
Hint
Calculate
Answer
In Table, we listed the indefinite integrals for ma ny elementary functions. Let’s now turn our attention t o evaluating
indefinite integrals for more complicated functions. For example, consider finding an antiderivative of a su m. In Example
we showed that an antiderivative of the sum is give n by the sum —that is, an antiderivative of a sum is
given by a sum of antiderivatives. This result was no t specific to this example. In general, if and are antiderivatives of any
functions and, respectively, then
Therefore, is an antiderivative of and we have
Similarly,
In addition, consider the task of finding an antideriva tive of where is any real number. SinceExercise

1.9.22.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511for any real number, we conclude that
These properties are summarized next.
Let and be antiderivatives of and, respectively, a nd let be any real number.
Sums and Differences
Constant Multiples
From this theorem, we can evaluate any integral involv ing a sum, difference, or constant multiple of funct ions with antiderivatives
that are known. Evaluating integrals involving produc ts, quotients, or compositions is more complicated. (See Example for
an example involving an antiderivative of a product.) We look at and address integrals involving these mo re complicated functions
in Introduction to Integration. In the next example, we examine how to use this theorem to calculate the i ndefinite integrals of
several functions.
Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals:
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution:
a. Using Properties of Indefinite Integrals, we can integrat e each of the four terms in the integrand separately. We ob tain
From the second part of Properties of Indefinite Integr als, each coefficient can be written in front of the i ntegral sign, which
gives
Using the power rule for integrals, we conclude that
b. Rewrite the integrand as
Then, to evaluate the integral, integrate each of these terms separately. Using the power rule, we haveProperties of Indefinite Integrals
Example: Evaluating Indefinite Integrals

1.9.22.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511c. Using Properties of Indefinite Integrals, write the integr al as
Then, use the fact that is an antiderivative of to co nclude that
d. Rewrite the integrand as
Therefore,
Evaluate.
Hint
Integrate each term in the integrand separately, maki ng use of the power rule.
Answer
Initial-Value Problems
We look at techniques for integrating a large varie ty of functions involving products, quotients, and comp ositions later in the text.
Here we turn to one common use for antiderivatives that aris es often in many applications: solving differential equ ations.
A differential equation is an equation that relates an u nknown function and one or more of its derivatives. The equation
is a simple example of a differential equation. Solv ing this equation means finding a function with a d erivative. Therefore, the
solutions of Equation are the antiderivatives of. If is one antiderivative of, every function of the form is
a solution of that differential equation. For example, th e solutions of
are given by
Sometimes we are interested in determining whether a pa rticular solution curve passes through a certain po int —that is,
. The problem of finding a function that satisfies a differential equationExercise

1.9.22.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511with the additional condition
is an example of an initial-value problem. The condi tion is known as an initial condition. For example, loo king for a
function that satisfies the differential equation
and the initial condition
is an example of an initial-value problem. Since the solutions of the differential equation are to find a function that
also satisfies the initial condition, we need to find such that. From this equation, we see that, and we
conclude that is the solution of this initial-value pro blem as shown in the following graph.
Figure: Some of the solution curves of the differenti al equation are displayed. The function satisfies
the differential equation and the initial condition
Solve the initial-value problem
Solution:
First we need to solve the differential equation. If, t hen
Next we need to look for a solution that satisfies th e initial condition. The initial condition means we need a
constant such that Therefore,
The solution of the initial-value problem is Example: Solving an Initial-Value Problem

1.9.22.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511Solve the initial value problem.
Hint
Find all antiderivatives of
Answer
Initial-value problems arise in many applications. Nex t we consider a problem in which a driver applies the b rakes in a car. We are
interested in how long it takes for the car to stop. Recall that the velocity function is the derivative of a position function
and the acceleration is the derivative of the velo city function. In earlier examples in the text, we cou ld calculate the velocity
from the position and then compute the acceleration from the velocity. In the next example we work the oth er way around. Given
an acceleration function, we calculate the velocity funct ion. We then use the velocity function to determine the position function.
A car is traveling at the rate of ft/sec (mph) whe n the brakes are applied. The car begins slowing down at a constant rate
of ft/sec.
a. How many seconds elapse before the car stops?
b. How far does the car travel during that time?
Solution:
a. First we introduce variables for this problem. Let be the time (in seconds) after the brakes are first ap plied. Let be
the acceleration of the car (in feet per seconds squ ared) at time. Let be the velocity of the car (in feet per second) at
time. Let be the car’s position (in feet) beyond the p oint where the brakes are applied at time.
The car is traveling at a rate of ft/sec. Therefor e, the initial velocity is ft/sec. Since the car is de celerating, the
acceleration is
The acceleration is the derivative of the velocity,
Therefore, we have an initial-value problem to solve:
Integrating, we find that
Since Thus, the velocity function is
To find how long it takes for the car to stop, we need to find the time such that the velocity is zero. Solving
we obtain sec.
b. To find how far the car travels during this time, we need to find the position of the car after sec. We know the
velocity is the derivative of the position. Consid er the initial position to be. Therefore, we need to solve the
initial-value problem
Integrating, we haveExercise
Example:

1.9.22.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109511Since, the constant is. Therefore, the position function is
After sec, the position is ft.
Suppose the car is traveling at the rate of ft/sec. How lo ng does it take for the car to stop? How far will the car tra vel?
Hint
Answer
sec, ft
Key Concepts
If is an antiderivative of then every antiderivative o f is of the form for some constant.
Solving the initial-value problem
requires us first to find the set of antiderivatives of and then to look for the particular antiderivative th at also satisfies the
initial condition.
Glossary
antiderivative
a function such that for all in the domain of is a n antiderivative of
indefinite integral
the most general antiderivative of is the indefinite i ntegral of; we use the notation to denote the indefini te
integral of
initial value problem
a problem that requires finding a function that sati sfies the differential equation together with the init ial condition
This page titled 1.9.22: Anti-derivatives is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed”
Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.10: Antiderivatives by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.Exercise

1.9.23.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095121.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
Determine the mass of a one-dimensional object from its l inear density function.
Determine the mass of a two-dimensional circular object f rom its radial density function.
Calculate the work done by a variable force acting along a line.
Calculate the work done in pumping a liquid from one h eight to another.
Find the hydrostatic force against a submerged vertical pl ate.
In this section, we examine some physical applications o f integration. Let’s begin with a look at calculating mass from a density
function. We then turn our attention to work, and close the section with a study of hydrostatic force.
Mass and Density
We can use integration to develop a formula for cal culating mass based on a density function. First we co nsider a thin rod or wire.
Orient the rod so it aligns with the -axis, with the lef t end of the rod at and the right end of the rod at (Figure).
Note that although we depict the rod with some thickne ss in the figures, for mathematical purposes we assume the rod is thin
enough to be treated as a one-dimensional object.
Figure: We can calculate the mass of a thin rod orien ted along the -axis by integrating its density functio n.
If the rod has constant density, given in terms of m ass per unit length, then the mass of the rod is just the product of the density
and the length of the rod:. If the density of the rod is not constant, however, the problem becomes a little more challenging.
When the density of the rod varies from point to poi nt, we use a linear density function,, to denote the density of the rod at any
point,. Let be an integrable linear density funct ion. Now, for let be a regular partition of the int erval
, and for choose an arbitrary point. Figure shows a re presentative segment of the rod.
Figure: A representative segment of the rod.
The mass of the segment of the rod from to is approx imated by
Adding the masses of all the segments gives us an approximation for the mass of the entire rod:Learning Objectives

1.9.23.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as, we get an express ion for the exact mass of the rod:
We state this result in the following theorem.
Given a thin rod oriented along the -axis over the in terval, let denote a linear density function givi ng the density of
the rod at a point in the interval. Then the mass of the rod is given by
We apply this theorem in the next example.
Consider a thin rod oriented on the -axis over the i nterval. If the density of the rod is given by, wh at is the
mass of the rod?
Solution
Applying Equation directly, we have
Consider a thin rod oriented on the -axis over the i nterval. If the density of the rod is given by what is the
mass of the rod?
Hint
Use the process from the previous example.
Solution
We now extend this concept to find the mass of a two-d imensional disk of radius. As with the rod we looked at in the onedimensional case, here we assume the disk is thin enou gh that, for mathematical purposes, we can treat it as a two-dimensional
object. We assume the density is given in terms of ma ss per unit area (called area density), and further assume the density varies
only along the disk’s radius (called radial density). We orient the disk in the, with the center at the origin. Then, the
density of the disk can be treated as a function of, denoted. We assume is integrable. Because density is a function of,
we partition the interval from along the -axis. For, let be a regular partition of the interval, and f or
, choose an arbitrary point. Now, use the partition to break up the disk into thin (two-dimensional)
washers. A disk and a representative washer are depicted in the following figure.Mass–Density Formula of a One-Dimensional Object
Example: Calculating Mass from Linear Density
Exercise

1.9.23.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512
Figure: (a) A thin disk in the xy-plane. (b) A representative washer.
We now approximate the density and area of the washer to calculate an approximate mass,. Note that the ar ea of the washer is
given by
You may recall that we had an expression similar to this when we were computing volumes by shells. As we did there, we use
to approximate the average radius of the washer. We obtai n
Using to approximate the density of the washer, we approxi mate the mass of the washer by
Adding up the masses of the washers, we see the mass of the entire disk is approximated by
We again recognize this as a Riemann sum, and take the li mit as This gives us
We summarize these findings in the following theorem.
Let be an integrable function representing the radia l density of a disk of radius. Then the mass of the disk i s given by
Let represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate t he mass of a disk of radius 4.
Solution
Applying Equation, we findMass–Density Formula of a Circular Object
Example: Calculating Mass from Radial Density

1.9.23.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512Let represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate t he mass of a disk of radius 2.
Hint
Use the process from the previous example.
Solution
Work Done by a Force
We now consider work. In physics, work is related to forc e, which is often intuitively defined as a push or pull on an object. When
a force moves an object, we say the force does work on the object. In other words, work can be thought of as the amount of energy
it takes to move an object. According to physics, when we have a constant force, work can be expressed as the p roduct of force and
distance.
In the English system, the unit of force is the pou nd and the unit of distance is the foot, so work is gi ven in foot-pounds. In the
metric system, kilograms and meters are used. One newton is the force needed to accelerate kilogram of mas s at the rate of
m/sec. Thus, the most common unit of work is the newton-m eter. This same unit is also called the joule. Both ar e defined as
kilograms times meters squared over seconds squared
When we have a constant force, things are pretty easy. It is rare, however, for a force to be constant. The wo rk done to compress (or
elongate) a spring, for example, varies depending on how far the spring has already been compressed (or str etched). We look at
springs in more detail later in this section.
Suppose we have a variable force that moves an object in a positive direction along the -axis from point t o point. To
calculate the work done, we partition the interval a nd estimate the work done over each subinterval. So, f or, let
be a regular partition of the interval, and for, choose an arbitrary point. To calculate the work
done to move an object from point to point, we ass ume the force is roughly constant over the interval, and use to
approximate the force. The work done over the interval, then, is given by
Therefore, the work done over the interval is approximat ely
Taking the limit of this expression as gives us the exact value for work:
Thus, we can define work as follows.Exercise

1.9.23.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512If a variable force moves an object in a positive d irection along the -axis from point to point, then the work done on
the object is
Note that if is constant, the integral evaluates to wh ich is the formula we stated at the beginning of thi s
section.
Now let’s look at the specific example of the work done to compress or elongate a spring. Consider a block at tached to a horizontal
spring. The block moves back and forth as the spring stretches and compresses. Although in the real world we wo uld have to
account for the force of friction between the block and the surface on which it is resting, we ignore fricti on here and assume the
block is resting on a frictionless surface. When the spring is at its natural length (at rest), the syste m is said to be at equilibrium. In
this state, the spring is neither elongated nor compre ssed, and in this equilibrium position the block does not move until some force
is introduced. We orient the system such that correspond s to the equilibrium position (Figure).
Figure: A block attached to a horizontal spring at e quilibrium, compressed, and elongated.
According to Hooke’s law, the force required to compress or stretch a sprin g from an equilibrium position is given by,
for some constant. The value of k depends on the ph ysical characteristics of the spring. The constant i s called the spring
constant and is always positive. We can use this info rmation to calculate the work done to compress or el ongate a spring, as shown
in the following example.
Suppose it takes a force of N (in the negative direct ion) to compress a spring m from the equilibrium p osition. How
much work is done to stretch the spring m from the equil ibrium position?
Solution
First find the spring constant,. When, we know so
and Then, to calculate work, we integrate the force func tion, obtainingDefinition: Work
Example: The Work Required to Stretch or Compress a Spring

1.9.23.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512The work done to stretch the spring is J.
Suppose it takes a force of lb to stretch a spring in. from the equilibrium position. How much work is done to stretch the
spring ft from the equilibrium position?
Hint
Use the process from the previous example. Be careful with u nits.
Solution
ft-lb
Work Done in Pumping
Consider the work done to pump water (or some other l iquid) out of a tank. Pumping problems are a little m ore complicated than
spring problems because many of the calculations depe nd on the shape and size of the tank. In addition, instead of being concerned
about the work done to move a single mass, we are looki ng at the work done to move a volume of water, and it t akes more work to
move the water from the bottom of the tank than it does to move the water from the top of the tank.
We examine the process in the context of a cylindric al tank, then look at a couple of examples using tan ks of different shapes.
Assume a cylindrical tank of radius m and height m is filled to a depth of 8 m. How much work does it take to pump all the
water over the top edge of the tank?
The first thing we need to do is define a frame of re ference. We let represent the vertical distance belo w the top of the tank. That
is, we orient the -axis vertically, with the origin at the t op of the tank and the downward direction being positive (Figu re).
Figure: How much work is needed to empty a tank part ially filled with water?
Using this coordinate system, the water extends from to. Therefore, we partition the interval and look at th e
work required to lift each individual “layer” of wate r. So, for, let be a regular partition of the inte rval,
and for, choose an arbitrary point. Figure shows a represe ntative layer.Exercise

1.9.23.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512
Figure: A representative layer of water.
In pumping problems, the force required to lift the water to the top of the tank is the force required to overcome gravity, so it is
equal to the weight of the water. Given that the weight -density of water is, or, calculating the volume of each
layer gives us the weight. In this case, we have
Then, the force needed to lift each layer is
Note that this step becomes a little more difficult if we have a noncylindrical tank. We look at a noncylind rical tank in the next
example.
We also need to know the distance the water must be li fted. Based on our choice of coordinate systems, we c an use as an
approximation of the distance the layer must be lifted. T hen the work to lift the layer of water is approximatel y
Adding the work for each layer, we see the approximate work to empty the tank is given by
This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit as we get
The work required to empty the tank is approximately 23,6 50,000 J.
For pumping problems, the calculations vary dependin g on the shape of the tank or container. The followin g problem-solving
strategy lays out a step-by-step process for solving pu mping problems.
1. Sketch a picture of the tank and select an appropriate fra me of reference.
2. Calculate the volume of a representative layer of wate r.
3. Multiply the volume by the weight-density of water to get t he force.
4. Calculate the distance the layer of water must be lif ted.
5. Multiply the force and distance to get an estimate of the wor k needed to lift the layer of water.Problem-Solving Strategy: Solving Pumping Problems

1.9.23.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095126. Sum the work required to lift all the layers. This expressi on is an estimate of the work required to pump out the desir ed
amount of water, and it is in the form of a Riemann sum.
7. Take the limit as and evaluate the resulting integral to get the exact work required to pump out the desired amo unt
of water.
We now apply this problem-solving strategy in an example wi th a noncylindrical tank.
Assume a tank in the shape of an inverted cone, with he ight ft and base radius ft. The tank is full to sta rt with, and water is
pumped over the upper edge of the tank until the he ight of the water remaining in the tank is ft. How much work is required
to pump out that amount of water?
Solution
The tank is depicted in Figure. As we did in the exampl e with the cylindrical tank, we orient the -axis vertic ally, with
the origin at the top of the tank and the downward directio n being positive (step 1).
Figure: A water tank in the shape of an inverted con e.
The tank starts out full and ends with ft of water le ft, so, based on our chosen frame of reference, we nee d to partition the
interval. Then, for, let be a regular partition of the interval, and for, choose an
arbitrary point. We can approximate the volume of a layer by using a disk, then use similar triangles to find the
radius of the disk (Figure).Example: A Pumping Problem with a Noncylindrical Tank

1.9.23.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512
Figure: Using similar triangles to express the radius of a disk of water.
From properties of similar triangles, we have
Then the volume of the disk is
The weight-density of water is lb/ft, so the force needed to lift each layer is approximately
Based on the diagram, the distance the water must be l ifted is approximately feet (step 4), so the approxi mate work needed
to lift the layer is
Summing the work required to lift all the layers, we get an a pproximate value of the total work:
Taking the limit as we obtain3

1.9.23.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512It takes approximately ft-lb of work to empty the tank to the desired level.
A tank is in the shape of an inverted cone, with heig ht ft and base radius 6 ft. The tank is filled to a depth of 8 ft to start with,
and water is pumped over the upper edge of the tank until 3 ft of water remain in the tank. How much work is required to pump
out that amount of water?
Hint
Use the process from the previous example.
Solution
Approximately ft-lb
Hydrostatic Force and Pressure
In this last section, we look at the force and pressur e exerted on an object submerged in a liquid. In the English system, force is
measured in pounds. In the metric system, it is measured in newtons. Pressure is force per unit area, so in the En glish system we
have pounds per square foot (or, perhaps more common ly, pounds per square inch, denoted psi). In the met ric system we have
newtons per square meter, also called pascals.
Let’s begin with the simple case of a plate of area submerged horizontally in water at a depth s (Figure). Then, the force
exerted on the plate is simply the weight of the wate r above it, which is given by, where is the weight den sity of water
(weight per unit volume). To find the hydrostatic pressure —that is, the pressure exerted by water on a submerge d object—we
divide the force by the area. So the pressure is.
Figure: A plate submerged horizontally in water.
By Pascal’s principle, the pressure at a given depth is the same in all dir ections, so it does not matter if the plate is submerg ed
horizontally or vertically. So, as long as we know the d epth, we know the pressure. We can apply Pascal’s princ iple to find the force
exerted on surfaces, such as dams, that are oriented vertically. We cannot apply the formula directly, because the depth
varies from point to point on a vertically oriented surface. So, as we have done many times before, we for m a partition, a Riemann
sum, and, ultimately, a definite integral to calculate t he force.Exercise

1.9.23.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512Suppose a thin plate is submerged in water. We choose ou r frame of reference such that the -axis is oriented vertically, with the
downward direction being positive, and point correspo nding to a logical reference point. Let denote the depth at point x.
Note we often let correspond to the surface of the wa ter. In this case, depth at any point is simply given by.
However, in some cases we may want to select a different reference point for, so we proceed with the developm ent in the
more general case. Last, let denote the width of the plat e at the point.
Assume the top edge of the plate is at point and the bottom edge of the plate is at point. Then, for, let
be a regular partition of the interval, and for, choose an arbitrary point. The partition divides
the plate into several thin, rectangular strips (Figure).
Figure: A thin plate submerged vertically in water.
Let’s now estimate the force on a representative stri p. If the strip is thin enough, we can treat it as if it is at a constant depth,.
We then have
Adding the forces, we get an estimate for the force on the pla te:
This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit gives us the exact force. We obtain
Evaluating this integral gives us the force on the plate. We summarize this in the following problem-solving strategy.
1. Sketch a picture and select an appropriate frame of refe rence. (Note that if we select a frame of reference other tha n the one
used earlier, we may have to adjust Equation accordingl y.)
2. Determine the depth and width functions, and
3. Determine the weight-density of whatever liquid with which you are working. The weight-density of water is, or
4. Use the equation to calculate the total force.
A water trough 15 ft long has ends shaped like invert ed isosceles triangles, with base 8 ft and height 3 ft. Find the force on one
end of the trough if the trough is full of water.
SolutionProblem-Solving Strategy: Finding Hydrostatic Force
Example: Finding Hydrostatic Force

1.9.23.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512Figure shows the trough and a more detailed view of one end.
Figure: (a) A water trough with a triangular cross-sec tion. (b) Dimensions of one end of the water trough.
Select a frame of reference with the -axis oriented ve rtically and the downward direction being positive. Sel ect the top of the
trough as the point corresponding to (step 1). The de pth function, then, is. Using similar triangles, we see that
(step 2). Now, the weight density of water is (step 3), so ap plying Equation, we obtain
The water exerts a force of 748.8 lb on the end of the trou gh (step 4).
A water trough 12 m long has ends shaped like inverte d isosceles triangles, with base 6 m and height 4 m. Find the force on
one end of the trough if the trough is full of water.
Hint
Follow the problem-solving strategy and the process from the p revious example.
Solution
NExercise

1.9.23.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512We now return our attention to the Hoover Dam, mentione d at the beginning of this chapter. The actual dam i s arched, rather
than flat, but we are going to make some simplifying assumptions to help us with the calculations. Assume the face of the
Hoover Dam is shaped like an isosceles trapezoid with lowe r base 750 ft, upper base 1250 ft, and height 750 f t (see the
following figure).
When the reservoir is full, Lake Mead’s maximum dept h is about 530 ft, and the surface of the lake is abo ut 10 ft below the top
of the dam (see the following figure).
Figure: A simplified model of the Hoover Dam with assu med dimensions.
a. Find the force on the face of the dam when the reservoir is full.
b. The southwest United States has been experiencing a droug ht, and the surface of Lake Mead is about 125 ft below where i t
would be if the reservoir were full. What is the force on th e face of the dam under these circumstances?
Solution:
a.
We begin by establishing a frame of reference. As usual, we choose to orient the -axis vertically, with the do wnward direction
being positive. This time, however, we are going to let represent the top of the dam, rather than the surfa ce of the water.
When the reservoir is full, the surface of the water is ft below the top of the dam, so (see the following figure).
Figure: We first choose a frame of reference.
To find the width function, we again turn to similar triangles as shown in the figure below.Example: Finding Hydrostatic Force

1.9.23.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512
Figure: We use similar triangles to determine a functi on for the width of the dam. (a) Assumed dimensions of the dam;
(b) highlighting the similar triangles.
From the figure, we see that. Using properties of similar tria ngles, we get. Thus,
Using a weight-density of lb/ft (step 3) and applying Eq uation, we get
Note the change from pounds to tons (lb = ton) (step 4). This changes our depth function,, and our limi ts of
integration. We have. The lower limit of integration is 135. The upper limit remains. Evaluating the int egral,
we get
When the reservoir is at its average level, the surfa ce of the water is about 50 ft below where it would be if the reservoir were
full. What is the force on the face of the dam under thes e circumstances?
Hint
Change the depth function, and the limits of integrat ion.
Solution
Approximately 7,164,520,000 lb or 3,582,260 t3
Exercise

1.9.23.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109512Key Concepts
Several physical applications of the definite integral are common in engineering and physics.
Definite integrals can be used to determine the mass of an object if its density function is known.
Work can also be calculated from integrating a force funct ion, or when counteracting the force of gravity, as in a pum ping
problem.
Definite integrals can also be used to calculate the force ex erted on an object submerged in a liquid.
Key Equations
Mass of a one-dimensional object
Mass of a circular object
Work done on an object
Hydrostatic force on a plate
Glossary
density function
a density function describes how mass is distributed throug hout an object; it can be a linear density, expressed in terms of mass
per unit length; an area density, expressed in terms of mass per unit area; or a volume density, expressed in terms of mass per
unit volume; weight-density is also used to describe wei ght (rather than mass) per unit volume
Hooke’s law
this law states that the force required to compress (or elong ate) a spring is proportional to the distance the spring has been
compressed (or stretched) from equilibrium; in other words,, where is a constant
hydrostatic pressure
the pressure exerted by water on a submerged object
work
the amount of energy it takes to move an object; in physics, when a force is constant, work is expressed as the product of force
and distance
This page titled 1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
6.5: Physical Applications of Integration by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.24.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095131.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia
Find the center of mass of objects distributed along a lin e.
Locate the center of mass of a thin plate.
Use symmetry to help locate the centroid of a thin plate.
Apply the theorem of Pappus for volume.
Use double integrals to locate the center of mass of a two-di mensional object.
Use double integrals to find the moment of inertia of a two- dimensional object.
Use triple integrals to locate the center of mass of a three-d imensional object.
In this section, we consider centers of mass and mome nts. The basic idea of the center of mass is the notion of a balancing point. Many
of us have seen performers who spin plates on the en ds of sticks. The performers try to keep several of t hem spinning without allowing
any of them to drop. If we look at a single plate (wit hout spinning it), there is a sweet spot on the plate wh ere it balances perfectly on
the stick. If we put the stick anywhere other than tha t sweet spot, the plate does not balance and it falls to the ground. Mathematically,
that sweet spot is called the center of mass of the plate.
In this section, we first examine these concepts in a o ne-dimensional context, then expand our development t o consider centers of mass
of two-dimensional regions and symmetry. Last, we use c entroids to find the volume of certain solids by app lying the theorem of
Pappus.
Center of Mass and Moments
Let’s begin by looking at the center of mass in a one -dimensional context. Consider a long, thin wire or rod of negligible mass resting
on a fulcrum, as shown in Figure. Now suppose we place obje cts having masses and at distances and from the
fulcrum, respectively, as shown in Figure.
Figure: (a) A thin rod rests on a fulcrum. (b) Masses are placed on the rod.
The most common real-life example of a system like t his is a playground seesaw, or teeter-totter, with chi ldren of different weights
sitting at different distances from the center. On a seesaw, if one child sits at each end, the heavier ch ild sinks down and the lighter
child is lifted into the air. If the heavier child slides in toward the center, though, the seesaw balances. App lying this concept to the
masses on the rod, we note that the masses balance each other if and only if
Figure: The center of mass is the balance point of th e system.
In the seesaw example, we balanced the system by movin g the masses (children) with respect to the fulcrum. Howe ver, we are really
interested in systems in which the masses are not allo wed to move, and instead we balance the system by movin g the fulcrum. SupposeLearning Objectives

1.9.24.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513we have two point masses, and, located on a number lin e at points and, respectively (Figure). The center o f mass,
, is the point where the fulcrum should be placed to make the sy stem balance.
Thus, we have
or
The expression in the numerator of Equation,, is ca lled the first moment of the system with respect to the origin. If
the context is clear, we often drop the word first an d just refer to this expression as the moment of the system. The expression in the
denominator,, is the total mass of the system. Thus, the center of mass of the system is the point at which the total mass of
the system could be concentrated without changing the moment.
This idea is not limited just to two point masses. In gen eral, if masses, are placed on a number line at poin ts
respectively, then the center of mass of the system is given by
Let be point masses placed on a number line at poin ts, respectively, and let denote the total
mass of the system. Then, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is given by
and the center of mass of the system is given by
We apply this theorem in the following example.
Suppose four point masses are placed on a number line as follo ws:
placed at
placed at
placed at
placed at
Solution
Find the moment of the system with respect to the origin and fi nd the center of mass of the system.
First, we need to calculate the moment of the system (Equatio n):Center of Mass of Objects on a Line
Example: Finding the Center of Mass of Objects along a Line

1.9.24.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Now, to find the center of mass, we need the total mass of the syst em:
Then we have (from Equation)
The center of mass is located 1/2 m to the left of the origi n.
We can generalize this concept to find the center of mass of a system of point masses in a plane. Let be a point mass located at
point in the plane. Then the moment of the mass with respect to the -axis is given by. Similarly, the mom ent
with respect to the -axis is given by
Notice that the -coordinate of the point is used to c alculate the moment with respect to the -axis, and v ice versa. The reason is that
the -coordinate gives the distance from the point m ass to the -axis, and the -coordinate gives the distance to the -axis (see the
following figure).
Figure: Point mass is located at point in the plane.
If we have several point masses in the -plane, we can use the moments with respect to the - and -axes to calcu late the - and coordinates of the center of mass of the system.
Let,, …, be point masses located in the -plane at points respectively, and let
denote the total mass of the system. Then the moment s and of the system with respect to the - and -axes, respectively, are
given by
and
Also, the coordinates of the center of mass of the system are
andCenter of Mass of Objects in a Plane

1.9.24.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The next example demonstrates how to the center of mass for mulas (Equations -) may be applied.
Suppose three point masses are placed in the -plane as follows (assume coordinates are given in meters):
placed at
placed at
placed at
Find the center of mass of the system.
Solution
First we calculate the total mass of the system:
Next we find the moments with respect to the - and -axes:
Then we have
and
The center of mass of the system is in meters.
Center of Mass of Thin Plates
So far we have looked at systems of point masses on a line and in a plane. Now, instead of having the mass of a system concentrated at
discrete points, we want to look at systems in which the m ass of the system is distributed continuously across a t hin sheet of material.
For our purposes, we assume the sheet is thin enough tha t it can be treated as if it is two-dimensional. Such a sheet is called a lamina.
Next we develop techniques to find the center of mass of a la mina. In this section, we also assume the density of the lami na is constant.
Laminas are often represented by a two-dimensional reg ion in a plane. The geometric center of such a regio n is called its centroid.
Since we have assumed the density of the lamina is con stant, the center of mass of the lamina depends only o n the shape of the
corresponding region in the plane; it does not depend on the density. In this case, the center of mass of the lamina corresponds to the
centroid of the delineated region in the plane. As with systems of point masses, we need to find the total mas s of the lamina, as well as
the moments of the lamina with respect to the - and -axe s.
We first consider a lamina in the shape of a rectangl e. Recall that the center of mass of a lamina is the point where the lamina balances.
For a rectangle, that point is both the horizontal a nd vertical center of the rectangle. Based on this u nderstanding, it is clear that the
center of mass of a rectangular lamina is the point wh ere the diagonals intersect, which is a result of the symmetry principle, and it is
stated here without proof.
If a region is symmetric about a line, then the centroid of lies on.Example: Finding the Center of Mass of Objects in a Plane
The Symmetry Principle

1.9.24.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Let’s turn to more general laminas. Suppose we have a la mina bounded above by the graph of a continuous fun ction, below by the
-axis, and on the left and right by the lines and, respec tively, as shown in the following figure.
Figure: A region in the plane representing a lamina.
As with systems of point masses, to find the center of m ass of the lamina, we need to find the total mass of the lamina, as well as the
moments of the lamina with respect to the - and -axe s. As we have done many times before, we approximate th ese quantities by
partitioning the interval and constructing rectangles.
For let be a regular partition of. Recall that we can choose any point within the interval as our.
In this case, we want to be the x-coordinate of the centroid of our rectangles. Thus, for, we select such
that is the midpoint of the interval. That is,. Now, for construct a rectangle of height on
The center of mass of this rectangle is as shown in the follo wing figure.
Figure: A representative rectangle of the lamina.
Next, we need to find the total mass of the rectangle. Let represent the density of the lamina (note that is a constant). In this case,
is expressed in terms of mass per unit area. Thus, to f ind the total mass of the rectangle, we multiply the area of the rectangle by.
Then, the mass of the rectangle is given by.
To get the approximate mass of the lamina, we add the masse s of all the rectangles to get
Equation is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as gives the exa ct mass of the lamina:
Next, we calculate the moment of the lamina with respec t to the x-axis. Returning to the representative rec tangle, recall its center of
mass is. Recall also that treating the rectangle as if it is a point mass located at the center of mass d oes not change the
moment. Thus, the moment of the rectangle with respect to the x-axis is given by the mass of the rectangle,, multiplied by
the distance from the center of mass to the x-axis:. Therefore, the moment with respect to the x-axis of the rectangle is
Adding the moments of the rectangles and taking the limit of the resulting Riemann sum, we see that the m oment of
the lamina with respect to the x-axis is

1.9.24.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513We derive the moment with respect to the y-axis simi larly, noting that the distance from the center of ma ss of the rectangle to the yaxis is. Then the moment of the lamina with respect to the y-axis is given by
We find the coordinates of the center of mass by div iding the moments by the total mass to give and. If we look
closely at the expressions for, and, we notice that the constant cancels out when and are calculated.
We summarize these findings in the following theorem.
Let R denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function, below by the x-axis, and on the left and right by
the lines and, respectively. Let denote the densi ty of the associated lamina. Then we can make the foll owing
statements:
i. The mass of the lamina is
ii. The moments and of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are
and
iii. The coordinates of the center of mass are
and
In the next example, we use this theorem to find the center of mass of a lamina.
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of t he function and below by the x-axis over the interval. Find the
centroid of the region.
Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.Center of Mass of a Thin Plate in the xy-Plane
Example: Finding the Center of Mass of a Lamina

1.9.24.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
Figure: Finding the center of mass of a lamina.
Since we are only asked for the centroid of the region, rather than the mass or moments of the associated lamina, we know the
density constant cancels out of the calculations event ually. Therefore, for the sake of convenience, let’s assume.
First, we need to calculate the total mass (Equation):
Next, we compute the moments (Equation):
and (Equation):
Thus, we have (Equation):

1.9.24.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513and (Equation):
The centroid of the region is
We can adapt this approach to find centroids of mor e complex regions as well. Suppose our region is bounde d above by the graph of a
continuous function, as before, but now, instead of h aving the lower bound for the region be the x-axis, suppose the region is
bounded below by the graph of a second continuous funct ion,, as shown in Figure.
Figure: A region between two functions.
Again, we partition the interval and construct rectangle s. A representative rectangle is shown in Figure.
Figure: A representative rectangle of the region betwe en two functions.
Note that the centroid of this rectangle is. We won’t go through all the details of the Riemann sum devel opment,
but let’s look at some of the key steps. In the devel opment of the formulas for the mass of the lamina and the moment with respect to
the y-axis, the height of each rectangle is given by, which lead s to the expression in the integrands.
In the development of the formula for the moment wit h respect to the x-axis, the moment of each rectangl e is found by multiplying the
area of the rectangle, by the distance of the centr oid from the -axis,, which gives
. Summarizing these findings, we arrive at the following the orem.

1.9.24.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Let denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function below by the graph of the con tinuous function
, and on the left and right by the lines and, respect ively. Let denote the density of the associated lamin a. Then we
can make the following statements:
i. The mass of the lamina is
ii. The moments and of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are
and
iii. The coordinates of the center of mass are
and
We illustrate this theorem in the following example.
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the fu nction and below by the graph of the function
Find the centroid of the region.
Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.
Figure: Finding the centroid of a region between two c urves.
The graphs of the functions intersect at and, so we i ntegrate from −2 to 1. Once again, for the sake of conv enience,
assume.
First, we need to calculate the total mass:Center of Mass of a Lamina Bounded by Two Functions
Example: Finding the Centroid of a Region Bounded by Two Functions

1.9.24.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Next, we compute the moments:
and
Therefore, we have
and

1.9.24.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The centroid of the region is
The Symmetry Principle
We stated the symmetry principle earlier, when we were looking at the centroid of a rectangle. The symmetry principle can be a great
help when finding centroids of regions that are symmetric. C onsider the following example.
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of t he function and below by the x-axis. Find the centro id of the
region.
Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure
Figure: We can use the symmetry principle to help find the centroid of a symmetric region.
The region is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. Therefore, the x-coordinate of the centroid is zero. We need only calculate.
Once again, for the sake of convenience, assume.
First, we calculate the total mass:
Next, we calculate the moments. We only need:
Then we have
The centroid of the region is Example: Finding the Centroid of a Symmetric Region

1.9.24.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The Grand Canyon Skywalk opened to the public on March 28, 2007. This engineering marvel is a horseshoe-shap ed observation
platform suspended 4000 ft above the Colorado River on the West Rim of the Grand Canyon. Its crystal-clear glass floor allows
stunning views of the canyon below (see the following figure).
Figure: The Grand Canyon Skywalk offers magnificent views of the canyon. (credit: 10da_ralta, Wikimedia C ommons)
The Skywalk is a cantilever design, meaning that the obse rvation platform extends over the rim of the canyon, with no visible
means of support below it. Despite the lack of visible support posts or struts, cantilever structures are engi neered to be very stable
and the Skywalk is no exception. The observation platf orm is attached firmly to support posts that extend 4 6 ft down into bedrock.
The structure was built to withstand 100-mph winds and an 8.0-magnitude earthquake within 50 mi, and is ca pable of supporting
more than 70,000,000 lb.
One factor affecting the stability of the Skywalk is t he center of gravity of the structure. We are going to calculate the center of
gravity of the Skywalk, and examine how the center of gravit y changes when tourists walk out onto the observation platform.
The observation platform is U-shaped. The legs of the U a re 10 ft wide and begin on land, under the visitors’ center, 48 ft from the
edge of the canyon. The platform extends 70 ft over the edge of the canyon.
To calculate the center of mass of the structure, we t reat it as a lamina and use a two-dimensional region in the xy-plane to
represent the platform. We begin by dividing the regi on into three subregions so we can consider each sub region separately. The
first region, denoted, consists of the curved part of the U. We model as a semicircular annulus, with inner radius 25 ft and
outer radius 35 ft, centered at the origin (Figure).
Figure: We model the Skywalk with three sub-regions.The Grand Canyon Skywalk

1.9.24.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The legs of the platform, extending 35 ft between an d the canyon wall, comprise the second sub-region,. La st, the ends of
the legs, which extend 48 ft under the visitor center, comprise the third sub-region,. Assume the density of the lamina is
constant and assume the total weight of the platform is 1,200,000 lb (not including the weight of the visito r center; we will
consider that later). Use.
1. Compute the area of each of the three sub-regions. Note tha t the areas of regions and should include the areas of the legs
only, not the open space between them. Round answers to the ne arest square foot.
2. Determine the mass associated with each of the three sub- regions.
3. Calculate the center of mass of each of the three sub-reg ions.
4. Now, treat each of the three sub-regions as a point mass located at the center of mass of the corresponding sub-r egion. Using
this representation, calculate the center of mass of the en tire platform.
5. Assume the visitor center weighs 2,200,000 lb, with a center of ma ss corresponding to the center of mass of.Treating the
visitor center as a point mass, recalculate the center of ma ss of the system. How does the center of mass change?
6. Although the Skywalk was built to limit the number of people o n the observation platform to 120, the platform is capa ble of
supporting up to 800 people weighing 200 lb each. If all 8 00 people were allowed on the platform, and all of them went to the
farthest end of the platform, how would the center of gravit y of the system be affected? (Include the visitor center in the
calculations and represent the people by a point mass l ocated at the farthest edge of the platform, 70 ft from th e canyon wall.)
Theorem of Pappus
This section ends with a discussion of the theorem of Pappus for volume, which allows us to find the volume of particular kind s of
solids by using the centroid. (There is also a theorem of Pappus for surface area, but it is much less usefu l than the theorem for
volume.)
Let be a region in the plane and let l be a line i n the plane that does not intersect. Then the volume of the solid of revolution
formed by revolving around l is equal to the area of mult iplied by the distance d traveled by the centroid of.
We can prove the case when the region is bounded abov e by the graph of a function and below by the graph of a function
over an interval, and for which the axis of revoluti on is the -axis. In this case, the area of the region is
. Since the axis of rotation is the -axis, the distance traveled by the centroid of the region depends only on the -coordinate of
the centroid,, which is
where
and
Then,
and thusTheorem of Pappus for Volume
Proof

1.9.24.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513However, using the method of cylindrical shells, we have
So,
and the proof is complete.
Let be a circle of radius 2 centered at Use the the orem of Pappus for volume to find the volume of the torus generated by
revolving around the -axis.
Solution
The region and torus are depicted in the following figure.
Figure: Determining the volume of a torus by using th e theorem of Pappus. (a) A circular region in the p lane; (b) the
torus generated by revolving about the -axis.
The region is a circle of radius 2, so the area of R is. By the symmetry principle, the centroid of R is the center of
the circle. The centroid travels around the -axis in a circular path of radius 4, so the centroid travels units. Then, the
volume of the torus is units.

We have already discussed a few applications of multip le integrals, such as finding areas, volumes, and the average value of a function
over a bounded region. In this section we develop com putational techniques for finding the center of mas s and moments of inertia of
several types of physical objects, using double integ rals for a lamina (flat plate) and triple integrals for a three-dimensional object with
variable density. The density is usually considered to b e a constant number when the lamina or the object is homogeneous; that is, the
object has uniform density.
Center of Mass in Two Dimensions
The center of mass is also known as the center of grav ity if the object is in a uniform gravitational fie ld. If the object has uniform
density, the center of mass is the geometric center of the object, which is called the centroid. Figure sho ws a point as the
center of mass of a lamina. The lamina is perfectly balanc ed about its center of mass.Example: Using the Theorem of Pappus for Volume

1.9.24.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
Figure: A lamina is perfectly balanced on a spindle if th e lamina’s center of mass sits on the spindle.
To find the coordinates of the center of mass of a lamina, we need to find the moment of the lamina abo ut the -axis and the
moment about the -axis. We also need to find the mass of the lamina. Then
and
Refer to Moments and Centers of Mass for the definiti ons and the methods of single integration to find th e center of mass of a onedimensional object (for example, a thin rod). We are g oing to use a similar idea here except that the obje ct is a two-dimensional lamina
and we use a double integral.
If we allow a constant density function, then and give the centroid of the lamina.
Suppose that the lamina occupies a region in the -p lane and let be its density (in units of mass per u nit area) at any point
. Hence,
where and are the mass and area of a small rectangl e containing the point and the limit is taken as t he dimensions of the
rectangle go to (see the following figure).
Figure: The density of a lamina at a point is the li mit of its mass per area in a small rectangle about the point as the area goes to
zero.
Just as before, we divide the region into tiny rectan gles with area and choose as sample points. Then t he mass of
each is equal to (Figure). Let and be the number of subintervals in and respectively. Also, note tha t the
shape might not always be rectangular but the limit works an yway, as seen in previous sections.

1.9.24.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
Figure: Subdividing the lamina into tiny rectangles each containing a sample point.
Hence, the mass of the lamina is
Let’s see an example now of finding the total mass of a triang ular lamina.
Consider a triangular lamina with vertices and with densi ty. Find the total mass.
Solution:
A sketch of the region is always helpful, as shown in the followin g figure.
Figure: A lamina in the -plane with density.
Using the expression developed for mass, we see that
The computation is straightforward, giving the answer.
Now that we have established the expression for mass, we have the tools we need for calculating moments and cen ters of mass. The
moment about the -axis for is the limit of the sums of moments of the regions about the -axis. HenceExample: Finding the Total Mass of a Lamina

1.9.24.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Similarly, the moment about the -axis for is the limit o f the sums of moments of the regions about the -axis. Hence
Consider the same triangular lamina with vertices and wit h density. Find the moments and.
Solution:
Use double integrals for each moment and compute their value s:
The computation is quite straightforward.
Finally we are ready to restate the expressions for the center of mass in terms of integrals. We denote the x-coordinate of the center of
mass by and the y-coordinate by. Specifically,
and
Again consider the same triangular region with vertic es and with density function. Find the center
of mass.
Solution:
Using the formulas we developed, we have
Therefore, the center of mass is the point
Analysis
If we choose the density instead to be uniform thro ughout the region (i.e., constant), such as the value 1 (any constant will do),
then we can compute the centroid,Example: Finding Moments
Example: center of mass

1.9.24.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Notice that the center of mass is not exactly the sa me as the centroid of the triangular region. This is due to the variable
density of If the density is constant, then we just use (constant). This value cancels out from the formu las, so for a
constant density, the center of mass coincides with the centro id of the lamina.
Once again, based on the comments at the end of Example, we have expressions for the centroid of a region on the p lane:
We should use these formulas and verify the centroid of the triangular region referred to in the last three ex amples.
Find the mass, moments, and the center of mass of the l amina of density occupying the region under the c urve
in the interval (see the following figure).
Figure: Locating the center of mass of a lamina with density.
Solution:
First we compute the mass. We need to describe the reg ion between the graph of and the vertical lines an d
Now compute the moments and:
Finally, evaluate the center of mass,Example: Finding Mass, Moments, and Center of Mass

1.9.24.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Hence the center of mass is.
Find the centroid of the region under the curve over the in terval (Figure).
Figure: Finding a centroid of a region below the cur ve.
Solution:
To compute the centroid, we assume that the density functio n is constant and hence it cancels out:
Thus the centroid of the region is
Moment of Inertia
We defined the moment of inertia I of an object to be
for all the point masses that make up the object. Bec ause is the distance to the axis of rotation from e ach piece of mass that makes up
the object, the moment of inertia for any object de pends on the chosen axis. To see this, let’s take a si mple example of two masses at
the end of a massless (negligibly small mass) rod (Fig ure) and calculate the moment of inertia about two different axes. In this
case, the summation over the masses is simple because t he two masses at the end of the barbell can be approx imated as point masses,
and the sum therefore has only two terms.
In the case with the axis in the center of the barbel l, each of the two masses m is a distance away from t he axis, giving a moment of
inertia ofExample: Finding a Centroid

1.9.24.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513In the case with the axis at the end of the barbell—passing through one of the masses—the moment of inertia is
From this result, we can conclude that it is twice as hard to rota te the barbell about the end than about its center.
Figure: (a) A barbell with an axis of rotation throug h its center; (b) a barbell with an axis of rotation thro ugh one end.
In this example, we had two point masses and the sum was simple to calculate. However, to deal with objects that are not point-like,
we need to think carefully about each of the terms i n the equation. The equation asks us to sum over eac h ‘piece of mass’ a certain
distance from the axis of rotation. But what exactly do es each ‘piece of mass’ mean? Recall that in our de rivation of this equation, each
piece of mass had the same magnitude of velocity, whic h means the whole piece had to have a single distance r to the axis of rotation.
However, this is not possible unless we take an infinitesimally sma ll piece of mass dm, as shown in Figure.
Figure: Using an infinitesimally small piece of mass to c alculate the contribution to the total moment of in ertia.
The need to use an infinitesimally small piece of ma ss dm suggests that we can write the moment of inertia by evaluating an integral
over infinitesimal masses rather than doing a discrete su m over finite masses:
becomes
This, in fact, is the form we need to generalize the eq uation for complex shapes. It is best to work out specif ic examples in detail to get
a feel for how to calculate the moment of inertia for specifi c shapes. This is the focus of most of the rest of this section.
A uniform thin rod with an axis through the center
Consider a uniform (density and shape) thin rod of mass M and length L as shown in Figure. We want a thin r od so that we can
assume the cross-sectional area of the rod is small and the rod can be thought of as a string of masses along a one-dimensional straight
line. In this example, the axis of rotation is perpendi cular to the rod and passes through the midpoint fo r simplicity. Our task is to
calculate the moment of inertia about this axis. We o rient the axes so that the z-axis is the axis of rotat ion and the x-axis passes through
the length of the rod, as shown in the figure. This is a conven ient choice because we can then integrate along the x-axi s.

1.9.24.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
Figure: Calculation of the moment of inertia I for a uniform thin rod about an axis through the center of the rod.
We define dm to be a small element of mass making up the rod. The moment of inertia integral is an integ ral over the mass
distribution. However, we know how to integrate over space, not over mass. We therefore need to find a way to rela te mass to spatial
variables. We do this using the linear mass density of the object, which is the mass per unit length. Sin ce the mass density of this
object is uniform, we can write
If we take the differential of each side of this equation, we find
since is constant. We chose to orient the rod along the x-axis for convenience—this is where that choice becomes very helpful. Note
that a piece of the rod dl lies completely along th e x-axis and has a length dx; in fact, dl = dx in thi s situation. We can therefore write
dm = (dx), giving us an integration variable that we k now how to deal with. The distance of each piece of mass dm from the axis is
given by the variable x, as shown in the figure. Putting this a ll together, we obtain
The last step is to be careful about our limits of i ntegration. The rod extends from x = to x =, since th e axis is in the middle of
the rod at x = 0. This gives us
Next, we calculate the moment of inertia for the same uniform thin rod but with a different axis choice so we can compare the results.
We would expect the moment of inertia to be smaller a bout an axis through the center of mass than the end point axis, just as it was for
the barbell example at the start of this section. This happ ens because more mass is distributed farther from the a xis of rotation.
A Uniform Thin Rod with Axis at the End
Now consider the same uniform thin rod of mass and le ngth, but this time we move the axis of rotation to t he end of the rod. We
wish to find the moment of inertia about this new axis (Fi gure).
Figure: Calculation of the moment of inertia for a uniform thin rod about an axis through the end of th e rod.
The quantity is again defined to be a small element of mass making up the rod. Just as before, we obtain
However, this time we have different limits of integrati on. The rod extends from to, since the axis is at the end of the rod at
. Therefore we find

1.9.24.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Note the rotational inertia of the rod about its end point is larger than the rotational inertia about i ts center (consistent with the barbell
example) by a factor of four.
A Uniform Thin Disk about an Axis through the Center
Integrating to find the moment of inertia of a two-d imensional object is a little bit trickier, but one shape is commonly done at this
level of study—a uniform thin disk about an axis through it s center (Figure).
Figure: Calculating the moment of inertia for a thin disk about an axis through its center.
Since the disk is thin, we can take the mass as distribut ed entirely in the xy-plane. We again start with the relationship for the surface
mass density, which is the mass per unit surface area. Since it is uniform, the surface mass density is constant:
or
so
Now we use a simplification for the area. The area can be thought of as made up of a series of thin rings, wher e each ring is a mass
increment dm of radius equidistant from the axis, as shown in part (b) of the figure. The infinitesimal area of each ring is
therefore given by the length of each ring () times the i nfinitesimmal width of each ring:
The full area of the disk is then made up from addi ng all the thin rings with a radius range from to. T his radius range then becomes
our limits of integration for, that is, we integrate from to. Putting this all together, we have
Note that this agrees with the value given in Figure 10.5.4.
I shall now derive the first three of these by calculus. T he derivations for the spheres will be left until later.
1.Rod, length (Figure II.2)

1.9.24.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
The mass of an element at a distance from the middle of the rod is.
and its second moment of inertia is
2. Disc, radius. (Figure II.3)
The area of an elemental annulus, radii is is.
The area of the entire disc is.
Therefore the mass of the annulus is
and its second moment of inertia is
The moment of inertia of the entire disc is
3. Right-angled triangular lamina. (Figure II.4)
The equation to the hypotenuse is.

1.9.24.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The area of the elemental strip is and the area of the entire triangle is.
Therefore the mass of the elemental strip is.
and its second moment of inertia is.
The second moment of inertia of the entire triangle is th e integral of this from to, which is.
Uniform circular lamina about a diameter.
For the sake of one more bit of integration practice, we shall now use the same argument to show that the mom ent of inertia of a
uniform circular disc about a diameter is. However, we shall see later that it is not necessary to resort to integral calculus to arrive
at this result, nor is it necessary to commit the resul t to memory. In a little while it will become immediat ely apparent and patently
obvious, with no calculation, that the moment of inert ia must be. However, for the time being, let us have so me more calculus
practice. See Figure II.5.
The disc is of radius, and the area of the elemental strip is. But and are related through the equation to the circl e, which is
. Therefore the area of the strip is. The area of the whole di sc is, so the mass of the strip is
The second moment of inertia about the -axis is
For the entire disc, we integrate from to, or, if you prefer, from to and then double it. The result
should follow. If you need a hint about how to do the integration, let (which it is, anyway), and be sure to get the limits of
integration with respect to right.
The moment of inertia of a uniform semicircular lamina of mass and radius about its base, or diameter, is also, since the mass
distribution with respect to rotation about the diame ter is the same., since the mass distribution with re spect to rotation about the
diameter is the same.

1.9.24.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Moments of Inertia
For a clear understanding of how to calculate moments of inertia using double integrals, we need to go back to the general definition in
Section. The moment of inertia of a particle of mass about an axis is where is the distance of the part icle from the axis. We
can see from Figure that the moment of inertia of t he subrectangle about the -axis is. Similarly, the
moment of inertia of the subrectangle about the -ax is is. The moment of inertia is related to the rot ation of the
mass; specifically, it measures the tendency of the mass t o resist a change in rotational motion about an axis.
The moment of inertia about the -axis for the regi on is the limit of the sum of moments of inertia of the regions about the axis. Hence
Similarly, the moment of inertia about the -axis for is the limit of the sum of moments of inertia of the regions about the axis. Hence
Sometimes, we need to find the moment of inertia of a n object about the origin, which is known as the pola r moment of inertia. We
denote this by and obtain it by adding the moments of inert ia and. Hence
All these expressions can be written in polar coordinate s by substituting, and. For example,
Use the triangular region with vertices, and and with density as in previous examples. Find the
moments of inertia.
Solution:
Using the expressions established above for the moments of inerti a, we have
As mentioned earlier, the moment of inertia of a par ticle of mass about an axis is where is the distanc e of the particle from the
axis, also known as the radius of gyration.
Hence the radii of gyration with respect to the -axis, the -a xis and the origin are
respectively. In each case, the radius of gyration te lls us how far (perpendicular distance) from the axi s of rotation the entire mass of an
object might be concentrated. The moments of an objec t are useful for finding information on the balance and torque of the object
about an axis, but radii of gyration are used to de scribe the distribution of mass around its centroida l axis. There are many applications
in engineering and physics. Sometimes it is necessary to find th e radius of gyration, as in the next example.Example: Finding Moments of Inertia for a Triangular Lamina

1.9.24.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Consider the same triangular lamina with vertices, and and with density as in previous examples.
Find the radii of gyration with respect to the -axis the -axi s and the origin.
Solution:
If we compute the mass of this region we find that. We found the moments of inertia of this lamina in Exam ple.
From these data, the radii of gyration with respect to the - axis, -axis and the origin are, respectively,
Center of Mass and Moments of Inertia in Three Dimensions
All the expressions of double integrals discussed so far can be modified to become triple integrals.
If we have a solid object with a density function at any point in space, then its mass is
Its moments about the -plane the -plane and the -plane a re
If the center of mass of the object is the point, then
Also, if the solid object is homogeneous (with constant d ensity), then the center of mass becomes the centroid of the solid. Finally,
the moments of inertia about the -plane, -plane, and the -plane are
Suppose that is a solid region bounded by and the co ordinate planes and has density. Find the
total mass.
Solution:
The region is a tetrahedron (Figure) meeting the a xes at the points and. To find the limits of
integration, let in the slanted plane. Then for a nd find the projection of onto the -plane, which
is bounded by the axes and the line. Hence the mass isExample: Finding the Radius of Gyration for a Triangular Lamina
Definition
Example: Finding the Mass of a Solid

1.9.24.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513
Figure: Finding the mass of a three-dimensional solid.
Suppose is a solid region bounded by the plane and the coordinate planes with density (see
Figure). Find the center of mass using decimal approximati on.
Solution
We have used this tetrahedron before and know the li mits of integration, so we can proceed to the comput ations right away. First,
we need to find the moments about the -plane, the -plane, and the -plane:
Hence the center of mass is
The center of mass for the tetrahedron is the point.
We conclude this section with an example of finding moment s of inertia, and.
Suppose that is a solid region and is bounded by and the coordinate planes with density (see
Figure). Find the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron ab out the -plane, the -plane, and the -plane.
Solution:Example: Finding the Center of Mass of a Solid
Example: Finding the Moments of Inertia of a Solid

1.9.24.28 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Once again, we can almost immediately write the limits o f integration and hence we can quickly proceed to ev aluating the
moments of inertia. Using the formula stated before, the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron about the - plane, the plane, and the -plane are
and
Proceeding with the computations, we have
Thus, the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron ab out the -plane, the -plane, and the -plane are, and
, respectively.
Key Concepts
Finding the mass, center of mass, moments, and moments of inert ia in double integrals:
For a lamina with a density function at any point in t he plane, the mass is
The moments about the -axis and -axis are
The center of mass is given by.
The center of mass becomes the centroid of the plane when the de nsity is constant.
The moments of inertia about the -axis, -axis, and the ori gin are
Finding the mass, center of mass, moments, and moments of inert ia in triple integrals:
For a solid object with a density function at any point in s pace, the mass is
The moments about the -plane, the -plane, and the -plane are

1.9.24.29 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513The center of mass is given by
The center of mass becomes the centroid of the solid when the den sity is constant.
The moments of inertia about the -plane, the -plane, and the -plane are
Key Equations
Mass of a lamina
Moment about the x-axis
Moment about the y-axis
Center of mass of a lamina
Glossary
radius of gyration
the distance from an object’s center of mass to its axis of rotati on
Key Concepts
Mathematically, the center of mass of a system is the point a t which the total mass of the system could be concentrated wi thout
changing the moment. Loosely speaking, the center of mass can be thought of as the balancing point of the system.
For point masses distributed along a number line, the mome nt of the system with respect to the origin is For point
masses distributed in a plane, the moments of the system with re spect to the - and -axes, respectively, are and
, respectively.
For a lamina bounded above by a function, the moments of t he system with respect to the - and -axes, respectively, are
and
The - and -coordinates of the center of mass can be found by di viding the moments around the -axis and around the -axis,
respectively, by the total mass. The symmetry principle says that if a region is symmetric with respect to a line, then the centroid of
the region lies on the line.
The theorem of Pappus for volume says that if a region is revo lved around an external axis, the volume of the resultin g solid is
equal to the area of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the centroid of the region.

1.9.24.30 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109513Key Equations
Mass of a lamina
Moments of a lamina
Center of mass of a lamina
Glossary
center of mass
the point at which the total mass of the system could be con centrated without changing the moment
centroid
the centroid of a region is the geometric center of the r egion; laminas are often represented by regions in the pla ne; if the lamina
has a constant density, the center of mass of the lamina depends only on the shape of the corresponding planar region; in this case,
the center of mass of the lamina corresponds to the centroid of the representative region
lamina
a thin sheet of material; laminas are thin enough that, for mathematical purposes, they can be treated as if they are two -dimensional
moment
if n masses are arranged on a number line, the moment of the sys tem with respect to the origin is given by; if, instead,
we consider a region in the plane, bounded above by a function o ver an interval, then the moments of the region with
respect to the - and -axes are given by and, respectivel y
symmetry principle
the symmetry principle states that if a region is symmet ric about a line, then the centroid of lies on
theorem of Pappus for volume
this theorem states that the volume of a solid of revol ution formed by revolving a region around an external axis is equal to the area
of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the ce ntroid of the region

This page titled 1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inert ia is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
6.6: Moments and Centers of Mass by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
15.6: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original
source: https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
10.6: Calculating Moments of Inertia by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.
2.3: Moments of Inertia of Some Simple Shapes by Jeremy Tatum is licensed CC BY-NC 4.0. Original source:
http://orca.phys.uvic.ca/~tatum/classmechs.html.

1.9.25.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095141.9.25: Table of Integrals
Basic Integrals
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
Trigonometric Integrals
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

1.9.25.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951426.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
Exponential and Logarithmic Integrals
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
Hyperbolic Integrals
49.
50.
51. Erroneous nesting of equation structures

1.9.25.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951452.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
Inverse Trigonometric Integrals
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
Integrals Involving a + u, a > 0
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76. 2 2

1.9.25.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109514Integrals Involving u − a, a > 0
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
Integrals Involving a − u, a > 0
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
Integrals Involving 2 au − u, a > 0
94.
95.
96.
97.
Integrals Involving a + bu, a ≠ 0
98. 2 2
2 2

1.9.25.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/10951499.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
This page titled 1.9.25: Table of Integrals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed”
Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Appendix B: Table of Integrals by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

1.9.26.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095151.9.26: Further Vector Topics
Vector Basics
Classical mechanics describes the motion of bodies as they move through space. To describe a motion in spa ce it is not sufficient to
give a position and a speed: you need a direction as well. Therefore we work with vectors: mathematical obje cts that have both a
magnitude and a direction. If you tell me you’re mov ing, I know something, but not much; I’ll know more if you tell me you’re
moving at walking speed, and have full information o f your velocity once you tell me that you’re moving at walking speed towards
the coffee machine. Although in principle we could mak e do with specifying a magnitude and direction of ev ery vector in this way,
it is often more convenient to express our vectors in a basis. To do so, we choose an (arbitrary) origin, and as many basis vectors as
we have spatial dimensions, in such a way that they are n ot parallel to one another, and usually mutually per pendicular (orthogonal)
and of unit length (orthonormal). Then we decompose o ur vector by giving its components along each of th e basis vectors. The
most common choice is to use a Cartesian basis, of t wo or three (depending on spatial dimension) basis ve ctors of unit length
pointing in the standard x, y and z directions, and in dicated as and, or (rather annoyingly) sometimes as and, the latter
especially in American textbooks. Other often encounte red systems are polar coordinates (2D) and cylindric al and spherical
coordinates (3D), see the mathematical appendix for mo re background on those. To write our vectors, we now spe cify the
components in each direction, writing for example fo r a vector (in boldface) representing a speed of a nd a
direction making an angle of with the horizontal.
Vectors can be added and subtracted just like scalar s - simply add and subtract them by component. Graph ically, you add two
vectors by putting them head-to-tail: you can find the sum of two vectors and by putting the start of at the end of, the sum
then points from the start of to the end of. You can also multiply a vector by a scalar, by multiply ing every component of
the vector with that scalar. Graphically, this means t hat you extend the length of the vector with the sca lar factor you just multiplied
with.
You can’t take the product of two vectors like you wou ld two scalars. There are however two vector operation s that closely
resemble the product, known as the inner (or dot) and outer (or cross) product, see Figure 16.A.1. The dot pro duct represents the
length of the projection of one vector on another (and thus gives a scalar); it is zero for perpendicular vectors, and the dot product
of a vector with itself gives the square of its length. To calculate the dot product of two vectors, sum th e products of their
components: if and, then. You can use the dot pr oduct to find the angle between
two vectors, using standard geometry, which gives
where and are the lengths of vectors and, respect ively. The cross product is only defined for three-d imensional vectors,
say and. The result is another vector, with a direc tion perpendicular to the plane spanned
by and, and a magnitude equal to the area of the parallelogram bounded by them. The cross product is most easily expressed in
column vector form:
The cross product of a vector with itself is zero.

1.9.26.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109515
Figure: Products and derivatives of vectors. (a) The d ot product of two vectors and gives the length of t he projection of
on (or vice versa). (b) The cross product of two vec tors and gives a vector perpendicular to the plane spanned by and
and with a magnitude equal to the area of the paral lelogram spanned by and. (c-f) Acceleration as a c hange in velocity. In every
panel, the original velocity is shown in black, the v elocity a short time ∆t later is shown in blue, and th e acceleration is shown in
red. (c) Acceleration for an increase in the magnitu de of the velocity. (d) Acceleration for a decrease in the magnitude of the
velocity. (e) Acceleration for a change in directio n of the velocity at constant magnitude. (f) Accele ration for a change in velocity
that involves both a change in direction and a decre ase in magnitude.
Vectors can be functions, just like scalar quantities: t hey can depend on one or more parameters, like posi tion or time. Also, again
just like scalar functions, you can calculate a rat e of change of vector function as you move through parameter values, for instance
asking how the velocity of a car changes as a functio n of time. An instantaneous rate of change is simply a derivative, which is
calculated in exactly the same manner as the deriva tive of a scalar function. For example, the rate of c hange of the velocity, known
as the acceleration, is defined as:
Since the velocity itself is the derivative of the po sition, the acceleration is also the second derivativ e of the position. Time
derivatives occur so frequently in classical mechani cs that we use a special notation for them: a first derivative is indicated by a dot
on top of the quantity, and a second derivative by a do uble dot - so we have.
Vector derivatives are somewhat richer than those of scalar functions, since there are more ways that a ve ctor can change. Like a
scalar function, the magnitude of a vector can incr ease or decrease. Moreover, its direction can also chan ge, which also means that
it has a nonzero derivative, and of course, you can have a combination of a change in magnitude and a c hange in direction, see
Figure 16.A.1.
Figure: Examples of scalar and vector fields. (a) Temp erature (a scalar) at every point in the Netherlands at 11:30 on
October 28, 2013. Lines of equal temperature are dra wn in black; the gradient of the temperature field is everywhere perpendicular
to these lines. (b) Wind velocity (a vector) at every point in the Netherlands at the same time as the temp erature map. Colors
correspond to the magnitude of the velocity. (a and b) from [30]. (c) Example of a vector field with a large divergence and zero
curl. (d) Example of a vector field with a large cu rl (and low but nonzero divergence).
Functions (scalar or vector) that are defined at ever y point in space are sometimes called fields. Examples are the temperature
(scalar) and wind (vector) at every point on the pla net, see Figure 16.A.2. Just like you can calculate the r ate of change of a

1.9.26.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109515function in time, you can also consider how a function changes in space. For a scalar function, this quantit y is a vector, known as
the gradient, defined as the vector of partial derivati ves. For a function f (x, y, z), we have:
The direction of is the direction of maximal chang e, and its magnitude tells you how quickly the functi on changes in that
direction. For a vector field, we can’t take the gra dient, but we can use the ‘vector’ of partial deriva tives combined with either
the dot or cross product. The first option is known a s the divergence of, and tells you how quickly spre ads out; the second is the
curl of and tells you how much rotates:
where, and so on.
Polar Coordinates
You can specify any point in the plane by specifyin g its projection on two perpendicular axes - we typical ly call these the x and yaxes and x and y coordinates. In this Cartesian syst em (named after Descartes), we identify unit vectors a nd, pointing along
their respective axes, and being of unit length. A pos ition can then be decomposed in the two directions:, with
and. Alternatively, we can write and, which gives for:
Instead of specifying the x and y coordinates of ou r position, we could also uniquely identify it by givi ng two different numbers: its
distance to the origin r, and the angle the line to the origin makes with a fixed reference axis (typic ally the x-axis), see Figure
16.A.3. Invoking the Pythagorean theorem and basic trigon ometry,
we readily find and. We call r the length of the v ector. We could also invert the relations for r an d so we
can get the Cartesian components if the length and angle are known: and.
Like the Cartesian basis vectors and (\hat{\boldsymbo l{y}}\), which point in the direction of increasing x and y values, we can
also define unit vectors pointing in the direction o f increasing r and. These directions do depend on our position in space, but they
do have a clear geometrical interpretation: \hat{\b oldsymbol{r}} always points radially outward from the origin, and
\hat{\boldsymbol{\theta}} in the direction you’d mo ve if you’d be making a counterclockwise rotation ab out the origin. Given a
position vector, finding the vector in the directi on of increasing r is very easy:. The expression for r in our new polar basis
is almost tautological:.
Relating the polar basis vectors to the Cartesian one s is straightforward. We have:
and using we also have
We thus find that.
For \(\hat{\boldsymbol{\theta}\) we note that to rotat e around the origin, the direction of motion needs t o be perpendicular to.
There are of course two such directions - we pick the si gn by demanding that the counterclockwise rotation i s positive. This gives
. Written out as vectors, we have:

1.9.26.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109515Note that
Naturally, we can also express the Cartesian basis in terms of the polar ones:
Figure: Polar coordinate system and polar unit vector s. A position in the plane can be specified either by giving its
projections on two reference axes (along the and di rection), or by giving its distance r to the origin, and the angle the line to
the origin makes with the x axis. The polar basis vecto rs are defined as pointing in the direction of increa sing r (i.e., radially
outward), and increasing (i.e., rotating counterclo ckwise around the origin).
1.9.26: Further Vector Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
16.A: Math by Timon Idema is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://textbooks.open.tudelft.nl/textbooks/catalog/bo ok/14.

1.9.27.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095161.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equations
1.9.27.1 Solving Differential Equations
A differential equation is an equation which contain s derivatives of the function to be determined. They can be very simple. For
example, you may be given the (constant) velocity of a car, which is the derivative of its position, which we ’d write mathematically
as:
To determine where the car ends up after one hour, we need to solve this differential equation. We also ne ed a second piece of
information: where the car was at some reference time (usually t = 0), the initial condition. If, you don ’t need advanced
maths skills to figure out that. Unfortunately, things aren’t usually this easy.
Before we proceed to a few techniques for solving dif ferential equations, we need some terminology. The ord er of a differential
equation is the order of the highest derivative found in the equation; Equation is thus of first order. A differential equation is
called ordinary if it only contains derivatives with respect to one variable, and partial if it contains d erivatives to multiple variables.
The equation is linear if it does not contain any p roducts of (derivatives of) the unknown function. Fina lly, a differential equation is
homogeneous if it only contains terms that contain the unknown function, and inhomogeneous if it also c ontains other terms.
Equation is ordinary and inhomogeneous, as the te rm on the right does not contain the unknown functio n. In the
sections below,we discuss the various cases you’ll encou nter in this book; there are many others (many of whi ch can’t be solved
explicitly) to which a whole subfield of mathematics is dedi cated.
1.9.27.1.1 FIRST-ORDER LINEAR ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Suppose we have a general equation of the form
where and are known functions of, and is our unkn own function. Equation is a first-order, ordinary,
linear, inhomogeneous differential equation. In order to solve it we will use two techniques that are treme ndously useful: separation
of variables and separation into homogeneous and part icular solutions.
Suppose we had. Then, if we had two solutions and of E quation, we could construct a third as
(or any linear combination of and), since the e quation is linear. Now since is not zero, we can’t do t his, but
we can do something else. First, we find the most genera l solution to the equation where, which we call the h omogeneous
solution. Second, we find a solution (any at all) of the full Equation, which we call the particular solut ion. The
full solution is then the sum of these two solutions,. You may worry that there may be multiple particu lar
solutions: how would we pick the ‘right’ one? Fortunatel y, we don’t need to worry: the homogeneous solution wil l contain an
unknown variable, which will be set by the initial con dition. Changing the particular solution will change the value of the variable,
such that the final solution will be the same and satis fy both the differential equation and the initial co ndition.
To find the solution to the homogeneous equation
we’re going to use a technique called separation of variables. There are two variables in this system: th e independent parameter t
and the dependent parameter x. The trick is to get e verything depending on t on one side of the equals sign, and everything
depending on x on the other. To do so, we’re going to treat dx/dt as if it were an actual fraction. In that case, it’s not hard to see
that we can re-arrange Equation to
By itself, Equation means little, but if we integrate both sides, we get something that makes sense:1

1.9.27.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109516or
where is an integration constant (the unknown consta nt that will be set by our initial condition). Of cours e, in principle
it may not be possible to evaluate the integral in Equation, but even then the solution is valid. In pr actice, you’ll often
encounter situations in which and are simple functi ons or even constants, and the evaluation of the integr al is
straightforward. Now that we have our homogeneous soluti on, we still need a particular one. Sometimes you’re lu cky, and you can
easily guess one - for instance one in which doesn’t de pend on at all. In case you’re not lucky, there’s ar e two other
techniques you may try, either using variation of co nstants or finding an integrating factor. To demonstr ate variation of constants,
we’ll pick a specific example, to not get lost in a bu nch of abstract functions. Let be a constant and be linear. The
homogeneous solution then becomes. The constant we’ re going to vary is our integration constant, so ou r
guess for the particular solution will be
We substitute back into the full differential Equati on, which gives:
A big part of the left-hand side thus cancels, and tha t’s not a coincidence - that’s because it is based o n the homogeneous equation.
What remains is a differential equation in that can b e trivially solved by direct integration:
Again, it may not be possible to evaluate the integra l in Equation, but in principle the solution could be inserted in Equation
to give us our particular solution, and the whole different ial equation will be solved.
Alternatively, we may try to find an integration facto r for Equation. This means that we try to rewrite the left hand side of
the equation as a total derivative, after which we can simply integrate to get the solution. To do so, we fir st divide the whole
equation by, then look for a function that satisfies the condition that
from which we can read off that we need to solve the homog eneous equation
We can solve by separation of constants, which gives us
where we set the integration constant to one, as it dr ops out of the equation for anyway. With this functio n, we can rewrite
Equation as
which we can integrate to find:

1.9.27.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1095161.9.27.1.2 SECOND-ORDER LINEAR ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS WITH CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS
Second order ordinary differential equations are esse ntial for the study of mechanics, as its central equati on, Newton’s second law
of motion (Equation 2.1.4) is of this type. In the ca se that the equation is also linear, we have some hope s of solving it analytically.
There are several examples of this type of equation in the main text, especially in Section 2.6, where we solv e the equation of
motion resulting from Newton’s second law for three spe cial cases, and Section 8.1, where we study a number of variants of the
harmonic oscillator. For the case that the equation is homogeneous and has constant coefficients, we can wr ite down the general
solution. The equation to be solved is of the form
For the case that, we retrieve a first-order differen tial equation, whose solution is an exponential (as can be found by
separation of variables and integration):. In many cases an exponential is also a solution of Equation. To
figure out which exponential, let’s start with the tr ial function (or ‘Ansatz’), where is an unknown parame ter.
Substituting this Ansatz into Equation yields the characte ristic polynomial for this ode:
which almost always has two solutions:
Note that the solutions can be real or complex. If th ere are two of them, we can write the general solution of Equation as
a linear combination of the Ansatz with the two cases:
where A and B are set by either initial or boundary conditions. Since the may be complex, so may A and B; it’s their
combination that should give a real number (as is real), see problem A.3.1a.
In the case that Equation gives only one solution, t he corresponding exponential function is still a soluti on of Equation
, but it is not the most general one, as we only can p ut a single undetermined constant in front of it. We therefore need a
second, independent solution. To guess one, here’s a thi rd useful trick: take the derivative of our known solu tion,, with respect
to the parameter. This gives a second Ansatz:, where. Substituting this Ansatz into Equation for the cas e
that, we find:
so our Ansatz is again a solution. For this special case, t he general solution is therefore given by
In Section 8.2, where we discuss the damped harmonic osc illator, the special case corresponds to the critical ly damped oscillator.
We get an underdamped oscillator when the roots of th e characteristic polynomial are complex, and an over damped one when they
are real.
1.9.27.1.3 SECOND-ORDER LINEAR ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF EULER TYPE
There’s a second class of linear ordinary different ial equations that we can solve explicitly: those of Euler (or Cauchy-Euler) type,
where the coefficient in front of a derivative conta ins the variable to the power of the derivative, i.e., for a second-order differential
equation, we have as the most general form:2

1.9.27.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109516Note that we are now solving for; we do so because this type of equation typically occurs in the context of position- rather than
time-dependent functions. An example is the Laplace eq uation in polar coordinates. Like for the second or der ode with
constant coefficients, the ode of Euler type can be gene ralized to higher-order equations.
There are (at least) two ways to solve Equation: thro ugh an Ansatz, and through a change of variables. For t he Ansatz,
note that for any polynomial, the derivative of each term reduces the power by one, and here we’re multipl ying each such term with
the variable to the power the number of derivatives. This suggests we simply try a polynomial, so our Ansatz here will be
. Substituting in Equation gives:
so we get another second order polynomial to solve, thi s time in:
If the roots in Equation are both real (the most c ommon case in physics problems), we have two independen t solutions,
and we are done. If the roots are complex, we also ha ve two independent solutions, though they involve co mplex powers of; like
for the equation with constant coefficients, we can re write these as real functions with Euler’s formula (s ee problem A.3.1b). For
the case that we have only one root, we again apply ou r trick to get a second: we try, which turns out to be indeed a
solution (problem A.3.1c), and the general solution is agai n a linear combination of the two solutions found.
Alternatively, we could have solved Equation by a cha nge of variables. Although this method is occasionally useful (and
so it’s good to be aware of its existence), there is no systematic way of deriving which change of variabl es will do the trick, so
you’ll have to go by trial-and-error (without a prio ri guarantee of success). In this case, this process le ads to the following
substitution:
where we introduce for convenience. Taking derivatives of with the chain rule gives
which is a second order differential equation with con stant coefficients, and thus of the form given in Eq uation. We
therefore know how to find its solutions, and can use Equati on to transform those solutions back to functions.
1.9.27.1.4 Reduction of Order
If you find yourself with a non-homogeneous second or der differential equation where the homogeneous equat ion either has
constant coefficients or is of Euler type, you can again use the technique of variation of constants t o find a particular solution. A
similar technique, known as reduction of order, may hel p you find solutions to a second (or higher) order e quation where the
coefficients are not constant. In order to be able t o use this technique, you need to know a solution to th e homogeneous equation, so
it is not as universally applicable as the techniques in t he previous two sections, but still frequently very helpf ul.
Let us write the general non-homogeneous second-order lin ear differential equation as
Note that this is the most general form: if there is a coefficient (constant or otherwise) in front of the second derivative, we simply
divide the whole equation by that coefficient and re define the coefficients to match Equation. Now suppos e we have a
solution of the homogeneous equation (so for the ca se that). As the equation is homogeneous, for any constant the
function will also be a solution. As an Ansatz for the seco nd solution, we’ll try a variant of variation of constan ts, and take
where is an arbitrary function. Substituting back into, we find5

1.9.27.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109516We recognize the prefactor of as exactly the homoge neous equation, which satisfies, so this term vanish es. Now defining
, we are left with a first-order equation for:
Equation is a first-order linear differential equat ion, and can be solved by the techniques from Section A.3.1. Integrating
the equation then gives us, and hence the second so lution of the (inhomogeneous) second order different ial
equation.
1.9.27.1.5 POWER SERIES Solutions
If none of the techniques in the sections above apply to your differential equation, there’s one last Ansatz you can try: a power
series expansion of your solution. To illustrate, we’ll aga in pick a concrete example: Legendre’s differential equa tion, given by
where is an integer. As an Ansatz for the solution, we’ll try a power series expansion of:
Our task is now to find numbers (many of which may be zero) such that is a solution of. Fortunately, we can
simply substitute our trial solution and re-arrange to get
where in the last line, we ‘shifted’ the index of the last term. We do so in order to get at an expression for the coefficient of for
any value of. As the functions are linearly independ ent (i.e., you can’t write as a linear combination of other functions
where), the coefficient of each of the powers in the sum in Equation has to vanish for the sum to be id entically zero.
This gives us a recurrence relation between the coefficients:
Given the values of and (the two degrees of freedom that our second-order differential equation allows u s), we can repeatedly
apply Equation to get all coefficients. Note that f or the coefficient equals zero. Therefore, if for a n even value of,
we set, and for an odd value of, we set, we get a fin ite number of nonzero coefficients. The resulting sol utions are
polynomials, characterized by the number; in this cas e, they’re known as the Legendre polynomials, typicall y denoted, and
normalized (by setting the value of the remaining fr ee coefficient) such that. Table A.1 lists the first fi ve, which are also
plotted in Figure 16.A.4a.
Legendre polynomials have many other interesting pr operties (many of which can be found in either math t extbooks or on their
Wikipedia page). They occur frequently in physics, for example in solving problems involving Newtonian gra vity or Laplace’s6

1.9.27.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109516equation from electrostatics.
If we replace the factor in the Legendre differenti al equation with an arbitrary number, the series sol ution remains a
solution, but it no longer terminates. There are ma ny other differential equations that lead to both i nfinite series and polynomial
solutions. A well-known example is the Bessel differential equation:
The solutions to this equation are known as the Bessel functions of the first and second kind (see Problem A.3. 3, where you’ll
prove that for these functions the series never term inates). These functions generalize the sine and co sine function and occur in the
vibrations of two-dimensional surfaces. Other example s include the Hermite and Laguerre polynomials, which feature in quantum
mechanics, and Airy functions, which you can encounter wh en studying optics.
Table A.1:: The first five (and zeroth, for good me asure) Legendre polynomials, the solutions of Equation for the given value of n and
the appropriate choice of and.
0 1
1 x
Figure: Solutions to the Legendre and Bessel differenti al equations. (a) The first five Legendre polynomials (Table A.1).
Note that the polynomials with even n are all even, and those with odd n are all odd. (b-c) The first fiv e Bessel functions of the first
(b) and second (c) kind.
This page titled 1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Timon Idema (TU Delft Open) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.A: Math by Timon Idema is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://textbooks.open.tudelft.nl/textbooks/catalog/bo ok/14.8

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Electrostatics - Charges, Forces and Fields
2.1: Unit Learning Outcomes
2.2: Electrical Charge
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
GSU-TM-Physics II (2212)
2.5: Electric Field
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distribution s
2.7: Electric Flux
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
2.11: Summary
2.12: Practice
2.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer)
This page titled 2: Electrostatics - Charges, Forces and Fields is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1096562.1: Unit Learning Outcomes
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
I. Electrical Charge
Describe the concept of electric charge
Explain qualitatively the force electric charge creates
II. Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
Explain what a conductor is
Explain what an insulator is
List the differences and similarities between conducto rs and insulators
Describe the process of charging by induction
III. Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Describe the electric force, both qualitatively and qua ntitatively
Calculate the force that charges exert on each other
Determine the direction of the electric force for diff erent source charges
Correctly describe and apply the superposition principle for multiple source charges
IV. Electric Field
Explain the purpose of the electric field concept
Describe the properties of the electric field
Calculate the field of a collection of source charges o f either sign
Explain the purpose of an electric field diagram
Describe the relationship between a vector diagram and a field line diagram
Explain the rules for creating a field diagram and why these rules make physical sense
Sketch the field of an arbitrary source charge
Describe a permanent dipole
Describe an induced dipole
Define and calculate an electric dipole moment
Explain the physical meaning of the dipole moment
V. Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
Explain what a continuous source charge distribution is and ho w it is related to the concept of quantization of charge
Describe line charges, surface charges, and volume charges
Calculate the field of a continuous source charge dist ribution of either sign
VI. Electric Flux
Define the concept of flux
Describe electric flux
Calculate electric flux for a given situation
VII. Gauss’s Law
State Gauss’s law
Explain the conditions under which Gauss’s law may be used
Apply Gauss’s law in appropriate systems
VIII. Applying Gauss’s Law
Explain what spherical, cylindrical, and planar symmetry a re
Recognize whether or not a given system possesses one of the se symmetries
Apply Gauss’s law to determine the electric field of a system with one of these symmetries
IX. Conductors in Electrostatic EquilibriumLearning Objectives

2.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/109656q
Describe the electric field within a conductor at equili brium
Describe the electric field immediately outside the sur face of a charged conductor at equilibrium
Explain why if the field is not as described in the first two objectives, the conductor is not at equilibrium
2.1: Unit Learning Outcomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
5.2: Electric Charge by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

2.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765112.2: Electrical Charge
Discoveries
In this section, we begin the study of the electric force, which acts on all objects with a property call ed charge. The electric force is
much stronger than gravity (in most systems where bot h appear), but it can be a force of attraction or a force of repulsion, which
leads to very different effects on objects. The ele ctric force helps keep atoms together, so it is of fu ndamental importance in matter.
But it also governs most everyday interactions we deal with, from chemical interactions to biological processes.
Figure: Electric charges exist all around us. They can cause objects to be repelled from each other or to b e attracted to each
other. (credit: modification of work by Sean McGrath)
You are certainly familiar with electronic devices t hat you activate with the click of a switch, from com puters to cell phones to
television. And you have certainly seen electricity i n a flash of lightning during a heavy thunderstorm. But you have also most
likely experienced electrical effects in other ways, ma ybe without realizing that an electric force was invo lved. Let’s take a look at
some of these activities and see what we can learn from the m about electric charges and forces.
You have probably experienced the phenomenon of static electricity: When you first take clothes out of a dryer, many (n ot all) of
them tend to stick together; for some fabrics, they can be very difficult to separate. Another example o ccurs if you take a woolen
sweater off quickly—you can feel (and hear) the stat ic electricity pulling on your clothes, and perhaps even your hair. If you comb
your hair on a dry day and then put the comb close t o a thin stream of water coming out of a faucet, you will find that the water
stream bends toward (is attracted to) the comb (Figure).
Figure: An electrically charged comb attracts a strea m of water from a distance. Note that the water is no t touching the comb.
(credit: Jane Whitney)

2.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511Suppose you bring the comb close to some small strips o f paper; the strips of paper are attracted to the co mb and even cling to it
(Figure). In the kitchen, quickly pull a length of p lastic cling wrap off the roll; it will tend to cling to most any nonmetallic
material (such as plastic, glass, or food). If you ru b a balloon on a wall for a few seconds, it will stick to the wall. Probably the
most annoying effect of static electricity is gettin g shocked by a doorknob (or a friend) after shufflin g your feet on some types of
carpeting.
Figure: After being used to comb hair, this comb attr acts small strips of paper from a distance, without physi cal contact.
Investigation of this behavior helped lead to the con cept of the electric force.
Many of these phenomena have been known for centuries. The ancient Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus (624– 546 BCE)
recorded that when amber (a hard, translucent, fossil ized resin from extinct trees) was vigorously rubbed with a piece of fur, a force
was created that caused the fur and the amber to be a ttracted to each other (Figure). Additionally, he fo und that the rubbed
amber would not only attract the fur, and the fur at tract the amber, but they both could affect other (n onmetallic) objects, even if not
in contact with those objects (Figure).
Figure: Borneo amber is mined in Sabah, Malaysia, from shale-sandstone-mudstone veins. When a piece of amber i s rubbed
with a piece of fur, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a net negative charge. At the same time, t he fur, having lost electrons,
becomes positively charged. (credit: “Sebakoamber”/Wi kimedia Commons)
The English physicist William Gilbert (1544–1603) als o studied this attractive force, using various substa nces. He worked with
amber, and, in addition, he experimented with rock crysta l and various precious and semi-precious gemstones. He also
experimented with several metals. He found that the met als never exhibited this force, whereas the minerals d id. Moreover,
although an electrified amber rod would attract a pi ece of fur, it would repel another electrified amber rod; similarly, two electrified
pieces of fur would repel each other.

2.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511
Figure: When materials are rubbed together, charges c an be separated, particularly if one material has a g reater affinity for
electrons than another. (a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and neg ative charges. Only a tiny
fraction of the charges are involved, and only a few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, so me negative charge is
transferred to the amber, leaving the cloth with a n et positive charge. (c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net
charges, but the absolute value of the net positive an d negative charges will be equal.
This suggested there were two types of an electric pro perty; this property eventually came to be called electric charge. The
difference between the two types of electric charge is in the directions of the electric forces that each type of charge causes: These
forces are repulsive when the same type of charge exist s on two interacting objects and attractive when the c harges are of opposite
types. The SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb (C), after the French physicist Charles Augustine de Coul omb (1736–1806).
The most peculiar aspect of this new force is that it does not require physical contact between the two obje cts in order to cause an
acceleration. This is an example of a so-called “lon g-range” force. (Or, as James Clerk Maxwell later phra sed it, “action at a
distance.”) With the exception of gravity, all other forces we have discussed so far act only when the two i nteracting objects
actually touch.
The American physicist and statesman Benjamin Frankli n found that he could concentrate charge in a “Leyd en jar,” which was
essentially a glass jar with two sheets of metal foil, one inside and one outside, with the glass between them (Figure). This
created a large electric force between the two foil sheet s.

2.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511
Figure: A Leyden jar (an early version of wha t is now called a capacitor) allowed experimenters to store large amounts of
electric charge. Benjamin Franklin used such a jar to demonstrate that lightning behaved exactly like the electricity he got from the
equipment in his laboratory.
Franklin pointed out that the observed behavior coul d be explained by supposing that one of the two types of charge remained
motionless, while the other type of charge flowed from one piece of foil to the other. He further suggested that an excess of what he
called this “electrical fluid” be called “positive electricity” and the deficiency of it be called “neg ative electricity.” His suggestion,
with some minor modifications, is the model we use to day. (With the experiments that he was able to do, thi s was a pure guess; he
had no way of actually determining the sign of the mo ving charge. Unfortunately, he guessed wrong; we now know t hat the charges
that flow are the ones Franklin labeled negative, and the positive charges remain largely motionless. Fortun ately, as we’ll see, it
makes no practical or theoretical difference which choic e we make, as long as we stay consistent with our choice.)
Let’s list the specific observations that we have of this electric force:
The force acts without physical contact between the two ob jects.
The force can be either attractive or repulsive: If two interacting objects carry the same sign of charge, the force is repulsive; if
the charges are of opposite sign, the force is attracti ve. These interactions are referred to as electrostatic repulsion and
electrostatic attraction, respectively.
Not all objects are affected by this force.
The magnitude of the force decreases (rapidly) with incre asing separation distance between the objects.
To be more precise, we find experimentally that the m agnitude of the force decreases as the square of th e distance between the two
interacting objects increases. Thus, for example, when t he distance between two interacting objects is doubled, the force between
them decreases to one fourth what it was in the origi nal system. We can also observe that the surroundings of the charged objects
affect the magnitude of the force. However, we will explore this issue in a later chapter.
Properties of Electric Charge
In addition to the existence of two types of charge, sev eral other properties of charge have been discovered.
Charge is quantized. This means that electric charge comes in discrete amount s, and there is a smallest possible amount of
charge that an object can have. In the SI system, this smalle st amount is. No free particle can have less
charge than this, and, therefore, the charge on any objec t—the charge on all objects—must be an integer multiple of this

2.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511amount. All macroscopic, charged objects have charge becau se electrons have either been added or taken away from t hem,
resulting in a net charge.
The magnitude of the charge is independent of the type. Phrased another way, the smallest possible positive charge (t o four
significant figures) is, and the smallest possible nega tive charge is; these values are exactly
equal. This is simply how the laws of physics in our universe turned out.
Charge is conserved. Charge can neither be created nor destroyed; it can only be transferred from place to place, from one
object to another. Frequently, we speak of two charges “canc eling”; this is verbal shorthand. It means that if two ob jects that
have equal and opposite charges are physically close to each other, then the (oppositely directed) forces they ap ply on some
other charged object cancel, for a net force of zero. It is i mportant that you understand that the charges on the ob jects by no
means disappear, however. The net charge of the universe is constant.
Charge is conserved in closed systems. In principle, if a negative charge disappeared from your lab bench and reappeared on
the Moon, conservation of charge would still hold. However, t his never happens. If the total charge you have in your loc al
system on your lab bench is changing, there will be a measur able flow of charge into or out of the system. Again, charge s can
and do move around, and their effects can and do cancel, bu t the net charge in your local environment (if closed) is conserved.
The last two items are both referred to as the law of conservation of charge.
The Source of Charges: The Structure of the Atom
Once it became clear that all matter was composed of particles that came to be called atoms, it also quic kly became clear that the
constituents of the atom included both positively ch arged particles and negatively charged particles. The next question was, what
are the physical properties of those electrically charg ed particles?
The negatively charged particle was the first one to b e discovered. In 1897, the English physicist J. J. Thomson was studying what
was then known as cathode rays. Some years before, the English physicist William Cr ookes had shown that these “rays” were
negatively charged, but his experiments were unable t o tell any more than that. (The fact that they carri ed a negative electric charge
was strong evidence that these were not rays at all, bu t particles.) Thomson prepared a pure beam of these p articles and sent them
through crossed electric and magnetic fields, and a djusted the various field strengths until the net de flection of the beam was zero.
With this experiment, he was able to determine the char ge-to-mass ratio of the particle. This ratio showed t hat the mass of the
particle was much smaller than that of any other pre viously known particle—1837 times smaller, in fact. Ev entually, this particle
came to be called the electron.
Since the atom as a whole is electrically neutral, the next question was to determine how the positive and n egative charges are
distributed within the atom. Thomson himself imagined that his electrons were embedded within a sort of posi tively charged paste,
smeared out throughout the volume of the atom. Howeve r, in 1908, the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford showed that the
positive charges of the atom existed within a tiny co re—called a nucleus —that took up only a very tiny fraction of the over all
volume of the atom, but held over 99% of the mass (s ee Linear Momentum and Collisions.) In addition, he showed that the
negatively charged electrons perpetually orbited ab out this nucleus, forming a sort of electrically char ged cloud that surrounds the
nucleus (Figure). Rutherford concluded that th e nucleus was constructed of small, massive particles that he named protons.

2.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511
Figure: This simplified model of a hydrogen at om shows a positively charged nucleus (consisting, in the case of hydrogen, of
a single proton), surrounded by an electron “cloud.” The charge of the electron cloud is equal (and opposi te in sign) to the charge of
the nucleus, but the electron does not have a definit e location in space; hence, its representation here is as a cloud. Normal
macroscopic amounts of matter contain immense numbers o f atoms and molecules, and, hence, even greater numbe rs of individual
negative and positive charges.
Since it was known that different atoms have different masses, and that ordinarily atoms are electrically neutral, it was natural to
suppose that different atoms have different numbers of protons in their nucleus, with an equal number of neg atively charged
electrons orbiting about the positively charged nucl eus, thus making the atoms overall electrically neutr al. However, it was soon
discovered that although the lightest atom, hydrogen, did indeed have a single proton as its nucleus, th e next heaviest atom—
helium—has twice the number of protons (two), but four times the mass of hydrogen.
This mystery was resolved in 1932 by the English physic ist James Chadwick, with the discovery of the neutron. The neutron is,
essentially, an electrically neutral twin of the pro ton, with no electric charge, but (nearly) identical m ass to the proton. The helium
nucleus therefore has two neutrons along with its two protons. (Later experiments were to show that although the neutron is
electrically neutral overall, it does have an intern al charge structure. Furthermore, although the masses of the neutron an d the
proton are nearly equal, they aren’t exactly equal: The neutron’s mas s is very slightly larger than the mass of the proton. That slight
mass excess turned out to be of great importance. That, however, is a story that will have to wait until our study of modern physics
in Nuclear Physics.)
Thus, in 1932, the picture of the atom was of a small, massive nucleus constructed of a combination of proto ns and neutrons,
surrounded by a collection of electrons whose combin ed motion formed a sort of negatively charged “clou d” around the nucleus
(Figure). In an electrically neutral atom, t he total negative charge of the collection of elect rons is equal to the total positive
charge in the nucleus. The very low-mass electrons ca n be more or less easily removed or added to an atom, changing the net
charge on the atom (though without changing its type). An atom that has had the charge altered in this way is called an ion. Positive
ions have had electrons removed, whereas negative io ns have had excess electrons added. We also use this ter m to describe
molecules that are not electrically neutral.

2.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76511
Figure: The nucleus of a carbon atom is compose d of six protons and six neutrons. As in hydrogen, the su rrounding six
electrons do not have definite locations and so can be considered to be a sort of cloud surrounding the nucl eus.
The story of the atom does not stop there, however. In the latter part of the twentieth century, many more subatomic particles were
discovered in the nucleus of the atom: pions, neutr inos, and quarks, among others. With the exception of the photon, none of these
particles are directly relevant to the study of ele ctromagnetism, so we defer further discussion of them u ntil the chapter on particle
physics.
As noted previously, electric charge is a property tha t an object can have. This is similar to how an obje ct can have a property
that we call mass, a property that we call density, a property that we call temperature, and so on. Techni cally, we should always
say something like, “Suppose we have a particle that c arries a charge of.” However, it is very common to say instead,
“Suppose we have a charge.” Similarly, we often say so mething like, “Six charges are located at the vertic es of a regular
hexagon.” A charge is not a particle; rather, it is a property of a particle. Nevertheless, this terminology is extrem ely common
(and is frequently used in this book, as it is ever ywhere else). So, keep in the back of your mind what we re ally mean when we
refer to a “charge.”
This page titled 2.2: Electrical Charge is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.2: Electric Charge by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
5.1: Prelude to Electric Charges and Fields by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.A Note on Terminology

2.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765132.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
In the preceding section, we said that scientists were able to create electric charge only on nonmetallic materials and never on
metals. To understand why this is the case, you have to understand more about the nature and structure of a toms. In this section, we
discuss how and why electric charges do—or do not—mov e through materials (Figure). A more complete descri ption is given
in a later chapter.
Figure: This power adapter uses metal wires and connect ors to conduct electricity from the wall socket to a laptop computer.
The conducting wires allow electrons to move freely t hrough the cables, which are shielded by rubber and p lastic. These materials
act as insulators that don’t allow electric charge to escape outward. (credit: modification of work by “Ev an-Amos”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Conductors and Insulators
As discussed in the previous section, electrons surrou nd the tiny nucleus in the form of a (comparatively) vast cloud of negative
charge. However, this cloud does have a definite structur e to it. Let’s consider an atom of the most commonly used conductor,
copper.
For reasons that will become clear in Atomic Structure, there is an outermost electron that is only loosely bound to the atom’s
nucleus. It can be easily dislodged; it then moves to a neighboring atom. In a large mass of copper atoms (such as a copper wire or
a sheet of copper), these vast numbers of outermost e lectrons (one per atom) wander from atom to atom, an d are the electrons that
do the moving when electricity flows. These wandering, or “free,” electrons are called conduction electron s, and copper is therefore
an excellent conductor (of electric charge). All cond ucting elements have a similar arrangement of their electrons, with one or two
conduction electrons. This includes most metals.
Insulators, in contrast, are made from materials that lack cond uction electrons; charge flows only with great diffic ulty, if at all.
Even if excess charge is added to an insulating mate rial, it cannot move, remaining indefinitely in plac e. This is why insulating
materials exhibit the electrical attraction and rep ulsion forces described earlier, whereas conductors d o not; any excess charge
placed on a conductor would instantly flow away (due to mutual repulsion from existing charges), leaving no excess charge around
to create forces. Charge cannot flow along or through an insulator, so its electric forces remain for long periods of time. (Charge
will dissipate from an insulator, given enough time.) As it happens, amber, fur, and most semi-precious gems are insulators, as are
materials like wood, glass, and plastic.
Charging by Induction
Let’s examine in more detail what happens in a condu ctor when an electrically charged object is brought close to it. As mentioned,
the conduction electrons in the conductor are able to move with nearly complete freedom. As a result, whe n a charged insulator
(such as a positively charged glass rod) is brought close to the conductor, the (total) charge on the i nsulator exerts an electric force
on the conduction electrons. Since the rod is positive ly charged, the conduction electrons (which themselves are negatively
charged) are attracted, flowing toward the insulator to the n ear side of the conductor (Figure).
Now, the conductor is still overall electrically neut ral; the conduction electrons have changed position, but they are still in the
conducting material. However, the conductor now has a ch arge distribution; the near end (the portion of the conductor closest to

2.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76513the insulator) now has more negative charge than pos itive charge, and the reverse is true of the end fart hest from the insulator. The
relocation of negative charges to the near side of t he conductor results in an overall positive charge i n the part of the conductor
farthest from the insulator. We have thus created an electric charge distribution where one did not exist before. This process is
referred to as inducing polarization —in this case, polarizing the conductor. The resulti ng separation of positive and negative
charge is called polarization, and a material, or eve n a molecule, that exhibits polarization is said to be polarized. A similar situation
occurs with a negatively charged insulator, but the resultin g polarization is in the opposite direction.
Figure: Induced polarization. A positively charged g lass rod is brought near the left side of the conductin g sphere, attracting
negative charge and leaving the other side of the sph ere positively charged. Although the sphere is overall still electrically neutral,
it now has a charge distribution, so it can exert an e lectric force on other nearby charges. Furthermore, t he distribution is such that
it will be attracted to the glass rod.
The result is the formation of what is called an electr ic dipole, from a Latin phrase meaning “two ends.” The presence of electric
charges on the insulator—and the electric forces the y apply to the conduction electrons—creates, or “ind uces,” the dipole in the
conductor.
Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged objec t. The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral, for example. If
you run a plastic comb through your hair, the charg ed comb can pick up neutral pieces of paper. Figure shows how the
polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects res ults in their attraction to a charged object.
Figure: Both positive and negative objects attract a neutral object by polarizing its molecules. (a) A posi tive object brought
near a neutral insulator polarizes its molecules. There is a slight shift in the distribution of the electrons orbiting the molecule, with
unlike charges being brought nearer and like charges moved away. Since the electrostatic force decreases wi th distance, there is a
net attraction. (b) A negative object produces the o pposite polarization, but again attracts the neutral object. (c) The same effect
occurs for a conductor; since the unlike charges are c loser, there is a net attraction.
When a charged rod is brought near a neutral substan ce, an insulator in this case, the distribution of c harge in atoms and molecules
is shifted slightly. Opposite charge is attracted neare r the external charged rod, while like charge is rep elled. Since the electrostatic
force decreases with distance, the repulsion of like charges is weaker than the attraction of unlike char ges, and so there is a net
attraction. Thus, a positively charged glass rod attra cts neutral pieces of paper, as will a negatively cha rged rubber rod. Some
molecules, like water, are polar molecules. Polar mol ecules have a natural or inherent separation of cha rge, although they are
neutral overall. Polar molecules are particularly af fected by other charged objects and show greater pol arization effects than
molecules with naturally uniform charge distributions.
When the two ends of a dipole can be separated, this m ethod of charging by induction may be used to create charged objects
without transferring charge. In Figure, we see two neutr al metal spheres in contact with one another but ins ulated from the rest
of the world. A positively charged rod is brought ne ar one of them, attracting negative charge to that s ide, leaving the other sphere
positively charged.

2.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76513
Figure: Charging by induction. (a) Two uncharged or neutral metal spheres are in contact with each other but insulated from
the rest of the world. (b) A positively charged glass r od is brought near the sphere on the left, attracting negative charge and leaving
the other sphere positively charged. (c) The spheres ar e separated before the rod is removed, thus separating negative and positive
charges. (d) The spheres retain net charges after the i nducing rod is removed—without ever having been touc hed by a charged
object.
Another method of charging by induction is shown in Fig ure. The neutral metal sphere is polarized when a ch arged rod is
brought near it. The sphere is then grounded, meaning that a conducting wire is run from the sphere to the ground. Since Earth is
large and most of the ground is a good conductor, i t can supply or accept excess charge easily. In this case, electrons are attracted to
the sphere through a wire called the ground wire, beca use it supplies a conducting path to the ground. The ground connection is
broken before the charged rod is removed, leaving th e sphere with an excess charge opposite to that of the rod. Again, an opposite
charge is achieved when charging by induction, and the c harged rod loses none of its excess charge.

2.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76513
Figure: Charging by induction using a ground connect ion. (a) A positively charged rod is brought near a n eutral metal sphere,
polarizing it. (b) The sphere is grounded, allowing e lectrons to be attracted from Earth’s ample supply. (c) The ground connection is
broken. (d) The positive rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an induced negative charge.
This page titled 2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

2.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765142.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Coulomb's Force
Experiments with electric charges have shown that if t wo objects each have electric charge, then they exer t an electric force on
each other. The magnitude of the force is linearly p roportional to the net charge on each object and in versely proportional to the
square of the distance between them. (Interestingly, the force does not depend on the mass of the objects.) The direction of the force
vector is along the imaginary line joining the two objec ts and is dictated by the signs of the charges involved.
Let
the net electric charge of the two objects;
the vector displacement from to.
The electric force on one of the charges is proport ional to the magnitude of its own charge and the magn itude of the other charge,
and is inversely proportional to the square of the distanc e between them:
This proportionality becomes an equality with the intro duction of a proportionality constant:
The electric force (or Coulomb force) experienced by charge due to charge is equal to
The unit vector has a magnitude of 1 and points along t he axis as the charges from to (same direction as vecto r).
Figure: The vector between point charges and.
If the charges have the same sign, the force is in the same direction as showing a repelling force. If the charges have diffe rent
signs, the force is in the opposite direction of showing a n attracting force. (Figure).Coulomb's Law

2.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514
Figure: The electrostatic force between point charg es and separated by a distance is given by Coulomb’s
law. Note that Newton’s third law (every force exert ed creates an equal and opposite force) applies as usual —the force on is
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force it exerts on -. (a) Like charges; (b) unlike charges.
It is important to note that the electric force is not constant; it is a function of the separation dist ance between the two charges. If
either the test charge or the source charge (or both) move, then changes, and therefore so does the force. An immediate
consequence of this is that direct application of Ne wton’s laws with this force can be mathematically diff icult, depending on the
specific problem at hand. It can (usually) be done, b ut we almost always look for easier methods of calculat ing whatever physical
quantity we are interested in. (Conservation of energy is the most common choice.)
Finally, the new constant in Coulomb’s law is called t he permittivity of free space, or (better) the permittivity of vacuum. It has
a very important physical meaning that we will discus s in a later chapter; for now, it is simply an empiric al proportionality
constant. Its numerical value (to three significant fig ures) turns out to be
These units are required to give the force in Coulomb ’s law the correct units of newtons. Note that in Coulo mb’s law, the
permittivity of vacuum is only part of the proportionalit y constant. For convenience, we often define a Coulomb’s co nstant:
Examples
A hydrogen atom consists of a single proton and a singl e electron. The proton has a charge of and the elec tron has. In the
“ground state” of the atom, the electron orbits the p roton at most probable distance of (Figure). Calcula te
the electric force on the electron due to the proton.
Figure: A schematic depiction of a hydrogen atom, sho wing the force on the electron. This depiction is onl y to enable us
to calculate the force; the hydrogen atom does not r eally look like this.
StrategyExample: The Force on the Electron in Hydrogen

2.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514For the purposes of this example, we are treating the electron and proton as two point particles, each with an electric
charge, and we are told the distance between them; we ar e asked to calculate the force on the electron. We thus use
Coulomb’s law (Equation).
Solution
Our two charges are,
and the distance between them
The magnitude of the force on the electron (Equation) is
As for the direction, since the charges on the two parti cles are opposite, the force is attractive; the forc e on the electron
points radially directly toward the proton, everywhere i n the electron’s orbit. The force is thus expressed as
You might have noticed that Coulomb's force bears a striking resemblance to the Universal Gravit ational Expression between
two masses and

Multiple Source Charges
The analysis that we have done for two particles can b e extended to an arbitrary number of particles; we si mply repeat the analysis,
two charges at a time. Specifically, we ask the questio n: Given N charges (which we refer to as source charge), what is the net
electric force that they exert on some other point charge (which we call the test charge)? Note that we us e these terms because we
can think of the test charge being used to test the stren gth of the force provided by the source charges.
Like all forces that we have seen up to now, the net e lectric force on our test charge is simply the vect or sum of each individual
electric force exerted on it by each of the individ ual test charges. Thus, we can calculate the net for ce on the test charge Q by
calculating the force on it from each source charge, taken one at a time, and then adding all those forc es together (as vectors). This
ability to simply add up individual forces in this way is referred to as the principle of superposition, and is one of the more
important features of the electric force. In mathematica l form, this becomesUniversal Gravitational Expression

2.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514In this expression, Q represents the charge of the particle that is experi encing the electric force, and is located at from the
origin; the are the N source charges, and the vectors are the displacem ents from the position of the ith charge to the
position of. Each of the N unit vectors points directly from its associated sour ce charge toward the test charge. All of this is
depicted in Figure. Please note that there is no phys ical difference between Q and; the difference in labels is merely to allow
clear discussion, with Q being the charge we are determining the force on.
Figure: The eight source charges each apply a force o n the single test charge Q. Each force can be calculated independently of
the other seven forces. This is the essence of the superpo sition principle.
(Note that the force vector does not necessarily poi nt in the same direction as the unit vector; it ma y point in the opposite
direction,. The signs of the source charge and test ch arge determine the direction of the force on the test char ge.)
There is a complication, however. Just as the source charges each exert a force on the test charge, so to o (by Newton’s third law)
does the test charge exert an equal and opposite for ce on each of the source charges. As a consequence, ea ch source charge would
change position. However, by Equation, the force on th e test charge is a function of position; thus, as the positions of the
source charges change, the net force on the test char ge necessarily changes, which changes the force, which again changes the
positions. Thus, the entire mathematical analysis quick ly becomes intractable. Later, we will learn technique s for handling this
situation, but for now, we make the simplifying assump tion that the source charges are fixed in place someh ow, so that their
positions are constant in time. (The test charge is a llowed to move.) With this restriction in place, the a nalysis of charges is known
as electrostatics, where “statics” refers to the constant (that is, st atic) positions of the source charges and the force i s referred to as
an electrostatic force.
Examples
Three different, small charged objects are placed a s shown in Figure. The charges and are fixed in pla ce; is free to
move. Given, and, and that, what is the net force on the mid dle charge?Example: The Net Force from Two Source Charges

2.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514
Figure: Source charges and each apply a force on.
Strategy
We use Coulomb’s law again. The way the question is phra sed indicates that is our test charge, so that and are
source charges. The principle of superposition says that the force on from each of the other charges is unaffected by the
presence of the other charge. Therefore, we write down the force on from each and add them together as vectors.
Solution
We have two source charges and a test charge, dist ances and and we are asked to find a force. This cal ls
for Coulomb’s law and superposition of forces. There are two forces:
We cannot add these forces directly because they don’ t point in the same direction: points only in the + y-direction,
while points only in the - x-direction. The net force is obtained from applying the Pythagorean theorem to its x- and
y-components:
Thus:
We find that
at an angle of

2.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514that is, above the − x-axis, as shown in the diagram.

Shown below are 4 identical positive charges located a t the corners of a square. The magnitude of the force on charge 1 by
charge 4 is. Find the magnitude of the total force on charge 3 exerted by charges 1, 2, and 4.
Solution
Let the side of the square be distance a. The relevant dist ances and forces on charge 3 are shown below.
Since the magnitude of the force on charge 1 by char ge 4 is 4 N, the same as the magnitude on charge 3 by charge 2 is also
4 N, since the distance between 1 and 4 is the same as between 2 and 3, and the charges are identical, all p ositive with the
same charge. Thus, the magnitude of the force on 3 by 2 is given by:

The magnitude of the force on 2 by both 1 and 4 are the sa me since the distance is the same:Example: The Net Force from Three Charges

2.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514Comparing the two equations above we see that the force by 1 and 4 is double the force by 2. Therefore:
The direction of the force by 1 is down since the forces are repulsive. In vector form this is written as:
The direction of the force by 4 is to the left:
These two vectors combined are:
One way to continue is to break down into components, then add to the sum of the two other forces above, an d
then find the magnitude. But there is a convenient sh ortcut when we recognize that the combined vector abo ve will point in
the same direction as, thus you can just add their m agnitudes (it's now a 1D vector addition) to get the t otal
magnitude of the force:
Force Due to a Continuous Charge Distribution
The charge distributions we have seen so far have bee n discrete: made up of individual point particles. This is in contrast with a
continuous charge distribution, which has at least one nonzero dimension. If a charge distribution is continuous rather than
discrete, we can generalize the definition of the ele ctric field. We simply divide the charge into infini tesimal pieces and treat each
piece as a point charge.
Note that because charge is quantized, there is no su ch thing as a “truly” continuous charge distribution. However, in most practical
cases, the total charge creating the field involves su ch a huge number of discrete charges that we can safel y ignore the discrete
nature of the charge and consider it to be continuo us. This is exactly the kind of approximation we make wh en we deal with a
bucket of water as a continuous fluid, rather than a collec tion of molecules.
Our first step is to define a charge density for a cha rge distribution along a line, across a surface, or withi n a volume, as shown in
Figure.
Figure: The configuration of charge differential el ements for a (a) line charge, (b) sheet of charge, an d (c) a volume of charge.
Also note that (d) some of the components of the total electric field cancel out, with the remainder resul ting in a net electric field.

2.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514Definitions of charge density:
linear charge density: charge per unit length (Figure); units are coulombs per meter ()
surface charge density: charge per unit area (Figure); units are coulombs per squ are meter
volume charge density: charge per unit volume (Figure); units are coulombs per square meter
For a line charge, a surface charge, and a volume char ge, the summation in the definition of an Electric field discussed previously
becomes an integral and is replaced by,, or, respec tively:

A point charge is placed a distance above the cent er of a ring that has a uniform charge density, wit h units of coulomb per
unit meter of arc, resulting in a total charge of. Find th e electric force acting on the charge.
Strategy
We use the same procedure as for multiple charges. The difference here is that the multiple charges is a charge that is
distributed on a circle. We divide the circle into i nfinitesimal elements shaped as arcs on the circle ea ch having a charge
and use polar coordinates shown in Figure.
Figure: The system and variable for calculating the e lectric force due to a ring of charge.
Solution
The electric force on due to an arc line charge is given by Coulomb's Law:
The charge in the arc line charge spanning the angle is given by:
The force is then given by:
The force due to the whole ring can be obtained throu gh integration:
A general element of the arc between and is of len gth and therefore contains a charge equal to. The
element is at a distance of from, the angle is and th erefore the electric field isDefinitions: Charge Densities
Example: Electric Force due to a Ring of Charge

2.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514Significance
As usual, symmetry simplified this problem, in this par ticular case resulting in a trivial integral. Also, wh en we take the
limit of, we find that
as we expect.
Find the electric force on a charge placed at the o rigin (point), a distance to the left of a straight line segment of length
that carries a uniform positive line charge density an d overall charge.
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. Symmetry implies that the electric field at point is along t he x-axis.
Strategy
Since this is a continuous charge distribution, we conce ptually break the wire segment into differential piec es of length,
each of which carries a differential amount of charge
Then, we conclude that because of symmetry, the force due to each segment is along the x-axis and directed either towards
or depending on the signs of the charges and. We then integrate the differential force expression over the
length of the wire, from to to obtain the complete ele ctric force expression.
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. The ele ctric Force on charge can be found by applying the
superposition principle to charge elements and integra ting.
Solution
The electric force due to a line charge segment on t he charge is given by the general Coulomb expression:
The electric force due to the whole line charge segm ent on the charge can be found through integrati on over the
whole line segment:Example: Electric Force due to a Line Segment along the axis of the segment

2.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76514The symmetry of the situation implies that there are o nly horizontal ()-components of the Force. The drawin g implies
that the charges are identical in sign resulting in a repulsive force. However, the calculation will maintai n the vector
notation to ensure that the final expression will work for wh atever charge sign configuration.
So we have
where our differential line element is, in this ex ample, since we are integrating along a line of charg e that lies on
the -axis. (The limits of integration are to.
The result is then:

This page titled 2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Taha
Mzoughi (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.4: Coulomb's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
5.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

2.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765152.5: Electric Field
As we showed in the preceding section, the net electric fo rce on a test charge is the vector sum of all the e lectric forces acting on it,
from all of the various source charges, located at t heir various positions. But what if we use a differen t test charge, one with a
different magnitude, or sign, or both? Or suppose we h ave a dozen different test charges we wish to try at th e same location? We
would have to calculate the sum of the forces from s cratch. Fortunately, it is possible to define a quanti ty, called the electric field,
which is independent of the test charge. It only depen ds on the configuration of the source charges, and o nce found, allows us to
calculate the force on any test charge.
Defining a Field
Suppose we have source charges located at positions, applying electrostatic forces on a test
charge. The net force on is
We can rewrite this as
where
or, more compactly,
This expression is called the electric field at posit ion of the source charges. Here, is the location of the point in
space where you are calculating the field and is rela tive to the positions of the source charges (Figure). Note that we have to
impose a coordinate system to solve actual problems.
Figure: Each of these five source charges creates its ow n electric field at every point in space; shown here are the field vectors
at an arbitrary point P. Like the electric force, t he net electric field obeys the superposition principl e.

2.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515Notice that the calculation of the electric field ma kes no reference to the test charge. Thus, the physical ly useful approach is to
calculate the electric field and then use it to cal culate the force on some test charge later, if needed. Different test charges
experience different forces Equation, but it is the same electric field Equation. That being said, recal l that there is no
fundamental difference between a test charge and a so urce charge; these are merely convenient labels for the system of interest.
Any charge produces an electric field; however, just as Earth’s orbit is not affected by Earth’s own gravity, a charge is not subject to
a force due to the electric field it generates. Charges are only subject to forces from the electric fields of other c harges.
In this respect, the electric field of a point cha rge is similar to the gravitational field of Earth; once we have calculated the
gravitational field at some point in space, we can us e it any time we want to calculate the resulting force on any mass we choose to
place at that point. In fact, this is exactly what we d o when we say the gravitational field of Earth (near Earth’s surface) has a value
of and then we calculate the resulting force (i.e., weight) on different masses. Also, the general express ion for calculating
at arbitrary distances from the center of Earth (i.e., not just near Earth’s surface) is very similar to the express ion for:
where is a proportionality constant, playing the sam e role for as does for. The value of is calculated once and is then
used in an endless number of problems.
To push the analogy further, notice the units of the e lectric field: From, the units of E are newtons per coulomb, N/C, that
is, the electric field applies a force on each unit charge. Now notice the units of g: From the units of g are newtons per
kilogram, N/kg, that is, the gravitational field appl ies a force on each unit mass. We could say that the g ravitational field of Earth,
near Earth’s surface, has a value of 9.81 N/kg.
The Meaning of “Field
Recall from your studies of gravity that the word “f ield” in this context has a precise meaning. A field, i n physics, is a physical
quantity whose value depends on (is a function of) po sition, relative to the source of the field. In the ca se of the electric field,
Equation shows that the value of (both the magnitud e and the direction) depends on where in space the p oint is located,
measured from the locations of the source charges.
In addition, since the electric field is a vector q uantity, the electric field is referred to as a vector field. (The gravitational field is
also a vector field.) In contrast, a field that has o nly a magnitude at every point is a scalar field. The temperature in a room is an
example of a scalar field. It is a field because th e temperature, in general, is different at different locations in the room, and it is a
scalar field because temperature is a scalar quantity.
Also, as you did with the gravitational field of an o bject with mass, you should picture the electric field of a charge-bearing object
(the source charge) as a continuous, immaterial subs tance that surrounds the source charge, filling all of space—in principle, to
in all directions. The field exists at every physical p oint in space. To put it another way, the electric c harge on an object alters the
space around the charged object in such a way that al l other electrically charged objects in space exper ience an electric force as a
result of being in that field. The electric field, t hen, is the mechanism by which the electric propertie s of the source charge are
transmitted to and through the rest of the universe. (Again, the range of the electric force is infinite.)
We will see in subsequent chapters that the speed at which electrical phenomena travel is the same as the speed of light. There is a
deep connection between the electric field and light.
Superposition
Yet another experimental fact about the field is tha t it obeys the superposition principle. In this cont ext, that means that we can (in
principle) calculate the total electric field of ma ny source charges by calculating the electric field of only at position P, then
calculate the field of at P, while—and this is the crucial idea—ignoring the fie ld of, and indeed even the existence of,. We can
repeat this process, calculating the field of each individual source charge, independently of the existe nce of any of the other
charges. The total electric field, then, is the vector su m of all these fields. That, in essence, is what Equation says.
In the next section, we describe how to determine the shape of an electric field of a source charge distribution an d how to sketch it.

2.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515The Direction of the Field
Equation enables us to determine the magnitude of the electric field, but we need the direction also. W e use the convention
that the direction of any electric field vector is t he same as the direction of the electric force vect or that the field would apply to a
positive test charge placed in that field. Such a ch arge would be repelled by positive source charges (t he force on it would point
away from the positive source charge) but attracted to negati ve charges (the force points toward the negative source).
By convention, all electric fields point away from posit ive source charges and point toward negative source c harges.
Electric Field Lines
Now that we have some experience calculating electric fields, let’s try to gain some insight into the geomet ry of electric fields. As
mentioned earlier, our model is that the charge on an object (the source charge) alters space in the r egion around it in such a way
that when another charged object (the test charge) i s placed in that region of space, that test charge e xperiences an electric force.
The concept of electric field lines, and of electric field line diagrams, enables us to visualize the way in which the space is altered,
allowing us to visualize the field. The purpose of this s ection is to enable you to create sketches of this ge ometry, so we will list the
specific steps and rules involved in creating an accurat e and useful sketch of an electric field.
It is important to remember that electric fields are three-dimensional. Although in this book we include some pseudo-threedimensional images, several of the diagrams that yo u’ll see (both here, and in subsequent chapters) will be two-dimensional
projections, or cross-sections. Always keep in mind that in fac t, you’re looking at a three-dimensional phenomenon.
Our starting point is the physical fact that the ele ctric field of the source charge causes a test charg e in that field to experience a
force. By definition, electric field vectors point in the same direction as the electric force that a (hypothetical) positive test charge
would experience, if placed in the field (Figure).
Figure: The electric field of a positive point charg e. A large number of field vectors are shown. Like al l vector arrows, the
length of each vector is proportional to the magnitu de of the field at each point. (a) Field in two dim ensions; (b) field in three
dimensions.
We’ve plotted many field vectors in the figure, whic h are distributed uniformly around the source charge. Since the electric field is
a vector, the arrows that we draw correspond at every p oint in space to both the magnitude and the directi on of the field at that
point. As always, the length of the arrow that we draw c orresponds to the magnitude of the field vector at that point. For a point
source charge, the length decreases by the square o f the distance from the source charge. In addition, t he direction of the field
vector is radially away from the source charge, becau se the direction of the electric field is defined b y the direction of the force thatDirection of the Electric Field

2.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515a positive test charge would experience in that field. (Again, keep in mind that the actual field is three -dimensional; there are also
field lines pointing out of and into the page.)
This diagram is correct, but it becomes less useful a s the source charge distribution becomes more complic ated. For example,
consider the vector field diagram of a dipole (Figure).
Figure: The vector field of a dipole. Even with just two identical charges, the vector field diagram bec omes difficult to
understand.
There is a more useful way to present the same inform ation. Rather than drawing a large number of increas ingly smaller vector
arrows, we instead connect all of them together, forming con tinuous lines and curves, as shown in Figure.
Figure: (a) The electric field line diagram of a po sitive point charge. (b) The field line diagram of a dipole. In both diagrams,
the magnitude of the field is indicated by the field line density. The field vectors (not shown here) are everywhere tangent to the
field lines.
Although it may not be obvious at first glance, these f ield diagrams convey the same information about the electric field as do the
vector diagrams. First, the direction of the field at every point is simply the direction of the field vec tor at that same point. In other
words, at any point in space, the field vector at each point is tangent to the field line at that same poi nt. The arrowhead placed on a
field line indicates its direction.

2.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515As for the magnitude of the field, that is indicated by the field line density —that is, the number of field lines per unit area pa ssing
through a small cross-sectional area perpendicular to the electric field. This field line density is drawn to be proportional to the
magnitude of the field at that cross-section. As a resu lt, if the field lines are close together (that is, th e field line density is greater),
this indicates that the magnitude of the field is larg e at that point. If the field lines are far apart at the cross-section, this indicates
the magnitude of the field is small. Figure shows the i dea.
Figure: Electric field lines passing through imaginary areas. Since the number of lines passing through each a rea is the same,
but the areas themselves are different, the field line density is different. This indicates different magnitu des of the electric field at
these points.
In Figure, the same number of field lines passes thr ough both surfaces (S and), but the surface S is larger than surface.
Therefore, the density of field lines (number of lin es per unit area) is larger at the location of, in dicating that the electric field is
stronger at the location of than at S. The rules for creating an electric field diagram are as follows.
1. Electric field lines either originate on positive charg es or come in from infinity, and either terminate on n egative charges or
extend out to infinity.
2. The number of field lines originating or terminating at a charge is proportional to the magnitude of that cha rge. A charge of
2q will have twice as many lines as a charge of q.
3. At every point in space, the field vector at that point is tangent to the field line at that same point.
4. The field line density at any point in space is proportion al to (and therefore is representative of) the magnitu de of the field
at that point in space.
5. Field lines can never cross. Since a field line represent s the direction of the field at a given point, if two field lines crossed
at some point, that would imply that the electric field was pointing in two different directions at a single point. Th is in turn
would suggest that the (net) force on a test charge placed a t that point would point in two different directions. Sinc e this is
obviously impossible, it follows that field lines must neve r cross.
Always keep in mind that field lines serve only as a co nvenient way to visualize the electric field; they a re not physical entities.
Although the direction and relative intensity of the electric field can be deduced from a set of field l ines, the lines can also beProblem-Solving Strategy: Drawing Electric Field Lines

2.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515misleading. For example, the field lines drawn to repres ent the electric field in a region must, by necessi ty, be discrete. However,
the actual electric field in that region exists at ever y point in space.
Field lines for three groups of discrete charges are shown in Figure. Since the charges in parts (a) and (b) have the same
magnitude, the same number of field lines are shown st arting from or terminating on each charge. In (c), however, we draw three
times as many field lines leaving the charge as en tering the. The field lines that do not terminate a t emanate outward
from the charge configuration, to infinity.
Figure: Three typical electric field diagrams. (a) A dipole. (b) Two identical charges. (c) Two charges w ith opposite signs and
different magnitudes. Can you tell from the diagram which charge has the larger magnitude?
The ability to construct an accurate electric field diagram is an important, useful skill; it makes it m uch easier to estimate, predict,
and therefore calculate the electric field of a sou rce charge. The best way to develop this skill is wit h software that allows you to
place source charges and then will draw the net field upon request. We strongly urge you to search the Int ernet for a program. Once
you’ve found one you like, run several simulations to get the essential ideas of field diagram construct ion. Then practice drawing
field diagrams, and checking your predictions with the comp uter-drawn diagrams.
Rotation of a Dipole due to an Electric Field
In example we discussed, and calculated, the electric field of a dipole: two equal and opposite charges tha t are “close” to
each other. (In this context, “close” means that the distance d between the two charges is much, much less than the di stance of the
field point P, the location where you are calculating the field.) Let’s now consider what happens to a dipole when it is placed in an
external field. We assume that the dipole is a permanent dipole; it exists without the field, and does not break apar t in the
external field.
For now, we deal with only the simplest case: The extern al field is uniform in space. Suppose we have the situat ion depicted in
Figure, where we denote the distance between the charg es as the vector, pointing from the negative charge to the positive
charge.
Figure: A dipole in an external electric field. (a) The net force on the dipole is zero, but the net to rque is not. As a result, the
dipole rotates, becoming aligned with the external f ield. (b) The dipole moment is a convenient way to c haracterize this effect. The
points in the same direction as.

2.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515The forces on the two charges are equal and opposite, so there is no net force on the dipole. However, there is a torqu e:
The quantity (the magnitude of each charge multipl ied by the vector distance between them) is a proper ty of the dipole; its value,
as you can see, determines the torque that the dipole experiences in the external field. It is useful, th erefore, to define this product
as the so-called dipole moment of the dipole:
We can therefore write
Recall that a torque changes the angular velocity o f an object, the dipole, in this case. In this situatio n, the effect is to rotate the
dipole (that is, align the direction of) so that it is pa rallel to the direction of the external field.
Induced Dipoles
Neutral atoms are, by definition, electrically neutra l; they have equal amounts of positive and negative charge. Furthermore, since
they are spherically symmetrical, they do not have a “built-in” dipole moment the way most asymmetrical mo lecules do. They
obtain one, however, when placed in an external elect ric field, because the external field causes opposit ely directed forces on the
positive nucleus of the atom versus the negative ele ctrons that surround the nucleus. The result is a new c harge distribution of the
atom, and therefore, an induced dipole moment (Figure).
Figure: A dipole is induced in a neutral atom by an external electric field. The induced dipole moment is aligned with the
external field.
An important fact here is that, just as for a rotated polar molecule, the result is that the dipole momen t ends up aligned parallel to
the external electric field. Generally, the magnitude of an induced dipole is much smaller than that of a n inherent dipole. For both
kinds of dipoles, notice that once the alignment of the dipole (rotated or induced) is complete, the ne t effect is to decrease the total
electric field
in the regions outside the dipole charges (Figure). By “outside” we mean further from the charges than they are from each
other. This effect is crucial for capacitors, as you wil l see in Capacitance.

2.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515
Figure: The net electric field is the vector sum of t he field of the dipole plus the external field.
Recall that we found the electric field of a dipole in ex ample. If we rewrite it in terms of the dipole moment we get:
The form of this field is shown in Figure. Notice tha t along the plane perpendicular to the axis of the dipole and midway
between the charges, the direction of the electric f ield is opposite that of the dipole and gets weaker th e further from the axis one
goes. Similarly, on the axis of the dipole (but outsid e it), the field points in the same direction as the d ipole, again getting weaker
the further one gets from the charges.

Examples
In an ionized helium atom, the most probable distanc e between the nucleus and the electron is. What is t he
electric field due to the nucleus at the location of th e electron?
Strategy
Note that although the electron is mentioned, it is n ot used in any calculation. The problem asks for an electric field, not a
force; hence, there is only one charge involved, and the problem specifically asks for the field due to t he nucleus. Thus, the
electron is a red herring; only its distance matters. Also, since the distance between the two protons in the nucleus is much,
much smaller than the distance of the electron from the nucleus, we can treat the two protons as a single charge +2 e (Figure
Figure: A schematic representation of a helium atom. Again, helium physically looks nothing like this, but this sort of
diagram is helpful for calculating the electric fiel d of the nucleus.
SolutionExample: The E-field of an Atom

2.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515The electric field is calculated by
Since there is only one source charge (the nucleus), this expression simplifies to
Here, (since there are two protons) and r is given; substituting gives
The direction of is radially away from the nucleus in all directions. Why? Because a positive test charg e placed in this
field would accelerate radially away from the nucleus (since it is also positively charged), and again, the convention is
that the direction of the electric field vector is de fined in terms of the direction of the force it would apply to positive
test charges.

a. Find the electric field (magnitude and direction) a di stance z above the midpoint between two equal charges that are a
distance d apart (Figure). Check that your result is consistent wit h what you’d expect when.
b. The same as part (a), only this time make the right-ha nd charge instead of.
Figure: Finding the field of two identical source cha rges at the point. Due to the symmetry, the net fiel d at \(P\) is
entirely vertical. (Notice that this is not true away from the midline between the charges.)
Strategy
We add the two fields as vectors, per Equation. Notice that the system (and therefore the field) is symmetr ical about
the vertical axis; as a result, the horizontal compon ents of the field vectors cancel. This simplifies the math. Also, we take
care to express our final answer in terms of only qua ntities that are given in the original statement of the problem:,,,
and constants.Example: The E-Field above Two Equal Charges (Dipole)

2.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515
Figure. Note that the horizontal components of the electric fiel ds from the two charges cancel each other out,
while the vertical components add together.
Solution
a. By symmetry, the horizontal (x)-components of cancel (Figure);
The vertical (z)-component is given by
Since none of the other components survive, this is the entire electric field, and it points in the directio n. Notice that
this calculation uses the principle of superposition; we calculate the fields of the two charges independ ently and then
add them together.
What we want to do now is replace the quantities in th is expression that we don’t know (such as), or can’t ea sily
measure (such as with quantities that we do know, or can m easure. In this case, by geometry,
and
Thus, substituting,
Simplifying, the desired answer is

2.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76515b. If the source charges are equal and opposite, the vertica l components cancel because
and we get, for the horizontal component of.
Significance
It is a very common and very useful technique in ph ysics to check whether your answer is reasonable by eva luating it at
extreme cases. In this example, we should evaluate the field expressions for the cases, and, and
confirm that the resulting expressions match our physical expectations. Let’s do so:
Let’s start with Equation, the field of two identica l charges. From far away (i.e.,), the two source charges
should “merge” and we should then “see” the field of just one charge, of size 2 q. So, let; then we can neglect in
Equation to obtain
which is the correct expression for a field at a distance z away from a charge.
Next, we consider the field of equal and opposite char ges, Equation. It can be shown (via a Taylor expans ion) that
for,, this becomes
which is the field of a dipole, a system that we will st udy in more detail later in this section. (Note that the units of are
still correct in this expression, since the units o f d in the numerator cancel the unit of the “extra” z in the denominator.)
If z is very large, then, as it should; the two charges “merge” and so can cel out.
What is the electric field due to a single point particl e?
Answer
This page titled 2.5: Electric Field is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
5.5: Electric Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
5.7: Electric Field Lines by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me2.
5.8: Electric Dipoles by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Exercise

2.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765162.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
For a line charge, a surface charge, and a volume char ge, the summation in the definition of an Electric field discussed previously
becomes an integral and is replaced by,, or, respec tively:
The integrals in Equations - are generalizations of the expression for the field of a point charge. They im plicitly include
and assume the principle of superposition. The “trick ” to using them is almost always in coming up with co rrect expressions for,
, or, as the case may be, expressed in terms of r, and also expressing the charge density function app ropriately. It may be
constant; it might be dependent on location.
Note carefully the meaning of in these equations: I t is the distance from the charge element () to the l ocation of
interest, (the point in space where you want to deter mine the field). However, don’t confuse this with the me aning of; we
are using it and the vector notation to write three integ rals at once. That is, Equation is actually
Examples
Find the electric field a distance above the midpoi nt of a straight line segment of length that carrie s a uniform line charge
density.
Strategy
Since this is a continuous charge distribution, we conce ptually break the wire segment into differential piec es of length,
each of which carries a differential amount of charge
Then, we calculate the differential field created by two symmetrically placed pieces of the wire, using th e symmetry of the
setup to simplify the calculation (Figure). Finally, we integrate this differential field expression over t he length of the
wire (half of it, actually, as we explain below) to obtain th e complete electric field expression.Example: Electric Field of a Line Segment

2.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. The ele ctric field at point can be found by applying the superposition
principle to symmetrically placed charge elements and integrating.
Solution
Before we jump into it, what do we expect the field to “look like” from far away? Since it is a finite line segment, from
far away, it should look like a point charge. We will check the expression we get to see if it meets this expectation.
The electric field for a line charge is given by the gene ral expression
The symmetry of the situation (our choice of the two identical differential pieces of charge) implies th e horizontal ()components of the field cancel, so that the net field poi nts in the -direction. Let’s check this formally.
The total field is the vector sum of the fields from each of the two charge elements (call them and, for now):
Because the two charge elements are identical and ar e the same distance away from the point where we want t o
calculate the field,, so those components cancel. This leaves
These components are also equal, so we have
where our differential line element is, in this ex ample, since we are integrating along a line of charg e that lies on
the -axis. (The limits of integration are 0 to, not to, because we have constructed the net field from t wo
differential pieces of charge. If we integrated along th e entire length, we would pick up an erroneous factor of 2.)
In principle, this is complete. However, to actually calc ulate this integral, we need to eliminate all the var iables that are
not given. In this case, both and change as we integ rate outward to the end of the line charge, so those are the
variables to get rid of. We can do that the same way we did fo r the two point charges: by noticing that
and

2.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516Substituting, we obtain
which simplifies to
Significance
Notice, once again, the use of symmetry to simplify the problem. This is a very common strategy for calculati ng electric
fields. The fields of nonsymmetrical charge distribut ions have to be handled with multiple integrals and ma y need to be
calculated numerically by a computer.
Find the electric field at the origin (point), a di stance to the left of a straight line segment of l ength that carries a
uniform positive line charge density.
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. Symmetry implies that the electric field at point is along t he x-axis.
Strategy
Since this is a continuous charge distribution, we conce ptually break the wire segment into differential piec es of length,
each of which carries a differential amount of charge
Then, we conclude that because of symmetry, the field due to each segment is along the x-axis and directed towards.
The field will point towards if the charge were negat ive. We then integrate the differential field expre ssion over the
length of the wire, from to to obtain the complete ele ctric field expression.
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. The ele ctric field at point can be found by applying the superposition
principle to symmetrically placed charge elements and integrating.
Solution
The electric field for a line charge is given by the gene ral expression
The symmetry of the situation implies that there ar e only horizontal ()-components of the field. Since t he charge is
positive, the direction of the field is.
So we haveExample: Electric Field of a Line Segment along the axis of the segment

2.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516where our differential line element is, in this ex ample, since we are integrating along a line of charg e that lies on
the -axis. (The limits of integration are to.
In principle, this is complete. However, to actually calc ulate this integral, we need to eliminate all the var iables that are
not given. In this case, both and change as we integ rate outward to the end of the line charge, so those are the
variables to get rid of. We can do that the same way we did fo r the two point charges: by noticing that
The result is then:
Find the electric field a distance above the midpoi nt of a straight line segment of length that carrie s a uniform line charge
density.
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. The ele ctric field at point can be found by applying the superposition
principle to symmetrically placed charge elements and integrating.
Strategy
Since this is a continuous charge distribution, we conce ptually break the wire segment into differential piec es of length,
each of which carries a differential amount of charge
Then, we calculate the and components of the differ ential field created by a piece of the wire. We then integrate
these differential field expressions over the length o f the wire.Example: Electric Field of a Line Segment With No Symmetry

2.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516
Figure: A uniformly charged segment of wire. The ele ctric field at point can be found by applying the superposition
principle to symmetrically placed charge elements and integrating.
Solution
Before we jump into it, what do we expect the field to “look like” from far away? Since it is a finite line segment, from
far away, it should look like a point charge. We will check the expression we get to see if it meets this expectation.
The electric field for a line charge is given by the gene ral expression
The symmetry of the situation (our choice of the two identical differential pieces of charge) implies th e horizontal ()components of the field cancel, so that the net field poi nts in the -direction. Let’s check this formally.
The total field is the vector sum of the fields from each of the two charge elements (call them and, for now):
Because the two charge elements are identical and ar e the same distance away from the point where we want t o
calculate the field,, so those components cancel. This leaves
These components are also equal, so we have
where our differential line element is, in this ex ample, since we are integrating along a line of charg e that lies on
the -axis. (The limits of integration are 0 to, not to, because we have constructed the net field from t wo
differential pieces of charge. If we integrated along th e entire length, we would pick up an erroneous factor of 2.)
In principle, this is complete. However, to actually calc ulate this integral, we need to eliminate all the var iables that are
not given. In this case, both and change as we integ rate outward to the end of the line charge, so those are the
variables to get rid of. We can do that the same way we did fo r the two point charges: by noticing that
and
Substituting, we obtain

2.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516which simplifies to
Significance
Notice, once again, the use of symmetry to simplify the problem. This is a very common strategy for calculati ng electric
fields. The fields of nonsymmetrical charge distribut ions have to be handled with multiple integrals and ma y need to be
calculated numerically by a computer.

Find the electric field a distance above the midpoint of an infinite line of charge that carries a uniform line ch arge density.
Strategy
This is exactly like the preceding example, except the l imits of integration will be to.
Solution
Again, the horizontal components cancel out, so we wind up wit h
where our differential line element dl is dx, in this example, since we are integrating along a l ine of charge that lies on
the x-axis. Again,
Substituting, we obtainExample: Electric Field of an Infinite Line of Charge

2.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516which simplifies to
Significance
Our strategy for working with continuous charge distribu tions also gives useful results for charges with infinit e
dimension.
In the case of a finite line of charge, note that for, dominates the L in the denominator, so that Equation simplifies to
If you recall that the total charge on the wire, we have retr ieved the expression for the field of a point charge, as e xpected.
In the limit on the other hand, we get the field of an infinite straight wire, which is a straight wire whose length is much,
much greater than either of its other dimensions, a nd also much, much greater than the distance at which the field is to be
calculated:
An interesting artifact of this infinite limit is tha t we have lost the usual dependence that we are used to. This will become
even more intriguing in the case of an infinite plane.
A ring has a uniform charge density, with units of c oulomb per unit meter of arc. Find the electric fiel d at a point on the axis
passing through the center of the ring.
Strategy
We use the same procedure as for the charged wire. T he difference here is that the charge is distribute d on a circle. We
divide the circle into infinitesimal elements shaped as arc s on the circle and use polar coordinates shown in Figure.
Figure: The system and variable for calculating the e lectric field due to a ring of charge.
Solution
The electric field for a line charge is given by the gene ral expressionExample: Electric Field due to a Ring of Charge

2.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516A general element of the arc between and is of len gth and therefore contains a charge equal to. The
element is at a distance of from, the angle is and th erefore the electric field is
Significance
As usual, symmetry simplified this problem, in this par ticular case resulting in a trivial integral. Also, wh en we take the
limit of, we find that
as we expect.
Find the electric field of a circular thin disk of ra dius and uniform charge density at a distance above the center of the disk
(Figure)
Figure: A uniformly charged disk. As in the line char ge example, the field above the center of this disk c an be calculated
by taking advantage of the symmetry of the charge di stribution.
Strategy
The electric field for a surface charge is given by
To solve surface charge problems, we break the surface into symmetrical differential “stripes” that match th e shape of the
surface; here, we’ll use rings, as shown in the figure. Again, by symmetry, the horizontal components cancel and the field is
entirely in the vertical direction. The vertical co mponent of the electric field is extracted by multiplyin g by, soExample: The Field of a Disk

2.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516As before, we need to rewrite the unknown factors in the int egrand in terms of the given quantities. In this case,
(Please take note of the two different “ ’s” here; is the distance from the differential ring of charge t o the point where
we wish to determine the field, whereas is the distance from the center of the disk to the differential rin g of charge.) Also,
we already performed the polar angle integral in writing down.
Solution
Substituting all this in, we get
or, more simply,
Significance
Again, it can be shown (via a Taylor expansion) that when, thi s reduces to
which is the expression for a point charge.
How would the above limit change with a uniformly charged re ctangle instead of a disk?
Answer
The point charge would be where and are the sides of t he rectangle but otherwise identical.
As, Equation reduces to the field of an infinite pla ne, which is a flat sheet whose area is much, much great er than its
thickness, and also much, much greater than the distanc e at which the field is to be calculated:
Note that this field is constant. This surprising resu lt is, again, an artifact of our limit, although one t hat we will make use of
repeatedly in the future. To understand why this happ ens, imagine being placed above an infinite plane o f constant charge. Does the
plane look any different if you vary your altitude? No—you still see the plane going off to infinity, no matter how far you are from
it. It is important to note that Equation is because we are above the plane. If we were below, the field woul d point in the
direction.Exercise

2.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76516Find the electric field everywhere resulting from two infin ite planes with equal but opposite charge densities (Figu re).
Figure: Two charged infinite planes. Note the direct ion of the electric field.
Strategy
We already know the electric field resulting from a single infinite plane, so we may use the principle of superposition to
find the field from two.
Solution
The electric field points away from the positively c harged plane and toward the negatively charged plane. Since
the are equal and opposite, this means that in the region outside of the two planes, the electric field s cancel each other
out to zero. However, in the region between the planes, the ele ctric fields add, and we get
for the electric field. The is because in the figure, t he field is pointing in the +x-direction.
Significance
Systems that may be approximated as two infinite plane s of this sort provide a useful means of creating un iform electric
fields.
What would the electric field look like in a system with two parallel positively charged planes with equal charge dens ities?
Answer
The electric field would be zero in between, and have m agnitude everywhere else.
This page titled 2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributi ons is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Example: The Field of Two Infinite Planes
Exercise

2.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765362.7: Electric Flux
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the concept of flux
Describe electric flux
Calculate electric flux for a given situation
The concept of flux describes how much of something goes through a give n area. More formally, it is the dot product of a vect or
field (in this chapter, the electric field) with an ar ea. You may conceptualize the flux of an electric fi eld as a measure of the number
of electric field lines passing through an area (Figu re). The larger the area, the more field lines go th rough it and, hence, the
greater the flux; similarly, the stronger the electr ic field is (represented by a greater density of li nes), the greater the flux. On the
other hand, if the area rotated so that the plane is ali gned with the field lines, none will pass through and there wi ll be no flux.
Figure: The flux of an electric field through the sh aded area captures information about the “number” of electric field lines
passing through the area. The numerical value of the electric flux depends on the magnitudes of the electr ic field and the area, as
well as the relative orientation of the area with re spect to the direction of the electric field.
A macroscopic analogy that might help you imagine t his is to put a hula hoop in a flowing river. As you cha nge the angle of the
hoop relative to the direction of the current, more or less of the flow will go through the hoop. Similarly, the amount of flow
through the hoop depends on the strength of the curr ent and the size of the hoop. Again, flux is a general concept; we can also use it
to describe the amount of sunlight hitting a solar p anel or the amount of energy a telescope receives f rom a distant star, for
example.
To quantify this idea, Figure shows a planar surface of area that is perpendicular to the uniform elect ric field. If
N field lines pass through, then we know from the def inition of electric field lines (Electric Charges and Fields) that,
or.
The quantity is the electric flux through. We represent the electric flux through an open surface like by the symbol.
Electric flux is a scalar quantity and has an SI unit of newton-meters squared per coulomb (). Notice that may
also be written as, demonstrating that electric flux is a measure of the number of field lines crossing a s urface.
Figure: (a) A planar surface of area is perpendicul ar to the electric field. N field lines cross surface. (b) A surface
of area whose projection onto the xz-plane is. The same number of field lines cross each surface.
Now consider a planar surface that is not perpendicula r to the field. How would we represent the electric flux? Figure shows
a surface of area that is inclined at an angle to the xz-plane and whose projection in that plane is (area). The areas areLearning Objectives

2.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536related by. Because the same number of field lines crosses both and, the fluxes through both surfaces must be
the same. The flux through is therefore. Designating as a unit vector normal to (see Figure), we
obtain
Check out this video to observe what happens to the flux as the area cha nges in size and angle, or the electric field changes in
strength.
Area Vector
For discussing the flux of a vector field, it is help ful to introduce an area vector. This allows us to wr ite the last equation in a
more compact form. What should the magnitude of the a rea vector be? What should the direction of the are a vector be? What are
the implications of how you answer the previous question?
The area vector of a flat surface of area A has the following magnitude and direction:
Magnitude is equal to area (A)
Direction is along the normal to the surface; that is, pe rpendicular to the surface.
Since the normal to a flat surface can point in eith er direction from the surface, the direction of the area vector of an open surface
needs to be chosen, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The direction of the area vector of an open surface needs to be chosen; it could be either of the two cases displayed
here. The area vector of a part of a closed surface i s defined to point from the inside of the closed space to the outside. This rule
gives a unique direction.
Since is a unit normal to a surface, it has two possibl e directions at every point on that surface (Figure). For an open
surface, we can use either direction, as long as we are c onsistent over the entire surface. of the figure shows seve ral cases.Note

2.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536
Figure: (a) Two potential normal vectors arise at eve ry point on a surface. (b) The outward normal is used to calculate the flux
through a closed surface. (c) Only has been given a c onsistent set of normal vectors that allows us to define the flux through the
surface.
However, if a surface is closed, then the surface enclo ses a volume. In that case, the direction of the normal vector at any point on
the surface points from the inside to the outside. On a closed surface such as that of Figure, is chosen to be the outward
normal at every point, to be consistent with the sign convention f or electric charge.
Electric Flux
Now that we have defined the area vector of a surface, we can define the electric flux of a uniform electri c field through a flat area
as the scalar product of the electric field and the area v ector:
Figure shows the electric field of an oppositely char ged, parallel-plate system and an imaginary box betwe en the plates. The
electric field between the plates is uniform and poi nts from the positive plate toward the negative plate. A calculation of the flux of
this field through various faces of the box shows that the net flux through the box is zero. Why does the flux can cel out here?

2.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536
Figure: Electric flux through a cube, placed betwee n two charged plates. Electric flux through the bott om face (ABCD) is
negative, because is in the opposite direction to the normal to the surface. The electric flux through th e top face (FGHK) is
positive, because the electric field and the normal a re in the same direction. The electric flux through the other faces is zero, since
the electric field is perpendicular to the normal ve ctors of those faces. The net electric flux through th e cube is the sum of fluxes
through the six faces. Here, the net flux through the cube is equal to zero. The magnitude of the flux th rough rectangle BCKF is
equal to the magnitudes of the flux through both the top and bottom faces.
The reason is that the sources of the electric field are outside the box. Therefore, if any electric fie ld line enters the volume of the
box, it must also exit somewhere on the surface beca use there is no charge inside for the lines to land on. Therefore, quite generally,
electric flux through a closed surface is zero if th ere are no sources of electric field, whether positive or negative charges, inside the
enclosed volume. In general, when field lines leave (or “flow out of”) a closed surface, is positive; when they enter (or “flow
into”) the surface, is negative.
Any smooth, non-flat surface can be replaced by a col lection of tiny, approximately flat surfaces, as shown in Figure. If we
divide a surface S into small patches, then we notice that, as the patch es become smaller, they can be approximated by flat su rfaces.
This is similar to the way we treat the surface of Ear th as locally flat, even though we know that globally, it is approximately
spherical.
Figure: A surface is divided into patches to find the flux.
To keep track of the patches, we can number them from 1 through N. Now, we define the area vector for each patch as th e area of
the patch pointed in the direction of the normal. L et us denote the area vector for the ith patch by. (We have used the symbol

2.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536to remind us that the area is of an arbitrarily small patch.) With sufficiently small patches, we may appr oximate the electric field
over any given patch as uniform. Let us denote the average electric field at the location of the ith patch by.
Therefore, we can write the electric flux through the are a of the ith patch as
The flux through each of the individual patches can be constructed in this manner and then added to gi ve us an estimate of the net
flux through the entire surface S, which we denote simply as.
This estimate of the flux gets better as we decrease th e size of the patches. However, when you use smaller pa tches, you need more
of them to cover the same surface. In the limit of in finitesimally small patches, they may be considered t o have area dA and unit
normal. Since the elements are infinitesimal, they may be assumed to be planar, and may be taken as con stant over any
element. Then the flux through an area dA is given by. It is positive when the angle between and is less than
and negative when the angle is greater than. The n et flux is the sum of the infinitesimal flux element s over the entire
surface. With infinitesimally small patches, you nee d infinitely many patches, and the limit of the sum be comes a surface integral.
With representing the integral over S,
In practical terms, surface integrals are computed b y taking the antiderivatives of both dimensions def ining the area, with the edges
of the surface in question being the bounds of the integ ral.
To distinguish between the flux through an open surfa ce like that of Figure and the flux through a close d surface (one that
completely bounds some volume), we represent flux through a closed surface by
where the circle through the integral symbol simply means that the surface is closed, and we are integrat ing over the entire thing. If
you only integrate over a portion of a closed surface, t hat means you are treating a subset of it as an open surface.
Examples
A constant electric field of magnitude points in th e direction of the positive z-axis (Figure). What is the electric flux
through a rectangle with sides a and b in the (a) xy-plane and in the (b) xz-plane?
Figure: Calculating the flux of through a rectangu lar surface.
StrategyExample: Flux of a Uniform Electric Field

2.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536Apply the definition of flux:, where the definition of dot product is crucial.
Solution
1. In this case,.
2. Here, the direction of the area vector is either along the positive y-axis or toward the negative y-axis. Therefore, the
scalar product of the electric field with the area vector is zero, giving zero flux.
Significance
The relative directions of the electric field and area c an cause the flux through the area to be zero.
A constant electric field of magnitude points in t he direction of the positive z-axis (Figure). What is the net electric
flux through a cube?
Figure: Calculating the flux of through a closed cu bic surface.
Strategy
Apply the definition of flux:, noting that a closed surface eliminates the ambiguity in the direction of
the area vector.
Solution
Through the top face of the cube.
Through the bottom face of the cube,, because the area ve ctor here points downward.
Along the other four sides, the direction of the area vector is perpendicular to the direction of the elec tric field.
Therefore, the scalar product of the electric field with the area vector is zero, giving zero flux.
The net flux is.
Significance
The net flux of a uniform electric field through a closed surface is zero.Flux of a Uniform Electric Field through a Closed Surface

2.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536A uniform electric field of magnitude 10 N/C is dir ected parallel to the yz-plane at above the xy-plane, as shown in
Figure. What is the electric flux through the plane surface of area located in the xz-plane? Assume that points in
the positive y-direction.
Figure: The electric field produces a net electric f lux through the surface S.
Strategy
Apply, where the direction and magnitude of the electri c field are constant.
Solution
The angle between the uniform electric field and th e unit normal to the planar surface is. Since both the
direction and magnitude are constant, E comes outside the integral. All that is left is a surf ace integral over dA, which is
A. Therefore, using the open-surface equation, we find that the electric flux through the surface is
Significance
Again, the relative directions of the field and the a rea matter, and the general equation with the integr al will simplify to
the simple dot product of area and electric field.
What angle should there be between the electric fiel d and the surface shown in Figure in the previous exa mple so that no
electric flux passes through the surface?
Solution
Place it so that its unit normal is perpendicular to.Example: Electric Flux through a Plane, Integral Method
Exercise

2.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76536What is the total flux of the electric field through t he rectangular surface shown in Figure?
Figure: Since the electric field is not constant over the surface, an integration is necessary to determine t he flux.
Strategy
Apply. We assume that the unit normal to the given surface points in the positive z-direction, so.
Since the electric field is not uniform over the surf ace, it is necessary to divide the surface into infi nitesimal strips along
which is essentially constant. As shown in Figure, these strips are parallel to the x-axis, and each strip has an area
Solution
From the open surface integral, we find that the net flux throug h the rectangular surface is
Significance
For a non-constant electric field, the integral method is required.
If the electric field in Example is. what is the flux t hrough the rectangular area?
Solution
This page titled 2.7: Electric Flux is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
6.2: Electric Flux by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Example: Inhomogeneous Electric Field
Exercise

2.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765372.8: Gauss’s Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
State Gauss’s law
Explain the conditions under which Gauss’s law may be used
Apply Gauss’s law in appropriate systems
Flux is a general and broadly applicable concept in physics. However, in this chapter, we concentrate on the f lux of the electric
field. This allows us to introduce Gauss’s law, which is particularly useful for finding the electric fields of charge distributions
exhibiting spatial symmetry. The main topics discussed h ere are
1. Electric flux. We define electric flux for both open and closed surfaces.
2. Gauss’s law. We derive Gauss’s law for an arbitrary charge distribution and examine the role of electric flux in Gauss’s law.
3. Calculating electric fields with Gauss’s law. The main focus of this chapter is to explain how to use Ga uss’s law to find the
electric fields of spatially symmetrical charge distribu tions. We discuss the importance of choosing a Gaussian surface and
provide examples involving the applications of Gauss’s la w.
4. Electric fields in conductors. Gauss’s law provides useful insight into the absence of el ectric fields in conducting materials.
Figure: This chapter introduces the concept of flux, which relates a physical quantity and the area throug h which it is flowing.
Although we introduce this concept with the electric field, the concept may be used for many other quant ities, such as fluid flow.
(credit: modification of work by “Alessandro”/Flickr)
So far, we have found that the electrostatic field beg ins and ends at point charges and that the field of a point charge varies
inversely with the square of the distance from that c harge. These characteristics of the electrostatic f ield lead to an important
mathematical relationship known as Gauss’s law. This law is named in honor of the extraordinary German mathemat ician and
scientist Karl Friedrich Gauss (Figure). Gauss’s law gives us an elegantly simple way of finding the electric field, and, as you
will see, it can be much easier to use than the integr ation method described in the previous chapter. Howeve r, there is a catch—
Gauss’s law has a limitation in that, while always true, it can be readily applied only for charge distribution s with certain
symmetries.Learning Objectives

2.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537
Figure: Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) was a legenda ry mathematician of the nineteenth century. Althoug h his major
contributions were to the field of mathematics, he al so did important work in physics and astronomy.
We can now determine the electric flux through an ar bitrary closed surface due to an arbitrary charge di stribution. We found that if
a closed surface does not have any charge inside wher e an electric field line can terminate, then any ele ctric field line entering the
surface at one point must necessarily exit at some other point of the surface. Therefore, if a closed surfa ce does not have any
charges inside the enclosed volume, then the electri c flux through the surface is zero. Now, what happens to the electric flux if there
are some charges inside the enclosed volume? Gauss’s law giv es a quantitative answer to this question.
To get a feel for what to expect, let’s calculate th e electric flux through a spherical surface around a positive point charge, since
we already know the electric field in such a situation. Recall that when we place the point charge at the or igin of a coordinate
system, the electric field at a point that is at a distan ce from the charge at the origin is given by
where is the radial vector from the charge at the or igin to the point P. We can use this electric field to find the flux thro ugh the
spherical surface of radius r, as shown in Figure.
Figure: A closed spherical surface surrounding a point charge q.
Then we apply to this system and substitute known val ues. On the sphere, and so for an infinitesimal area
dA,
We now find the net flux by integrating this flux over the surface of the sphere:

2.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537where the total surface area of the spherical surface is. This gives the flux through the closed spherical surface at radius as
A remarkable fact about this equation is that the f lux is independent of the size of the spherical surfa ce. This can be directly
attributed to the fact that the electric field of a point charge decreases as with distance, which just can cels the rate of
increase of the surface area.
Electric Field Lines Picture
An alternative way to see why the flux through a close d spherical surface is independent of the radius of the surface is to look at the
electric field lines. Note that every field line from q that pierces the surface at radius also pierces the su rface at (Figure).
Figure: Flux through spherical surfaces of radii and enclosing a charge q are equal, independent of the size of the
surface, since all E-field lines that pierce one surface from the inside t o outside direction also pierce the other surface in t he same
direction.
Therefore, the net number of electric field lines pa ssing through the two surfaces from the inside to outs ide direction is equal. This
net number of electric field lines, which is obtained by subtracting the number of lines in the directio n from outside to inside from
the number of lines in the direction from inside to ou tside gives a visual measure of the electric flux through t he surfaces.
You can see that if no charges are included within a closed surface, then the electric flux through it must be zero. A typical field line
enters the surface at and leaves at. Every line t hat enters the surface must also leave that surface. Hence the net “flow” of
the field lines into or out of the surface is zero (Figure). The same thing happens if charges of equal and opposite sign are
included inside the closed surface, so that the total c harge included is zero (Figure). A surface that inclu des the same amount
of charge has the same number of field lines crossing it, regardless of the shape or size of the surface, a s long as the surface
encloses the same amount of charge (Figure).

2.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537
Figure: Understanding the flux in terms of field line s. (a) The electric flux through a closed surface due to a charge outside
that surface is zero. (b) Charges are enclosed, but bec ause the net charge included is zero, the net flux th rough the closed surface is
also zero. (c) The shape and size of the surfaces that e nclose a charge does not matter because all surfaces enc losing the same
charge have the same flux.
Statement of Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law generalizes this result to the case of any nu mber of charges and any location of the charges in t he space inside the
closed surface. According to Gauss’s law, the flux of the electric field through any closed surface, also cal led a Gaussian
surface, is equal to the net charge enclosed divided by the per mittivity of free space:
This equation holds for charges of either sign, because we define the area vector of a closed surfa ce to point outward. If the
enclosed charge is negative (Figure), then the flux thr ough either or is negative.
Figure: The electric flux through any closed surface surrounding a point charge q is given by Gauss’s law. (a) Enclosed charge
is positive. (b) Enclosed charge is negative.
The Gaussian surface does not need to correspond to a r eal, physical object; indeed, it rarely will. It is a mathematical construct that
may be of any shape, provided that it is closed. Howeve r, since our goal is to integrate the flux over it, we tend to choose shapes
that are highly symmetrical.
If the charges are discrete point charges, then we jus t add them. If the charge is described by a continuou s distribution, then we
need to integrate appropriately to find the total c harge that resides inside the enclosed volume. For e xample, the flux through the

2.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537Gaussian surface of Figure is
Note that is simply the sum of the point charges. If the charge distribution were continuous, we would need t o integrate
appropriately to compute the total charge within the Ga ussian surface.
Figure: The flux through the Gaussian surface shown, du e to the charge distribution, is.
Recall that the principle of superposition holds for the electric field. Therefore, the total electric fi eld at any point, including those
on the chosen Gaussian surface, is the sum of all the electric fields present at this point. This allows us to write Gauss’s law in
terms of the total electric field.
The flux of the electric field through any closed surface S (a Gaussian surface) is equal to the net charge enclo sed
divided by the permittivity of free space:
To use Gauss’s law effectively, you must have a clear understanding of what each term in the equation repre sents. The field is the
total electric field at every point on the Gaussian surface. This total f ield includes contributions from charges both inside and
outside the Gaussian surface. However, is just the ch arge inside the Gaussian surface. Finally, the Gaussian surface is any
closed surface in space. That surface can coincide with t he actual surface of a conductor, or it can be an im aginary geometric
surface. The only requirement imposed on a Gaussian su rface is that it be closed (Figure).Figure: A Klein bottle partially
filled with a liquid. Could the Klein bottle be used as a Gaussian s urface?
Examples
Calculate the electric flux through each Gaussian surfac e shown in Figure.Gauss's Law
Example: Electric Flux through Gaussian Surfaces

2.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537
Figure: Various Gaussian surfaces and charges.
Strategy
From Gauss’s law, the flux through each surface is given by, where is the charge enclosed by that surface
Solution
For the surfaces and charges shown, we find
a..
b..
c..
d..
e..
Significance
In the special case of a closed surface, the flux cal culations become a sum of charges. In the next section, this will allow
us to work with more complex systems.
Calculate the electric flux through the closed cubical s urface for each charge distribution shown in Figure.Exercise

2.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76537
Figure: A cubical Gaussian surface with various charge distributions.
Answer a
Answer b
Answer c
Answer d
This page titled 2.8: Gauss’s Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
6.3: Explaining Gauss’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
6.1: Prelude to Gauss's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

2.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765382.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law is very helpful in determining expressions for the electric field, even though the law is not d irectly about the electric
field; it is about the electric flux. It turns out th at in situations that have certain symmetries (spheri cal, cylindrical, or planar) in the
charge distribution, we can deduce the electric field based on knowledge of the electric flux. In these syst ems, we can find a
Gaussian surface S over which the electric field has constant magnitud e. Furthermore, if is parallel to everywhere on the
surface, then. (If and are antiparallel everywhere o n the surface,.) Gauss’s law then simplifies to
where A is the area of the surface. Note that these symmetri es lead to the transformation of the flux integral into a product of the
magnitude of the electric field and an appropriate area. When you use this flux in the expression for Ga uss’s law, you obtain an
algebraic equation that you can solve for the magnitude o f the electric field, which looks like
The direction of the electric field at point P is obtained from the symmetry of the charge distrib ution and the type of charge in the
distribution. Therefore, Gauss’s law can be used to determ ine. Here is a summary of the steps we will follow:
1. Identify the spatial symmetry of the charge distribution. This is an important first step that allows us to choose the
appropriate Gaussian surface. As examples, an isolated po int charge has spherical symmetry, and an infinite line of charge
has cylindrical symmetry.
2. Choose a Gaussian surface with the same symmetry as the charge di stribution and identify its consequences. With
this choice, is easily determined over the Gaussian surfa ce.
3. Evaluate the integral over the Gaussian surface, that is, calculate the flux through the surface. The
symmetry of the Gaussian surface allows us to factor o utside the integral.
4. Determine the amount of charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface. This is an evaluation of the right-hand side of the
equation representing Gauss’s law. It is often necessary to perform an integration to obtain the net enclosed charge.
5. Evaluate the electric field of the charge distribution. The field may now be found using the results of steps 3 an d 4.
Basically, there are only three types of symmetry that al low Gauss’s law to be used to deduce the electric field. They are
A charge distribution with spherical symmetry
A charge distribution with cylindrical symmetry
A charge distribution with planar symmetry
To exploit the symmetry, we perform the calculations in appropriate coordinate systems and use the right kind of Gaussian surface
for that symmetry, applying the remaining four steps.
Charge Distribution with Spherical Symmetry
A charge distribution has spherical symmetry if the density of charge depends only on the distanc e from a point in space and not
on the direction. In other words, if you rotate the system, it doesn’t look different. For instance, if a sp here of radius R is uniformly
charged with charge density then the distribution h as spherical symmetry (Figure). On the other hand, if a sphere of radius
R is charged so that the top half of the sphere has u niform charge density and the bottom half has a unif orm charge density
then the sphere does not have spherical symmetry b ecause the charge density depends on the direction (Fi gure). Thus, it
is not the shape of the object but rather the shape of the charge distribution that determines whether o r not a system has spherical
symmetry.
Figure shows a sphere with four different shells, each with its own uniform charge density. Although this is a situation where
charge density in the full sphere is not uniform, the charge density function depends only on the distance from the center and not on
the direction. Therefore, this charge distribution doe s have spherical symmetry.Problem-Solving Strategy: Gauss’s Law

2.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: Illustrations of spherically symmetrical and no nsymmetrical systems. Different shadings indicate differe nt charge
densities. Charges on spherically shaped objects do not n ecessarily mean the charges are distributed with spheric al symmetry. The
spherical symmetry occurs only when the charge density does not depend on the direction. In (a), charges are distributed uniformly
in a sphere. In (b), the upper half of the sphere has a different charge density from the lower half; ther efore, (b) does not have
spherical symmetry. In (c), the charges are in spherica l shells of different charge densities, which means that charge density is only
a function of the radial distance from the center; t herefore, the system has spherical symmetry.
One good way to determine whether or not your problem has spherical symmetry is to look at the charge dens ity function in
spherical coordinates,. If the charge density is only a function of r, that is, then you have spherical symmetry. If
the density depends on or, you could change it by rot ation; hence, you would not have spherical symmetry.
Consequences of symmetry
In all spherically symmetrical cases, the electric fie ld at any point must be radially directed, because the c harge and, hence, the field
must be invariant under rotation. Therefore, using sp herical coordinates with their origins at the center of the spherical charge
distribution, we can write down the expected form of the ele ctric field at a point P located at a distance r from the center:
where is the unit vector pointed in the direction f rom the origin to the field point P. The radial component of the electric field
can be positive or negative. When, the electric fi eld at P points away from the origin, and when, the electric field at
P points toward the origin.
Gaussian surface and flux calculations
We can now use this form of the electric field to ob tain the flux of the electric field through the Gauss ian surface. For spherical
symmetry, the Gaussian surface is a closed spherical surf ace that has the same center as the center of the char ge distribution. Thus,
the direction of the area vector of an area element on the Gaussian surface at any point is parallel to t he direction of the electric
field at that point, since they are both radially direct ed outward (Figure).

2.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: The electric field at any point of the spher ical Gaussian surface for a spherically symmetrical char ge distribution is
parallel to the area element vector at that point, giving flux as the product of the magnitude of elect ric field and the value of the
area. Note that the radius R of the charge distribution and the radius r of the Gaussian surface are different quantities.
The magnitude of the electric field must be the sa me everywhere on a spherical Gaussian surface concentri c with the distribution.
For a spherical surface of radius r:
Using Gauss’s law
According to Gauss’s law, the flux through a closed su rface is equal to the total charge enclosed within t he closed surface divided
by the permittivity of vacuum. Let be the total c harge enclosed inside the distance r from the origin, which is the space
inside the Gaussian spherical surface of radius r. This gives the following relation for Gauss’s law:
Hence, the electric field at point P that is a distance r from the center of a spherically symmetrical charg e distribution has the
following magnitude and direction:
Direction: radial from O to P or from P to O.
The direction of the field at point P depends on whether the charge in the sphere is positi ve or negative. For a net positive charge
enclosed within the Gaussian surface, the direction is from O to P, and for a net negative charge, the direction is fr om P to O. This
is all we need for a point charge, and you will notice that the result above is identical to that for a po int charge. However, Gauss’s
law becomes truly useful in cases where the charge occupie s a finite volume.
Computing Enclosed Charge
The more interesting case is when a spherical charge distribution occupies a volume, and asking what the e lectric field inside the
charge distribution is thus becomes relevant. In thi s case, the charge enclosed depends on the distance r of the field point relative to
the radius of the charge distribution R, such as that shown in Figure.

2.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: A spherically symmetrical charge distribution and the Gaussian surface used for finding the field (a) inside and (b)
outside the distribution.
If point P is located outside the charge distribution—that is, if —then the Gaussian surface containing P encloses all charges
in the sphere. In this case, equals the total charg e in the sphere. On the other hand, if point P is within the spherical charge
distribution, that is, if, then the Gaussian surface en closes a smaller sphere than the sphere of charge di stribution. In this case,
is less than the total charge present in the sphere. Referrin g to Figure, we can write as
The field at a point outside the charge distributio n is also called, and the field at a point inside t he charge distribution is called
. Focusing on the two types of field points, either in side or outside the charge distribution, we can now wri te the magnitude of
the electric field as
Note that the electric field outside a spherically sy mmetrical charge distribution is identical to that of a point charge at the center
that has a charge equal to the total charge of the spherical charge distribution. This is remarkable si nce the charges are not located
at the center only. We now work out specific examples of spherical charge distributions, starting with the case of a uniformly
charged sphere.
A sphere of radius R, such as that shown in Figure, has a uniform volume c harge density. Find the electric field at a
point outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere.
Strategy
Apply the Gauss’s law problem-solving strategy, where we have already worked out the flux calculation.
Solution
The charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface is given by
The answer for electric field amplitude can then be written down immediately for a point outside the sphe re, labeled
and a point inside the sphere, labeled.Example: Uniformly Charged Sphere

2.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538It is interesting to note that the magnitude of the electric field increases inside the material as you go out, since the
amount of charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface inc reases with the volume. Specifically, the charge enclos ed grows
, whereas the field from each infinitesimal element of charge drops off with the net result that the el ectric
field within the distribution increases in strength li nearly with the radius. The magnitude of the electri c field outside the
sphere decreases as you go away from the charges, be cause the included charge remains the same but the di stance
increases. Figure displays the variation of the magn itude of the electric field with distance from the ce nter of a
uniformly charged sphere.
Figure: Electric field of a uniformly charged, non- conducting sphere increases inside the sphere to a maxim um at
the surface and then decreases as. Here,. The electri c field is due to a spherical charge distribution of
uniform charge density and total charge Q as a function of distance from the center of the dist ribution.
The direction of the electric field at any point P is radially outward from the origin if is positive, and inward (i.e.,
toward the center) if is negative. The electric fie ld at some representative space points are displayed i n Figure
whose radial coordinates r are and.
Figure: Electric field vectors inside and outside a un iformly charged sphere.

2.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538Significance
Notice that has the same form as the equation of the electric field of an isolated point charge. In dete rmining the
electric field of a uniform spherical charge distri bution, we can therefore assume that all of the charg e inside the
appropriate spherical Gaussian surface is located at the center of the distribution.
A non-conducting sphere of radius R has a non-uniform charge density that varies with the di stance from its center as given by
where a is a constant. We require so that the charge densi ty is not undefined at. Find the electric field at a point
outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere.
Strategy
Apply the Gauss’s law strategy given above, where we work out the enclosed charge integrals separately for ca ses inside
and outside the sphere.
Solution
Since the given charge density function has only a ra dial dependence and no dependence on direction, we ha ve a
spherically symmetrical situation. Therefore, the magn itude of the electric field at any point is given ab ove and the
direction is radial. We just need to find the enclosed c harge, which depends on the location of the field point.
A note about symbols: We use for locating charges i n the charge distribution and r for locating the field point(s) at the
Gaussian surface(s). The letter R is used for the radius of the charge distribution.
As charge density is not constant here, we need to integ rate the charge density function over the volume en closed by the
Gaussian surface. Therefore, we set up the problem for c harges in one spherical shell, say between and as
shown in Figure. The volume of charges in the shell of infinitesimal width is equal to the product of the area of
surface and the thickness. Multiplying the volume with the density at this location, which is, gives the
charge in the shell:Example: Non-Uniformly Charged Sphere

2.9.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: Spherical symmetry with non-uniform charge di stribution. In this type of problem, we need four rad ii: R is
the radius of the charge distribution, r is the radius of the Gaussian surface, is the inner radius of the sphe rical shell,
and is the outer radius of the spherical shell. The sph erical shell is used to calculate the charge enclosed w ithin
the Gaussian surface. The range for is from 0 to r for the field at a point inside the charge distribution and from 0 to R
for the field at a point outside the charge distribut ion. If, then the Gaussian surface encloses more volume than the
charge distribution, but the additional volume does n ot contribute to.
(a) Field at a point outside the charge distribution. In this case, the Gaussian surface, which contains th e field point
P, has a radius r that is greater than the radius R of the charge distribution,. Therefore, all charges of the charge
distribution are enclosed within the Gaussian surface. No te that the space between and is empty of charges
and therefore does not contribute to the integral over the volume enclosed by the Gaussian surface:
This is used in the general result for above to obtain the electric field at a point outside the charge distribut ion as
where is a unit vector in the direction from the origin to the field point at the Gaussian surface.
(b) Field at a point inside the charge distribution. The Gaussian surface is now buried inside the charge distribution,
with. Therefore, only those charges in the distribu tion that are within a distance r of the center of the spherical
charge distribution count in:
Now, using the general result above for, we find the e lectric field at a point that is a distance r from the center and
lies within the charge distribution as
where the direction information is included by using th e unit radial vector.

2.9.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538Check that the electric fields for the sphere reduce to t he correct values for a point charge.
Solution
In this case, there is only. So, yes.
Charge Distribution with Cylindrical Symmetry
A charge distribution has cylindrical symmetry if the charge density depends only upon the distan ce r from the axis of a cylinder
and must not vary along the axis or with direction ab out the axis. In other words, if your system varies if y ou rotate it around the
axis, or shift it along the axis, you do not have cylindrica l symmetry.
Figure shows four situations in which charges are distri buted in a cylinder. A uniform charge density in an infinite straight
wire has a cylindrical symmetry, and so does an infinit ely long cylinder with constant charge density. An in finitely long cylinder
that has different charge densities along its length, such as a charge density for and for, does not h ave a usable
cylindrical symmetry for this course. Neither does a c ylinder in which charge density varies with the directi on, such as a charge
density for and for. A system with concentric cyl indrical shells, each with uniform charge densities,
albeit different in different shells, as in FiFigure, d oes have cylindrical symmetry if they are infinitely long. The infinite
length requirement is due to the charge density cha nging along the axis of a finite cylinder. In real s ystems, we don’t have infinite
cylinders; however, if the cylindrical object is consi derably longer than the radius from it that we are in terested in, then the
approximation of an infinite cylinder becomes useful.
Figure: To determine whether a given charge distribu tion has cylindrical symmetry, look at the cross-section of an “infinitely
long” cylinder. If the charge density does not depend on the polar angle of the cross-section or along the axis, then you have
cylindrical symmetry. (a) Charge density is constant in the cylinder; (b) upper half of the cylinder has a different charge density
from the lower half; (c) left half of the cylinder has a different charge density from the right half; (d) charges are constant in
different cylindrical rings, but the density does not depend on the polar angle. Cases (a) and (d) have cyl indrical symmetry, whereas
(b) and (c) do not.
Consequences of SAymmetry
In all cylindrically symmetrical cases, the electric f ield at any point must also display cylindrical symmet ry.
Cylindrical symmetry:, where is the distance from th e axis and is a unit vector directed perpendicularl y away from
the axis (Figure).Exercise

2.9.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: The electric field in a cylindrically symmet rical situation depends only on the distance from the axis. The direction of
the electric field is pointed away from the axis for positive charges and toward the axis for negative char ges.
Gaussian surface and flux calculation
To make use of the direction and functional depende nce of the electric field, we choose a closed Gaussian surface in the shape of a
cylinder with the same axis as the axis of the charge distribution. The flux through this surface of radius s and height L is easy to
compute if we divide our task into two parts: (a) a flu x through the flat ends and (b) a flux through the c urved surface (Figure
Figure: The Gaussian surface in the case of cylindrical symmetry. The electric field at a patch is either pa rallel or
perpendicular to the normal to the patch of the Gau ssian surface.
The electric field is perpendicular to the cylindri cal side and parallel to the planar end caps of the surface. The flux through the
cylindrical part is
whereas the flux through the end caps is zero because ther e. Thus, the flux is
Using Gauss’s law
According to Gauss’s law, the flux must equal the amoun t of charge within the volume enclosed by this surface, divided by the
permittivity of free space. When you do the calcula tion for a cylinder of length L, you find that of Gauss’s law is directly
proportional to L. Let us write it as charge per unit length () times length L:
Hence, Gauss’s law for any cylindrically symmetrical ch arge distribution yields the following magnitude of the electric field a
distance s away from the axis:

2.9.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538The charge per unit length depends on whether the f ield point is inside or outside the cylinder of charg e distribution, just as we
have seen for the spherical distribution.
Computing enclosed charge
Let R be the radius of the cylinder within which charges ar e distributed in a cylindrically symmetrical way. Let the field point P be
at a distance s from the axis. (The side of the Gaussian surface inclu des the field point P.) When (that is, when P is outside
the charge distribution), the Gaussian surface include s all the charge in the cylinder of radius R and length L. When (P is
located inside the charge distribution), then only t he charge within a cylinder of radius s and length L is enclosed by the Gaussian
surface:
A very long non-conducting cylindrical shell of rad ius R has a uniform surface charge density Find the electri c field (a) at a
point outside the shell and (b) at a point inside the shell.
Strategy
Apply the Gauss’s law strategy given earlier, where we treat th e cases inside and outside the shell separately.
Solution
a.Electric field at a point outside the shell. For a point outside the cylindrical shell, the Gaussi an surface is the surface
of a cylinder of radius and length L, as shown in Figure. The charge enclosed by the Gaussi an cylinder is
equal to the charge on the cylindrical shell of length L. Therefore, is given by
Figure: A Gaussian surface surrounding a cylindrical she ll.
Hence, the electric field at a point P outside the shell at a distance r away from the axis is
where is a unit vector, perpendicular to the axis an d pointing away from it, as shown in the figure. The ele ctric field at
P points in the direction of given in Figure if and i n the opposite direction to if.
b. Electric field at a point inside the shell. For a point inside the cylindrical shell, the Gaussia n surface is a cylinder
whose radius r is less than R (Figure). This means no charges are included inside the Ga ussian surface:Example: Uniformly Charged Cylindrical Shell

2.9.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: A Gaussian surface within a cylindrical shell.
This gives the following equation for the magnitude o f the electric field at a point whose r is less than R of the shell
of charges.
This gives us
Significance
Notice that the result inside the shell is exactly what we should expect: No enclosed charge means zero electr ic field.
Outside the shell, the result becomes identical to a wire wi th uniform charge.
A thin straight wire has a uniform linear charge den sity. Find the electric field at a distance d from the wire, where d is
much less than the length of the wire.
Solution
; This agrees with the calculation of [link] where we found the electric field by integrating ove r the charged
wire. Notice how much simpler the calculation of this electr ic field is with Gauss’s law.
Charge Distribution with Planar Symmetry
A planar symmetry of charge density is obtained when charges are uniformly spread over a large flat surf ace. In planar symmetry,
all points in a plane parallel to the plane of charge a re identical with respect to the charges.
Consequences of symmetry
We take the plane of the charge distribution to be the xy-plane and we find the electric field at a space poi nt P with coordinates (x,
y, z). Since the charge density is the same at all (x, y)-coordinates in the plane, by symmetry, the electr ic field at P cannot
depend on the x- or y-coordinates of point P, as shown in Figure. Therefore, the electric field a t P can only depend on the
distance from the plane and has a direction either toward the plane or away from the plane. That is, the electric field at P has only a
nonzero z-component.
Uniform charges in xy plane: where z is the distance from the plane and is the unit ve ctor normal to the plane. Note
that in this system,, although of course they point in opposite directions.Exercise

2.9.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538
Figure: The components of the electric field paralle l to a plane of charges cancel out the two charges lo cated symmetrically
from the field point P. Therefore, the field at any point is pointed verti cally from the plane of charges. For any point P and charge
, we can always find a with this effect.
Gaussian surface and flux calculation
In the present case, a convenient Gaussian surface is a box, since the expected electric field points in one direction only. To keep
the Gaussian box symmetrical about the plane of char ges, we take it to straddle the plane of the charges, suc h that one face
containing the field point P is taken parallel to the plane of the charges. In Fi gure, sides I and II of the Gaussian surface (the
box) that are parallel to the infinite plane have b een shaded. They are the only surfaces that give ri se to nonzero flux because the
electric field and the area vectors of the other faces are perpendicular to each other.
Figure: A thin charged sheet and the Gaussian box for finding the electric field at the field point P. The normal to each face
of the box is from inside the box to outside. On two f aces of the box, the electric fields are parallel to the area vectors, and on the
other four faces, the electric fields are perpendicul ar to the area vectors.
Let A be the area of the shaded surface on each side of the plane and
be the magnitude of the electric field at point P. Since sides I and II are at the same distance from the plane, the electric field has
the same magnitude at points in these planes, althou gh the directions of the electric field at these po ints in the two planes are
opposite to each other.
Magnitude at I or II:.
If the charge on the plane is positive, then the dir ection of the electric field and the area vectors ar e as shown in Figure.
Therefore, we find for the flux of electric field through the box
where the zeros are for the flux through the other si des of the box. Note that if the charge on the plane is negative, the directions of
electric field and area vectors for planes I and II are opposite to each other, and we get a negative sig n for the flux. According to
Gauss’s law, the flux must equal. From Figure, we see tha t the charges inside the volume enclosed by the Gaussi an
box reside on an area A of the xy-plane. Hence,
Using the equations for the flux and enclosed charge in Gauss’s law, we can immediately determine the electr ic field at a point at
height z from a uniformly charged plane in the xy-plane:

2.9.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76538The direction of the field depends on the sign of t he charge on the plane and the side of the plane whe re the field point P is located.
Note that above the plane,, while below the plane,.
You may be surprised to note that the electric field does not actually depend on the distance from the p lane; this is an effect of the
assumption that the plane is infinite. In practical terms, the result given above is still a useful approx imation for finite planes near
the center.
This page titled 2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.4: Applying Gauss’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

2.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765392.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
So far, we have generally been working with charges occ upying a volume within an insulator. We now study what h appens when
free charges are placed on a conductor. Generally, in the presence of a (generally external) electric fie ld, the free charge in a
conductor redistributes and very quickly reaches el ectrostatic equilibrium. The resulting charge distrib ution and its electric field
have many interesting properties, which we can investigat e with the help of Gauss’s law and the concept of electric po tential.
The Electric Field inside a Conductor Vanishes
If an electric field is present inside a conductor, it exerts forces on the free electrons (also called conduction electrons), which are
electrons in the material that are not bound to an a tom. These free electrons then accelerate. However, mo ving charges by definition
means nonstatic conditions, contrary to our assumptio n. Therefore, when electrostatic equilibrium is reached, the charge is
distributed in such a way that the electric field inside the conductor vanishes.
If you place a piece of a metal near a positive cha rge, the free electrons in the metal are attracted t o the external positive charge and
migrate freely toward that region. The region the el ectrons move to then has an excess of electrons ove r the protons in the atoms
and the region from where the electrons have migrate d has more protons than electrons. Consequently, the m etal develops a
negative region near the charge and a positive regi on at the far end (Figure). As we saw in the preceding chapter, this
separation of equal magnitude and opposite type of e lectric charge is called polarization. If you remove the external charge, the
electrons migrate back and neutralize the positive reg ion.
Figure: Polarization of a metallic sphere by an exte rnal point charge. The near side of the metal has an opposite surface
charge compared to the far side of the metal. The sph ere is said to be polarized. When you remove the exte rnal charge, the
polarization of the metal also disappears.
The polarization of the metal happens only in the p resence of external charges. You can think of this i n terms of electric fields. The
external charge creates an external electric field. When the metal is placed in the region of this elec tric field, the electrons and
protons of the metal experience electric forces due to this external electric field, but only the condu ction electrons are free to move
in the metal over macroscopic distances. The movement of the conduction electrons leads to the polarizatio n, which creates an
induced electric field in addition to the external electric field (Figure). The net electric field is a vector sum of the fields of
and the surface charge densities and. This means tha t the net field inside the conductor is different fro m the field
outside the conductor.
Figure: In the presence of an external charge q, the charges in a metal redistribute. The electric f ield at any point has three
contributions, from and the induced charges and. N ote that the surface charge distribution will not be uniform in this
case.
The redistribution of charges is such that the sum of the three contributions at any point P inside the conductor is

2.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539Now, thanks to Gauss’s law, we know that there is no net charge enclosed by a Gau ssian surface that is solely within the volume of
the conductor at equilibrium. That is, and hence
Charge on a Conductor
An interesting property of a conductor in static equ ilibrium is that extra charges on the conductor end up on the outer surface of the
conductor, regardless of where they originate. Figure i llustrates a system in which we bring an external posi tive charge inside
the cavity of a metal and then touch it to the insid e surface. Initially, the inside surface of the cavity is negatively charged and the
outside surface of the conductor is positively char ged. When we touch the inside surface of the cavity, t he induced charge is
neutralized, leaving the outside surface and the whole meta l charged with a net positive charge.
Figure: Electric charges on a conductor migrate to t he outside surface no matter where you put them initi ally.
To see why this happens, note that the Gaussian surface i n iFigure (the dashed line) follows the contour of the actual surface
of the conductor and is located an infinitesimal distan ce within it. Since everywhere inside a conductor,
Thus, from Gauss’ law, there is no net charge inside the Gaussian surface. But the Gaussian surface lies jus t below the actual
surface of the conductor; consequently, there is no net c harge inside the conductor. Any excess charge must lie on its surface.
Figure: The dashed line represents a Gaussian surface tha t is just beneath the actual surface of the conductor.
This particular property of conductors is the basis for an extremely accurate method developed by Plimpt on and Lawton in 1936 to
verify Gauss’s law and, correspondingly, Coulomb’s law. A sketch of their apparatus is shown in Figure. Two sp herical shells
are connected to one another through an electromete r E, a device that can detect a very slight amount of charge flowing from one
shell to the other. When switch S is thrown to the lef t, charge is placed on the outer shell by the battery B. Will charge flow through
the electrometer to the inner shell?
No. Doing so would mean a violation of Gauss’s law. Plimpt on and Lawton did not detect any flow and, knowing the sensitivity of
their electrometer, concluded that if the radial dep endence in Coulomb’s law were, would be less than.. More
recent measurements place at less than, a number so sm all that the validity of Coulomb’s law seems indisputable.1

2.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539
Figure: A representation of the apparatus used by Plimp ton and Lawton. Any transfer of charge between the sp heres is
detected by the electrometer E.
The Electric Field at the Surface of a Conductor
If the electric field had a component parallel to t he surface of a conductor, free charges on the surface would move, a situation
contrary to the assumption of electrostatic equilibr ium. Therefore, the electric field is always perpendicu lar to the surface of a
conductor.
At any point just above the surface of a conductor, t he surface charge density and the magnitude of the electric field E are related
by
To see this, consider an infinitesimally small Gaussian cylinder that surrounds a point on the surface of the conductor, as in Figure
. The cylinder has one end face inside and one end f ace outside the surface. The height and cross-sectio nal area of the cylinder
are and, respectively. The cylinder’s sides are perp endicular to the surface of the conductor, and its e nd faces are parallel to
the surface. Because the cylinder is infinitesimall y small, the charge density is essentially constant over the surface enclosed, so
the total charge inside the Gaussian cylinder is. Now E is perpendicular to the surface of the conductor ou tside the conductor
and vanishes within it, because otherwise, the charge s would accelerate, and we would not be in equilibrium. Electric flux therefore
crosses only the outer end face of the Gaussian surfa ce and may be written as since the cylinder is assume d to be small
enough that E is approximately constant over that area. From Gauss’ law,
Thus

2.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539
Figure: An infinitesimally small cylindrical Gaussian su rface surrounds point P, which is on the surface of the conductor. The
field is perpendicular to the surface of the conduct or outside the conductor and vanishes within it.
The infinite conducting plate in Figure has a unifo rm surface charge density. Use Gauss’ law to find the electric field
outside the plate. Compare this result with that previo usly calculated directly.
Figure: A side view of an infinite conducting plate and Gaussian cylinder with cross-sectional area A.
Strategy
For this case, we use a cylindrical Gaussian surface, a side vi ew of which is shown.
Solution
The flux calculation is similar to that for an infin ite sheet of charge from the previous chapter with o ne major exception:
The left face of the Gaussian surface is inside the co nductor where, so the total flux through the Gaussian surface
is EA rather than 2 EA. Then from Gauss’ law,Electric Field of a Conducting Plate

2.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539and the electric field outside the plate is
Significance
This result is in agreement with the result from the prev ious section, and consistent with the rule stated above.
Two large conducting plates carry equal and opposite charges, with a surface charge density of magnitud e,
as shown in Figure. The separation between the plates is. What is the electric field between the plates?
Figure: The electric field between oppositely charge d parallel plates. A test charge is released at the posi tive plate.
Strategy
Solution
Significance
This formula is applicable to more than just a plate. Further more, two-plate systems will be important later.
The isolated conducting sphere (Figure) has a radiu s R and an excess charge q. What is the electric field both inside and
outside the sphere?Electric Field between Oppositely Charged Parallel Plates
A Conducting Sphere

2.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539
Figure: An isolated conducting sphere.
Strategy
Solution
Since r is constant and on the sphere,
For, S is within the conductor, so, and Gauss’s law gives
as expected inside a conductor. If, S encloses the conductor so. From Gauss’s law,
The electric field of the sphere may therefore be wri tten as
Significance Notice that in the region, the electric field due to a charge q placed on an isolated conducting sphere
of radius R is identical to the electric field of a point char ge q located at the center of the sphere. The difference
between the charged metal and a point charge occurs o nly at the space points inside the conductor. For a p oint charge
placed at the center of the sphere, the electric fi eld is not zero at points of space occupied by the s phere, but a conductor
with the same amount of charge has a zero electric f ield at those points (Figure). However, there is no disti nction
at the outside points in space where, and we can repla ce the isolated charged spherical conductor by a poi nt
charge at its center with impunity.

2.10.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539
Figure: Electric field of a positively charged metal sphere. The electric field inside is zero, and the el ectric field
outside is same as the electric field of a point charge at the center, although the charge on the metal sph ere is at the
surface.
How will the system above change if there are charged obje cts external to the sphere?
Solution

If there are other charged objects around, then the charges on the surface of the sphere will not neces sarily be spherically
symmetrical; there will be more in certain direction th an in other directions.
For a conductor with a cavity, if we put a charge ins ide the cavity, then the charge separation takes pla ce in the conductor, with
amount of charge on the inside surface and a amou nt of charge at the outside surface (Figure). For the same
conductor with a charge outside it, there is no exce ss charge on the inside surface; both the positive a nd negative induced
charges reside on the outside surface (Figure).
Figure: (a) A charge inside a cavity in a metal. The distribution of charges at the outer surface does not depend on how the
charges are distributed at the inner surface, since the E-field inside the body of the metal is zero. That mag nitude of the charge on
the outer surface does depend on the magnitude of the charge inside, however. (b) A charge outside a condu ctor containing an inner
cavity. The cavity remains free of charge. The polar ization of charges on the conductor happens at the sur face.
If a conductor has two cavities, one of them having a c harge inside it and the other a charge the polariz ation of the
conductor results in on the inside surface of the c avity a, on the inside surface of the cavity b, and on the outside
surface (Figure). The charges on the surfaces may no t be uniformly spread out; their spread depends upon t he geometry. The
only rule obeyed is that when the equilibrium has bee n reached, the charge distribution in a conductor is such that the electric field
by the charge distribution in the conductor cancels t he electric field of the external charges at all spac e points inside the body of the
conductor.Exercise

2.10.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76539
Figure: The charges induced by two equal and opposite charges in two separate cavities of a conductor. If t he net charge on
the cavity is nonzero, the external surface becomes ch arged to the amount of the net charge.
This page titled 2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.5: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

2.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765212.11: Summary

2.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76521Key Terms
charging by inductionprocess by which an electrically charged object brough t near a
neutral object creates a charge separation in that ob ject
conduction electron electron that is free to move away from its atomic orb it
conductormaterial that allows electrons to move separately from their atomic
orbits; object with properties that allow charges to mo ve about
freely within it
continuous charge distributiontotal source charge composed of so large a number of e lementary
charges that it must be treated as continuous, rather t han discrete
coulomb SI unit of electric charge
Coulomb force another term for the electrostatic force
Coulomb’s lawmathematical equation calculating the electrostatic force vector
between two charged particles
dipole two equal and opposite charges that are fixed close to each other
dipole momentproperty of a dipole; it characterizes the combinati on of distance
between the opposite charges, and the magnitude of th e charges
electric chargephysical property of an object that causes it to be at tracted toward
or repelled from another charged object; each charg ed object
generates and is influenced by a force called an elec tric force
electric fieldphysical phenomenon created by a charge; it “transmit s” a force
between a two charges
electric force noncontact force observed between electrically charg ed objects
electronparticle surrounding the nucleus of an atom and carry ing the
smallest unit of negative charge
electrostatic attractionphenomenon of two objects with opposite charges attract ing each
other
electrostatic forceamount and direction of attraction or repulsion betwe en two
charged bodies; the assumption is that the source charge s have no
acceleration
electrostatic repulsion phenomenon of two objects with like charges repelling each other
electrostatics study of charged objects which are not in motion
field linesmooth, usually curved line that indicates the directi on of the
electric field
field line densitynumber of field lines per square meter passing through an
imaginary area; its purpose is to indicate the field st rength at
different points in space
induced dipoletypically an atom, or a spherically symmetric molecul e; a dipole
created due to opposite forces displacing the positive and negative
charges
infinite straight wirestraight wire whose length is much, much greater than ei ther of its
other dimensions, and also much, much greater than the distance at
which the field is to be calculated

2.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76521insulator material that holds electrons securely within their at omic orbits
ion atom or molecule with more or fewer electrons than p rotons
law of conservation of charge net electric charge of a closed system is constant
linear charge densityamount of charge in an element of a charge distribut ion that is
essentially one-dimensional (the width and height are much, much
smaller than its length); its units are C/m
neutronneutral particle in the nucleus of an atom, with (ne arly) the same
mass as a proton
permanent dipoletypically a molecule; a dipole created by the arran gement of the
charged particles from which the dipole is created
permittivity of vacuumalso called the permittivity of free space, and consta nt describing
the strength of the electric force in a vacuum
polarizationslight shifting of positive and negative charges to opp osite sides of
an object
principle of superpositionuseful fact that we can simply add up all of the forc es due to
charges acting on an object
protonparticle in the nucleus of an atom and carrying a po sitive charge
equal in magnitude to the amount of negative charge carried by an
electron
static electricitybuildup of electric charge on the surface of an obje ct; the
arrangement of the charge remains constant (“static”)
superpositionconcept that states that the net electric field of mu ltiple source
charges is the vector sum of the field of each source c harge
calculated individually
surface charge densityamount of charge in an element of a two-dimensional charge
distribution (the thickness is small); its units are
volume charge densityamount of charge in an element of a three-dimensiona l charge
distribution; its units are
area vectorvector with magnitude equal to the area of a surface and direction
perpendicular to the surface
cylindrical symmetry system only varies with distance from the axis, not dire ction
electric fluxdot product of the electric field and the area thro ugh which it is
passing
flux quantity of something passing through a given area
free electronsalso called conduction electrons, these are the electr ons in a
conductor that are not bound to any particular atom, and hence are
free to move around
Gaussian surface any enclosed (usually imaginary) surface
planar symmetry system only varies with distance from a plane
spherical symmetrysystem only varies with the distance from the origin, n ot in
direction

2.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76521Key Equations
Coulomb’s law
Superposition of electric forces
Electric force due to an electric field
Electric field at point P
Field of an infinite wire
Field of an infinite plane
Dipole moment
Torque on dipole in external E-field
Definition of electric flux, for uniform electric f ield
Electric flux through an open surface
Electric flux through a closed surface
Gauss’s law
Gauss’s Law for systems with symmetry
The magnitude of the electric field just outside the surface of a
conductor
Summary
5.2 Electric Charge
There are only two types of charge, which we call positive a nd negative. Like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the force
between charges decreases with the square of the distance.
The vast majority of positive charge in nature is carried b y protons, whereas the vast majority of negative charge i s carried by
electrons. The electric charge of one electron is equal in m agnitude and opposite in sign to the charge of one proton.
An ion is an atom or molecule that has nonzero total ch arge due to having unequal numbers of electrons and proto ns.
The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with protons an d electrons having charges of opposite sign but equal magnitude; the
magnitude of this basic charge is
Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral object s and can be separated by bringing the two objects into physical
contact; rubbing the objects together can remove elect rons from the bonds in one object and place them on the other object,
increasing the charge separation.
For macroscopic objects, negatively charged means an exce ss of electrons and positively charged means a depletion of
electrons.
The law of conservation of charge states that the net charge of a closed system is constant.
5.3 Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
A conductor is a substance that allows charge to flow freel y through its atomic structure.
An insulator holds charge fixed in place.
Polarization is the separation of positive and negative charges in a neutral object. Polarized objects have thei r positive and
negative charges concentrated in different areas, gi ving them a charge distribution.

2.11.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765215.4 Coulomb's Law
Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force between point c harges. It is
where and are two point charges separated by a dist ance r. This Coulomb force is extremely basic, since most
charges are due to point-like particles. It is resp onsible for all electrostatic effects and underlies m ost macroscopic
forces.
5.5 Electric Field
The electric field is an alteration of space caused by t he presence of an electric charge. The electric field med iates the electric
force between a source charge and a test charge.
The electric field, like the electric force, obeys the s uperposition principle
The field is a vector; by definition, it points away fr om positive charges and toward negative charges.
5.6 Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
A very large number of charges can be treated as a contin uous charge distribution, where the calculation of the f ield requires
integration. Common cases are:
one-dimensional (like a wire); uses a line charge densi ty
two-dimensional (metal plate); uses surface charge densi ty
three-dimensional (metal sphere); uses volume charge den sity
The “source charge” is a differential amount of charge dq. Calculating dq depends on the type of source charge dis tribution:
Symmetry of the charge distribution is usually key.
Important special cases are the field of an “infinite” wire a nd the field of an “infinite” plane.
5.7 Electric Field Lines
Electric field diagrams assist in visualizing the field of a source charge.
The magnitude of the field is proportional to the fiel d line density.
Field vectors are everywhere tangent to field lines.
5.8 Electric Dipoles
If a permanent dipole is placed in an external electric field, it results in a torque that aligns it with the exte rnal field.
If a nonpolar atom (or molecule) is placed in an externa l field, it gains an induced dipole that is aligned with the external field.
The net field is the vector sum of the external field p lus the field of the dipole (physical or induced).
The strength of the polarization is described by the di pole moment of the dipole,.
6.2 Electric Flux
The electric flux through a surface is proportional to t he number of field lines crossing that surface. Note that this means the
magnitude is proportional to the portion of the field perp endicular to the area.
The electric flux is obtained by evaluating the surface in tegral
where the notation used here is for a closed surface S.
6.3 Explaining Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law relates the electric flux through a closed sur face to the net charge within that surface,
where qencqenc is the total charge inside the Gaussian sur face S.

2.11.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76521All surfaces that include the same amount of charge have the same number of field lines crossing it, regardless of th e shape or
size of the surface, as long as the surfaces enclose the sam e amount of charge.
6.4 Applying Gauss’s Law
For a charge distribution with certain spatial symmetries (spherical, cylindrical, and planar), we can find a Gaussian surface
over which, where E is constant over the surface. The electric field is then determined with Gauss’s law.
For spherical symmetry, the Gaussian surface is also a sph ere, and Gauss’s law simplifies to.
For cylindrical symmetry, we use a cylindrical Gaussian surf ace, and find that Gauss’s law simplifies to.
For planar symmetry, a convenient Gaussian surface is a box p enetrating the plane, with two faces parallel to the plane and the
remainder perpendicular, resulting in Gauss’s law being.
6.5 Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
The electric field inside a conductor vanishes.
Any excess charge placed on a conductor resides entirely on the surface of the conductor.
The electric field is perpendicular to the surface of a c onductor everywhere on that surface.
The magnitude of the electric field just above the surfa ce of a conductor is given by.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.11: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
5.9: Electric Charges and Fields (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
6.6: Gauss's Law (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

2.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765202.12: Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electric Charge
1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in mo st objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit static el ectricity?
2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal numbers of p ositive and negative charges?
3. A positively charged rod attracts a small piece of cor k.
(a) Can we conclude that the cork is negatively charged?
(b) The rod repels another small piece of cork. Can we con clude that this piece is positively charged?
4. Two bodies attract each other electrically. Do they bo th have to be charged? Answer the same question if the bodies repel
one another.
5. How would you determine whether the charge on a particular ro d is positive or negative?
Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
6. An eccentric inventor attempts to levitate a cork ba ll by wrapping it with foil and placing a large negat ive charge on the
ball and then putting a large positive charge on the ceiling of his workshop. Instead, while attempting to place a large
negative charge on the ball, the foil flies off. Explain.
7. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes posi tive and the silk becomes negative—yet both attract dust. Does the
dust have a third type of charge that is attracted to both positive and negative? Explain.
8. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is poli shed? (Note that car wax and car tires are insulators.)
9. Does the uncharged conductor shown below experience a net el ectric force?
10. While walking on a rug, a person frequently becomes c harged because of the rubbing between his shoes and th e rug. This
charge then causes a spark and a slight shock when th e person gets close to a metal object. Why are these shocks so much
more common on a dry day?
11. Compare charging by conduction to charging by induction.
12. Small pieces of tissue are attracted to a charged com b. Soon after sticking to the comb, the pieces of tissu e are repelled
from it. Explain.
13. Trucks that carry gasoline often have chains dangling fro m their undercarriages and brushing the ground. Why?
14. Why do electrostatic experiments work so poorly in humi d weather?

2.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652015. Why do some clothes cling together after being removed fr om the clothes dryer? Does this happen if they’re still dam p?
16. Can induction be used to produce charge on an insulator?
17. Suppose someone tells you that rubbing quartz with cott on cloth produces a third kind of charge on the qua rtz. Describe
what you might do to test this claim.
18. A handheld copper rod does not acquire a charge when you rub it with a cloth. Explain why.
19. Suppose you place a charge q near a large metal plate.
(a) If q is attracted to the plate, is the plate necessarily charge d?
(b) If q is repelled by the plate, is the plate necessarily charg ed?
Coulomb's Law
20. Would defining the charge on an electron to be positive ha ve any effect on Coulomb’s law?
21. An atomic nucleus contains positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons. Since nuclei do stay togethe r, what must
we conclude about the forces between these nuclear particle s?
22. Is the force between two fixed charges influenced by the p resence of other charges?
Electric Field
23. When measuring an electric field, could we use a negative ra ther than a positive test charge?
24. During fair weather, the electric field due to the ne t charge on Earth points downward. Is Earth charged posit ively or
negatively?
25. If the electric field at a point on the line between two c harges is zero, what do you know about the charges?
26. Two charges lie along the x-axis. Is it true that the net electric field always v anishes at some point (other than infinity)
along the x-axis?
Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
27. Give a plausible argument as to why the electric field outs ide an infinite charged sheet is constant.
28. Compare the electric fields of an infinite sheet of c harge, an infinite, charged conducting plate, and in finite, oppositely
charged parallel plates.
29. Describe the electric fields of an infinite charged pl ate and of two infinite, charged parallel plates in terms of the electric
field of an infinite sheet of charge.
30. A negative charge is placed at the center of a ring of uniform positive charge. What is the motion (if a ny) of the charge?
What if the charge were placed at a point on the axis of the ring other than the center?
Electric Field Lines
31. If a point charge is released from rest in a uniform electric field, will it follow a field line? Will it do so if the electric
field is not uniform?
32. Under what conditions, if any, will the trajectory of a char ged particle not follow a field line?
33. How would you experimentally distinguish an electric field fr om a gravitational field?
34. A representation of an electric field shows 10 field lines perpendicular to a square plate. How many field lines should
pass perpendicularly through the plate to depict a field with twice the magnitude?
35. What is the ratio of the number of electric field lines le aving a charge 10q and a charge q?
Electric Dipoles
36. What are the stable orientation(s) for a dipole in a n external electric field? What happens if the dipol e is slightly
perturbed from these orientations?

2.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520Electric Flux
1. Discuss how would orient a planar surface of area A in a uniform electric field of magnitude to obtain
(a) the maximum flux and
(b) the minimum flux through the area.
2. What are the maximum and minimum values of the flux in t he preceding question?
3. The net electric flux crossing a closed surface is always zero. True or false?
4. The net electric flux crossing an open surface is never zero. True or false?
Explaining Gauss’s Law
5. Two concentric spherical surfaces enclose a point ch arge q. The radius of the outer sphere is twice that of the inner one.
Compare the electric fluxes crossing the two surfaces.
6. Compare the electric flux through the surface of a c ube of side length a that has a charge q at its center to the flux through
a spherical surface of radius a with a charge q at its cen ter.
7. (a) If the electric flux through a closed surface is zer o, is the electric field necessarily zero at all points o n the surface?
(b) What is the net charge inside the surface?
8. Discuss how Gauss’s law would be affected if the electric fiel d of a point charge did not vary as.
9. Discuss the similarities and differences between the gr avitational field of a point mass m and the electric field of a point
charge q.
10. Discuss whether Gauss’s law can be applied to other forces, and if so, which ones.
11. Is the term in Gauss’s law the electric field produced by j ust the charge inside the Gaussian surface?
12. Reformulate Gauss’s law by choosing the unit normal of the Ga ussian surface to be the one directed inward.
Applying Gauss’s Law
13. Would Gauss’s law be helpful for determining the electric field of two equal but opposite charges a fixed distance ap art?
14. Discuss the role that symmetry plays in the applicati on of Gauss’s law. Give examples of continuous charge d istributions
in which Gauss’s law is useful and not useful in determining th e electric field.
15. Discuss the restrictions on the Gaussian surface used t o discuss planar symmetry. For example, is its length important?
Does the cross-section have to be square? Must the end faces be on opposite sides of the sheet?
Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
16. Is the electric field inside a metal always zero?
17. Under electrostatic conditions, the excess charge on a conductor resides on its surface. Does this mean th at all the
conduction electrons in a conductor are on the surface?
18. A charge q is placed in the cavity of a conductor as shown belo w. Will a charge outside the conductor experience an
electric field due to the presence of q?

2.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
19. The conductor in the preceding figure has an excess charge of. If a point charge is placed in the cavi ty,
what is the net charge on the surface of the cavity and on t he outer surface of the conductor?
Problems
Electric Charge
37. Common static electricity involves charges ranging fro m nanocoulombs to microcoulombs.
(a) How many electrons are needed to form a charge of −2.00 n C?
(b) How many electrons must be removed from a neutral obj ect to leave a net charge of 0.500μC?
38. If electrons move through a pocket calculator duri ng a full day’s operation, how many coulombs of charg e
moved through it?
39. To start a car engine, the car battery moves electr ons through the starter motor. How many coulombs of c harge
were moved?
40. A certain lightning bolt moves 40.0 C of charge. How man y fundamental units of charge is this?
41. A 2.5-g copper penny is given a charge of.
(a) How many excess electrons are on the penny?
(b) By what percent do the excess electrons change the mas s of the penny?
42. A 2.5-g copper penny is given a charge of.
(a) How many electrons are removed from the penny?
(b) If no more than one electron is removed from an atom, what percent of the atoms are ionized by this c harging
process?
Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
43. Suppose a speck of dust in an electrostatic precipitato r has protons in it and has a net charge of −5.00 n C (a
very large charge for a small speck). How many electrons does it have?
44. An amoeba has protons and a net charge of 0.300 pC.
(a) How many fewer electrons are there than protons?
(b) If you paired them up, what fraction of the protons wou ld have no electrons?
45. A 50.0-g ball of copper has a net charge of 2.00μC. What fraction of the copper’s electrons has been removed? (Each
copper atom has 29 protons, and copper has an atomic mas s of 63.5.)

2.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652046. What net charge would you place on a 100-g piece of s ulfur if you put an extra electron on 1 in of its atoms? (Sulfur
has an atomic mass of 32.1 u.)
47. How many coulombs of positive charge are there in 4.00 kg of plutonium, given its atomic mass is 244 and t hat each
plutonium atom has 94 protons?
Coulomb's Law
48. Two point particles with charges +3μC and +5μC are held in place by 3-N forces on each charge in a ppropriate
directions. (a) Draw a free-body diagram for each particle. (b) Find the distance between the charges.
49. Two charges +3μC and +12μC are fixed 1 m apart, with the second one to the right. Find the magnitude and direction of
the net force on a −2-nC charge when placed at the follo wing locations:
(a) halfway between the two
(b) half a meter to the left of the +3μC charge
(c) half a meter above the +12μC charge in a direction perpendicular to the line joining the two fixed charges
50. In a salt crystal, the distance between adjacent sod ium and chloride ions is. What is the force of attr action
between the two singly charged ions?
51. Protons in an atomic nucleus are typically apart. Wha t is the electric force of repulsion between nuclear proto ns?
52. Suppose Earth and the Moon each carried a net negativ e charge −Q. Approximate both bodies as point masses and point
charges.
(a) What value of Q is required to balance the gravitational attraction b etween Earth and the Moon?
(b) Does the distance between Earth and the Moon affect your a nswer? Explain.
(c) How many electrons would be needed to produce this charge?
53. Point charges and are placed 1.0 m apart. What is th e force on a third charge placed
midway between and?
54. Where must of the preceding problem be placed so that t he net force on it is zero?
55. Two small balls, each of mass 5.0 g, are attached to si lk threads 50 cm long, which are in turn tied to the same point on
the ceiling, as shown below. When the balls are give n the same charge Q, the threads hang at 5.0° to the vertical, as shown
below. What is the magnitude of Q? What are the signs of the two charges?

2.12.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
56. Point charges and are located at and. What is
the force of on?
57. The net excess charge on two small spheres (small en ough to be treated as point charges) is Q. Show that the force of
repulsion between the spheres is greatest when each sp here has an excess charge Q/2. Assume that the distance between the
spheres is so large compared with their radii that the sp heres can be treated as point charges.
58. Two small, identical conducting spheres repel each oth er with a force of 0.050 N when they are 0.25 m apart. After a
conducting wire is connected between the spheres and t hen removed, they repel each other with a force of 0.0 60 N. What is
the original charge on each sphere?
59. A charge q=2.0μC is placed at the point P shown below. What is the force on q?
60. What is the net electric force on the charge located a t the lower right-hand corner of the triangle shown here?
61. Two fixed particles, each of charge, are 24 cm apart. What force do they exert on a third particle of ch arge
that is 13 cm from each of them?
62. The charges, and are placed at the corners of the triangle shown
below. What is the force on?

2.12.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
63. What is the force on the charge q at the lower-right-han d corner of the square shown here?
64. Point charges and are fixed at and What is the f orce of
on?
Electric Field
65. A particle of charge experiences an upward force of magnitude when it is placed in a particular
point in an electric field.
(a) What is the electric field at that point?
(b) If a charge is placed there, what is the force on it?
66. On a typical clear day, the atmospheric electric fiel d points downward and has a magnitude of approximately 100 N/C.
Compare the gravitational and electric forces on a small dust particle of mass that carries a single el ectron
charge. What is the acceleration (both magnitude and dir ection) of the dust particle?
67. Consider an electron that is 10−10m10−10m from an alpha p article (q=3.2×10−19C).(q=3.2×10−19C).
(a) What is the electric field due to the alpha partic le at the location of the electron?
(b) What is the electric field due to the electron at th e location of the alpha particle?
(c) What is the electric force on the alpha particle? On t he electron?
68. Each the balls shown below carries a charge q and has a mass m. The length of each thread is l, and at equ ilibrium, the
balls are separated by an angle. How does vary with q and l? Show that satisfies \(\displaystyle
sin(θ)^2tan(θ)=\frac{q^2}{16πε0gl^2m\).

2.12.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
69. What is the electric field at a point where the force on a charge is?
70. A proton is suspended in the air by an electric field at the surface of Earth. What is the strength of this electric field?
71. The electric field in a particular thundercloud is. Wh at is the acceleration of an electron in this field?
72. A small piece of cork whose mass is 2.0 g is given a c harge of. What electric field is needed to place th e cork
in equilibrium under the combined electric and gravi tational forces?
73. If the electric field is 100N/C at a distance of 50 cm from a point charge q, what is the value of q?
74. What is the electric field of a proton at the first Bohr orbit for hydrogen? What is the force on the
electron in that orbit?
75. (a) What is the electric field of an oxygen nucleus at a point that is from the nucleus?
(b) What is the force this electric field exerts on a secon d oxygen nucleus placed at that point?
76. Two point charges, and, are held 25.0 cm apart.
(a) What is the electric field at a point 5.0 cm from the n egative charge and along the line between the two charges?
(b)What is the force on an electron placed at that point?
77. Point charges and are placed 1.0 m apart.
(a) What is the electric field at a point midway between the m?
(b) What is the force on a charge situated there?
78. Can you arrange the two point charges and along the x-axis so that at the
origin?
79. Point charges are fixed on the x-axis at and. What charge q must be placed at
the origin so that the electric field vanishes at x=0,y=3.0m?
Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
80. A thin conducting plate 1.0 m on the side is given a charge of. An electron is placed 1.0 cm above the
center of the plate. What is the acceleration of the ele ctron?
81. Calculate the magnitude and direction of the electr ic field 2.0 m from a long wire that is charged unifor mly at
82. Two thin conducting plates, each 25.0 cm on a side, ar e situated parallel to one another and 5.0 mm apart. If
electrons are moved from one plate to the other, what is th e electric field between the plates?
83. The charge per unit length on the thin rod shown belo w is. What is the electric field at the point P? (Hint: Solve this
problem by first considering the electric field at P due to a small segment dx of the rod, which contains charge.

2.12.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520Then find the net field by integrating over the leng th of the rod.)
84. The charge per unit length on the thin semicircular wire shown below is λ. What is the electric field at the point P?
85. Two thin parallel conducting plates are placed 2.0 cm apart. Each plate is 2.0 cm on a side; one plate car ries a net charge
of 8.0μC, and the other plate carries a net charge of −8.0μC. What is the charge density on the inside surface of each plate?
What is the electric field between the plates?
86. A thin conducting plate 2.0 m on a side is given a total c harge of −10.0μC.
(a) What is the electric field 1.0cm above the plate?
(b) What is the force on an electron at this point?
(c) Repeat these calculations for a point 2.0 cm above the plate.
(d) When the electron moves from 1.0 to 2,0 cm above the p late, how much work is done on it by the electric field?
87. A total charge q is distributed uniformly along a thin, straight rod of length L (see below). What is the electric field at?
At?
88. Charge is distributed along the entire x-axis with uniform density λ. How much work does the electric field of this charge
distribution do on an electron that moves along the y-axis from to?
89. Charge is distributed along the entire x-axis with uniform density and along the entire y-axis with uniform density.
Calculate the resulting electric field at
(a) and
(b).
90. A rod bent into the arc of a circle subtends an ang le at the center P of the circle (see below). If the rod is charged
uniformly with a total charge Q, what is the electric field at P?.

2.12.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652091. A proton moves in the electric field. (a) What are the force on and the acceleration of the proton? (b) Do the
same calculation for an electron moving in this field.
92. An electron and a proton, each starting from rest, ar e accelerated by the same uniform electric field of 200 N/C.
Determine the distance and time for each particle to acq uire a kinetic energy of.
93. A spherical water droplet of radius 25μm carries an excess 250 electrons. What vertical electr ic field is needed to balance
the gravitational force on the droplet at the surface of the earth?
94. A proton enters the uniform electric field produced by the two charged plates shown below. The magnitude o f the electric
field is, and the speed of the proton when it enter s is. What distance d has the proton been
deflected downward when it leaves the plates?
95. Shown below is a small sphere of mass 0.25 g that carrie s a charge of. The sphere is attached to one end of a
very thin silk string 5.0 cm long. The other end of the string is attached to a large vertical conducti ng plate that has a charge
density of. What is the angle that the string makes with the vertical?
96. Two infinite rods, each carrying a uniform charge dens ity, are parallel to one another and perpendicular to the plane of
the page. (See below.) What is the electrical field at? At?
97. Positive charge is distributed with a uniform density along the positive x-axis from to, along the positive y-axis
from to, and along a 90° arc of a circle of radius r, as shown below. What is the el ectric field at O?

2.12.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
98. From a distance of 10 cm, a proton is projected with a speed of directly at a large, positively charged
plate whose charge density is.. (See below.)
(a) Does the proton reach the plate?
(b) If not, how far from the plate does it turn around?
99. A particle of mass m and charge moves along a straig ht line away from a fixed particle of charge Q. When the
distance between the two particles is is moving with a spe ed.
(a) Use the work-energy theorem to calculate the maximum separation of the charges.
(b) What do you have to assume about to make this calc ulation?
(c) What is the minimum value of such that escapes fro m Q?
Electric Field Lines
100. Which of the following electric field lines are incorrect for point charges? Explain why.

2.12.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
101. In this exercise, you will practice drawing electric f ield lines. Make sure you represent both the magnit ude and direction
of the electric field adequately. Note that the number of lines into or out of charges is proportional to the charges.
(a) Draw the electric field lines map for two charges +20μC and −20μC situated 5 cm from each other.
(b) Draw the electric field lines map for two charges +20μC and +20μC situated 5 cm from each other.
(c) Draw the electric field lines map for two charges +20μC and −30μC situated 5 cm from each other.
102. Draw the electric field for a system of three particle s of charges +1μC, +2μC and −3μC fixed at the corners of an
equilateral triangle of side 2 cm.
103. Two charges of equal magnitude but opposite sign make up an electric dipole. A quadrupole consists of two electric
dipoles that are placed anti-parallel at two edges of a squa re as shown. Draw the electric field of the charge distribution.
104. Suppose the electric field of an isolated point charg e decreased with distance as rather than as. Show th at it
is then impossible to draw continuous field lines so that thei r number per unit area is proportional to E.

2.12.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520Electric Dipoles
105. Consider the equal and opposite charges shown below. (a) Show that at all points on the x-axis for which
. (b) Show that at all points on the y-axis for which.
106. (a) What is the dipole moment of the configuration shown a bove? If Q=4.0μC,
(b) what is the torque on this dipole with an electric field o f?
(c) What is the torque on this dipole with an electric fiel d of?
(d) What is the torque on this dipole with an electric fiel d of?
107. A water molecule consists of two hydrogen atoms bonde d with one oxygen atom. The bond angle between the two
hydrogen atoms is 104° (see below). Calculate the net dipole moment of a hyp othetical water molecule where the charge at
the oxygen molecule is −2e and at each hydrogen ato m is +e. The net dipole moment of the molecule is the vector sum of the
individual dipole moment between the two O-Hs. The separati on O-H is 0.9578 angstroms.
Problems
Electric Flux
20. A uniform electric field of magnitude is perpendicu lar to a square sheet with sides 2.0 m long. What is th e
electric flux through the sheet?
21. Calculate the flux through the sheet of the previou s problem if the plane of the sheet is at an angle of 60° to the field.
Find the flux for both directions of the unit normal to the sheet.
22. Find the electric flux through a rectangular area 3cm×2cm between two parallel plates where there is a constant electric
field of 30 N/C for the following orientations of the area: (a) parallel to the plates, (b) perpendicular to the plates, and (c) the
normal to the area making a 30° angle with the direction of the electric field. Note that this angle can also be given as 180°
+30°.

2.12.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652023. The electric flux through a square-shaped area of sid e 5 cm near a large charged sheet is found to be.
when the area is parallel to the plate. Find the charge den sity on the sheet.
24. Two large rectangular aluminum plates of area face each other with a separation of 3 mm between them. The
plates are charged with equal amount of opposite char ges, ±20μC. The charges on the plates face each other. Find the flux
through a circle of radius 3 cm between the plates wh en the normal to the circle makes an angle of 5° with a line
perpendicular to the plates. Note that this angle can also be given as 180°+5°.
25. A square surface of area is in a space of uniform el ectric field of magnitude. The amount of flux thro ugh it
depends on how the square is oriented relative to the direction of the electric field. Find the electric flux through the square,
when the normal to it makes the following angles with e lectric field: (a) 30°, (b) 90°, and (c) 0°. Note that these angles can
also be given as 180°+θ.
26. A vector field is pointed along the z-axis, \(\displaystyle \vec{v} =\frac{α}{x^2+y^2}\hat{ z}.
(a) Find the flux of the vector field through a rectangle in the xy-plane between a<x<ba<x<b and c<y<dc<y<d.
(b) Do the same through a rectangle in the yz-plane between a<z<ba<z<b and c<y<dc<y<d. (Leave your answer as an
integral.)
27. Consider the uniform electric field. What is its e lectric flux through a circular area of radius
2.0 m that lies in the xy-plane?
28. Repeat the previous problem, given that the circular area is (a) in the yz-plane and (b) 45° above the xy-plane.
29. An infinite charged wire with charge per unit length lies along the central axis of a cylindrical surface of radius r and
length l. What is the flux through the surface due to the ele ctric field of the charged wire?
Explaining Gauss’s Law
30. Determine the electric flux through each closed surfac e whose cross-section inside the surface is shown below.
31. Find the electric flux through the closed surface whose cross-s ections are shown below.

2.12.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
32. A point charge q is located at the center of a cube whose sides are of length a. If there are no other charges in this system,
what is the electric flux through one face of the cube?
33. A point charge of is at an unspecified location in side a cube of side 2 cm. Find the net electric flux though the
surfaces of the cube.
34. A net flux of passes inward through the surface of a spher e of radius 5 cm.
(a) How much charge is inside the sphere?
(b) How precisely can we determine the location of the char ge from this information?

2.12.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652035. A charge q is placed at one of the corners of a cube of side a, as shown below. Find the magnitude of the electric fl ux
through the shaded face due to q. Assume.
36. The electric flux through a cubical box 8.0 cm on a side is. What is the total charge enclosed by the
box?
37. The electric flux through a spherical surface is. What is the net charge enclosed by the surface?
38. A cube whose sides are of length d is placed in a uniform electric field of magnitude so that the field is
perpendicular to two opposite faces of the cube. What i s the net flux through the cube?
39. Repeat the previous problem, assuming that the electric fi eld is directed along a body diagonal of the cube.
40. A total charge is distributed uniformly throughout a cubical volume whose edges are 8.0 cm long.
(a) What is the charge density in the cube?
(b) What is the electric flux through a cube with 12.0-cm edges that is concentric with the charge distribution?
(c) Do the same calculation for cubes whose edges are 1 0.0 cm long and 5.0 cm long.
(d) What is the electric flux through a spherical su rface of radius 3.0 cm that is also concentric with t he charge
distribution?
Applying Gauss’s Law
41. Recall that in the example of a uniform charged sph ere,. Rewrite the answers in terms of the total char ge
Q on the sphere.
42. Suppose that the charge density of the spherical char ge distribution shown in Figure 6.23 is for and
zero for. Obtain expressions for the electric field both inside and outside the distribution.
43. A very long, thin wire has a uniform linear charge d ensity of. What is the electric field at a distance 2.0 cm from
the wire?
44. A charge of is distributed uniformly throughout a s pherical volume of radius 10.0 cm. Determine the elec tric field
due to this charge at a distance of
(a) 2.0 cm,
(b) 5.0 cm, and
(c) 20.0 cm from the center of the sphere.
45. Repeat your calculations for the preceding problem, given that the charge is distributed uniformly over the surface of a
spherical conductor of radius 10.0 cm.
46. A total charge Q is distributed uniformly throughout a spherical she ll of inner and outer radii and, respectively.
Show that the electric field due to the charge is

2.12.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520;
47. When a charge is placed on a metal sphere, it ends u p in equilibrium at the outer surface. Use this info rmation to
determine the electric field of charge put on a 5.0-cm a luminum spherical ball at the following two points in space:
(a) a point 1.0 cm from the center of the ball (an inside point) and
(b) a point 10 cm from the center of the ball (an outsid e point).
48. A large sheet of charge has a uniform charge densit y of. What is the electric field due to this charg e at a point
just above the surface of the sheet?
49. Determine if approximate cylindrical symmetry holds for t he following situations. State why or why not.
(a) A 300-cm long copper rod of radius 1 cm is char ged with +500 nC of charge and we seek electric field at a point 5
cm from the center of the rod.
(b) A 10-cm long copper rod of radius 1 cm is charge d with +500 nC of charge and we seek electric field a t a point 5
cm from the center of the rod.
(c) A 150-cm wooden rod is glued to a 150-cm plastic r od to make a 300-cm long rod, which is then painted wit h a
charged paint so that one obtains a uniform charge density. The radius of each rod is 1 cm, and we seek an electric field
at a point that is 4 cm from the center of the rod.
(d) Same rod as (c), but we seek electric field at a point that is 500 cm from the center of the rod.
50. A long silver rod of radius 3 cm has a charge of on its s urface.
(a) Find the electric field at a point 5 cm from the cente r of the rod (an outside point).
(b) Find the electric field at a point 2 cm from the center of the rod (an inside point).
51. The electric field at 2 cm from the center of long copper rod of radius 1 cm has a magnitude 3 N/C and d irected outward
from the axis of the rod.
(a) How much charge per unit length exists on the copper rod?
(b) What would be the electric flux through a cube o f side 5 cm situated such that the rod passes through opposite sides
of the cube perpendicularly?
52. A long copper cylindrical shell of inner radius 2 cm and outer radius 3 cm surrounds concentrically a c harged long
aluminum rod of radius 1 cm with a charge density of 4 pC/m. All charges on the aluminum rod reside at its su rface. The
inner surface of the copper shell has exactly opposit e charge to that of the aluminum rod while the outer surface of the copper
shell has the same charge as the aluminum rod. Find t he magnitude and direction of the electric field at points that are at the
following distances from the center of the aluminum rod:
(a) 0.5 cm, (b) 1.5 cm, (c) 2.5 cm, (d) 3.5 cm, and (e) 7 cm.
53. Charge is distributed uniformly with a density throu ghout an infinitely long cylindrical volume of radi us R. Show that
the field of this charge distribution is directed radi ally with respect to the cylinder and that

54. Charge is distributed throughout a very long cylind rical volume of radius R such that the charge density increases with
the distance r from the central axis of the cylinder according to, where is a constant. Show that the field of this
charge distribution is directed radially with respect to th e cylinder and that

2.12.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520.
55. The electric field 10.0 cm from the surface of a co pper ball of radius 5.0 cm is directed toward the bal l’s center and has
magnitude. How much charge is on the surface of the ball?
56. Charge is distributed throughout a spherical shell o f inner radius and outer radius with a volume dens ity given by
, where is a constant. Determine the electric field d ue to this charge as a function of r, the distance from the center
of the shell.
57. Charge is distributed throughout a spherical volume o f radius R with a density, where αα is a constant. Determine
the electric field due to the charge at points both in side and outside the sphere.
58. Consider a uranium nucleus to be sphere of radius with a charge of 92e distributed uniformly
throughout its volume. (a) What is the electric force exerted on an electron when it is from the center o f the
nucleus? (b) What is the acceleration of the electron at this point?
59. The volume charge density of a spherical charge dist ribution is given by, where and are constants.
What is the electric field produced by this charge dist ribution?
Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
60. An uncharged conductor with an internal cavity is shown in the following figure. Use the closed surface S alon g with
Gauss’ law to show that when a charge q is placed in the cavity a total charge –q is induced on the inner surface of the
conductor. What is the charge on the outer surface of the c onductor?
61. An uncharged spherical conductor S of radius R has two spherical cavities A and B of radii a and b, respectively as
shown below. Two point charges and are placed at th e center of the two cavities by using non-conducting supports.
In addition, a point charge is placed outside at a dist ance r from the center of the sphere.
(a) Draw approximate charge distributions in the metal altho ugh metal sphere has no net charge.
(b) Draw electric field lines. Draw enough lines to represen t all distinctly different places.
62. A positive point charge is placed at the angle bisec tor of two uncharged plane conductors that make an an gle of 45°.See
below. Draw the electric field lines.

2.12.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
63. A long cylinder of copper of radius 3 cm is charged so that it has a uniform charge per unit length on its surface of 3 C/m.
(a) Find the electric field inside and outside the cylin der. (b) Draw electric field lines in a plane perpendicula r to the rod.
64. An aluminum spherical ball of radius 4 cm is charged with 5μC of charge. A copper spherical shell of inner radius 6 cm
and outer radius 8 cm surrounds it. A total charge of −8μC is put on the copper shell.
(a) Find the electric field at all points in space, including points inside the aluminum and copper she ll when copper
shell and aluminum sphere are concentric.
(b) Find the electric field at all points in space, inc luding points inside the aluminum and copper shell when the centers
of copper shell and aluminum sphere are 1 cm apart.
65. A long cylinder of aluminum of radius R meters is charged so that it has a uniform charge p er unit length on its surface of
. (a) Find the electric field inside and outside the cylinder. (b) Plot electric field as a function of di stance from the center of
the rod.
66. At the surface of any conductor in electrostatic equi librium,. Show that this equation is consistent with th e fact
that at the surface of a spherical conductor.
67. Two parallel plates 10 cm on a side are given equal a nd opposite charges of magnitude. The plates are 1.5
mm apart. What is the electric field at the center of t he region between the plates?
68. Two parallel conducting plates, each of cross-section al area, are 2.0 cm apart and uncharged. If
electrons are transferred from one plate to the other, what are (a) the charge density on each plate? (b) The electric field
between the plates?
69. The surface charge density on a long straight metallic pipe is. What is the electric field outside and ins ide the pipe?
Assume the pipe has a diameter of 2a.

2.12.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652070. A point charge is placed at the center of a spheric al conducting shell of inner radius 3.5 cm and outer
radius 4.0 cm. The electric field just above the surf ace of the conductor is directed radially outward an d has magnitude 8.0
N/C.
(a) What is the charge density on the inner surface of the she ll?
(b) What is the charge density on the outer surface of t he shell?
(c) What is the net charge on the conductor?
71. A solid cylindrical conductor of radius a is surround ed by a concentric cylindrical shell of inner radiu s b. The solid
cylinder and the shell carry charges +Q and –Q, respectively. Assuming that the length L of both conductors is much greater
than a or b, determine the electric field as a functi on of r, the distance from the common central axis of the cylinders, for (a)
; (b); and (c).
Additional Problems
108. Point charges and are located at and. What is
the force of on?
109. What is the force on the 5.0-μC charges shown below?
110. What is the force on the 2.0-μC charge placed at the center of the square shown below?
111. Four charged particles are positioned at the corners of a parallelogram as shown below. If and,
what is the net force on q?

2.12.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520112. A charge Q is fixed at the origin and a second charge q moves along the x-axis, as shown below. How much work is
done on q by the electric force when q moves from to?
113. A charge q=−2.0μC is released from rest when it is 2.0 m from a fixed charge. What is the kinetic energy of
q when it is 1.0 m from Q?
114. What is the electric field at the midpoint M of the hypot enuse of the triangle shown below?
115. Find the electric field at P for the charge configuration s shown below.

2.12.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
116. (a) What is the electric field at the lower-right-ha nd corner of the square shown below? (b) What is the f orce on a charge
q placed at that point?
117. Point charges are placed at the four corners of a re ctangle as shown below:
and. What is the electric field at P?

2.12.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
118. Three charges are positioned at the corners of a para llelogram as shown below. (a) If, what is the electric
field at the unoccupied corner? (b) What is the force on a 5.0-μC charge placed at this corner?
119. A positive charge q is released from rest at the origin of a rectangul ar coordinate system and moves under the influence
of the electric field What is the kinetic energy of q when it passes through?
120. A particle of charge and mass m is placed at the center of a uniformaly charged ri ng of total charge Q and radius R.
The particle is displaced a small distance along th e axis perpendicular to the plane of the ring and r eleased. Assuming that the
particle is constrained to move along the axis, show th at the particle oscillates in simple harmonic motio n with a frequency
121. Charge is distributed uniformly along the entire y-axis with a density and along the positive x-axis from to
with a density. What is the force between the two distr ibutions?
122. The circular arc shown below carries a charge per unit length, where is measured from the x-axis. What is
the electric field at the origin?
123. Calculate the electric field due to a uniformly cha rged rod of length L, aligned with the x-axis with one end at the
origin; at a point P on the z-axis.
124. The charge per unit length on the thin rod shown bel ow is. What is the electric force on the point charge q? Solve this
problem by first considering the electric force on q due to a small segment of the rod, which contains c harge
Then, find the net force by integrating over the length of the rod.
125. The charge per unit length on the thin rod shown her e is. What is the electric force on the point charge q? (See the
preceding problem.)

2.12.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
126. The charge per unit length on the thin semicircular wire shown below is. What is the electric force on the point charge
q? (See the preceding problems.)
Additional Problems
72. A vector field (not necessarily an electric field; note units) is given by. Calculate, where S is the
area shown below. Assume that.
73. Repeat the preceding problem, with.
74. A circular area S is concentric with the origin, has radius a, and lies in the yz-plane. Calculate for.
75. (a) Calculate the electric flux through the open hemispheric al surface due to the electric field (see below).
(b) If the hemisphere is rotated by 90° around the x-axis, what is the flux through it?

2.12.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652076. Suppose that the electric field of an isolated point charge were proportional to rather than. Determine the flux
that passes through the surface of a sphere of radius R centered at the charge. Would Gauss’s law remain valid?
77. The electric field in a region is given by, where a nd.What is the net
charge enclosed by the shaded volume shown below?
78. Two equal and opposite charges of magnitude Q are located on the x-axis at the points +a and –a, as shown below. What
is the net flux due to these charges through a square surface of side 2a that lies in the yz-plane and is centered at the origin?
(Hint: Determine the flux due to each charge separately, t hen use the principle of superposition. You may be able to make a
symmetry argument.)
79. A fellow student calculated the flux through the squ are for the system in the preceding problem and got 0. What went
wrong?
80. A 10cm×10cm piece of aluminum foil of 0.1 mm thickness has a ch arge of that spreads on both wide side surfaces
evenly. You may ignore the charges on the thin sides of th e edges.
(a) Find the charge density.
(b) Find the electric field 1 cm from the center, assum ing approximate planar symmetry.
81. Two 10cm×10cm pieces of aluminum foil of thickness 0.1 mm face e ach other with a separation of 5 mm. One of the
foils has a charge of and the other has.
(a) Find the charge density at all surfaces, i.e., on thos e facing each other and those facing away.
(b) Find the electric field between the plates near the c enter assuming planar symmetry.
82. Two large copper plates facing each other have charg e densities on the surface facing the other plate, an d zero
in between the plates. Find the electric flux through a 3cm×4cm rectangular area between the plates, as shown below, for the
following orientations of the area.
(a) If the area is parallel to the plates, and

2.12.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520(b) if the area is tilted from the parallel direction. Note, this angle can also be.
83. The infinite slab between the planes defined by and contains a uniform volume charge density (see
below). What is the electric field produced by this charge distribution, both inside and outside the distribution?
84. A total charge Q is distributed uniformly throughout a spherical vol ume that is centered at and has a radius R. Without
disturbing the charge remaining, charge is removed f rom the spherical volume that is centered at (see below). Show that
the electric field everywhere in the empty region is given by, where is the displacement vector directe d from
to.
85. A non-conducting spherical shell of inner radius and outer radius is uniformly charged with charged dens ity
inside another non-conducting spherical shell of in ner radius and outer radius that is also uniforml y charged with charge
density. See below. Find the electric field at space point P at a distance r from the common center such that (a), (b)
, (c), (d), and (e).

2.12.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
86. Two non-conducting spheres of radii and are uniform ly charged with charge densities and, respectively. T hey
are separated at center-to-center distance a (see be low). Find the electric field at point P located at a distance r from the
center of sphere 1 and is in the direction from the line joining the two spheres assuming their charge densities are not
affected by the presence of the other sphere. (Hint: Work one sphere at a time and use the superposition pri nciple.)
87. A disk of radius R is cut in a non-conducting large plate that is unifo rmly charged with charge density σ (coulomb per
square meter). See below. Find the electric field at a height h above the center of the disk. (or). (Hint: Fill
the hole with.)
88. Concentric conducting spherical shells carry charg es Q and –Q, respectively (see below). The inner shell has negli gible
thickness. Determine the electric field for (a) (b); (c); and (d).
89. Shown below are two concentric conducting spherical shel ls of radii and, each of finite thickness much less than
either radius. The inner and outer shell carry net c harges and, respectively, where both and are posit ive. What is the
electric field for (a); (b); and (c)? (d) What i s the net charge on the inner surface of the inner shell,
the outer surface of the inner shell, the inner surface o f the outer shell, and the outer surface of the outer shell?

2.12.28 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76520
90. A point charge of q=5.0×10−8Cq=5.0×10−8C is placed at the center of an uncharged spherical conducting sh ell of inner
radius 6.0 cm and outer radius 9.0 cm. Find the electr ic field at (a) r=4.0cmr=4.0cm, (b) r=8.0cmr=8.0cm, and (c)
r=12.0cmr=12.0cm. (d) What are the charges induced on th e inner and outer surfaces of the shell?
Challenge Problems
91. The Hubble Space Telescope can measure the energy flux from distant objects such as supernovae and stars. Scien tists
then use this data to calculate the energy emitted by that object. Choose an interstellar object which sci entists have observed
the flux at the Hubble with (for example,), find the distance to that object and the size of Hubble’s prima ry mirror, and
calculate the total energy flux. (Hint: The Hubble intercepts only a small part of the total flux.)
92. Re-derive Gauss’s law for the gravitational field, with d irected positively outward.
93. An infinite plate sheet of charge of surface charge de nsity is shown below. What is the electric field at a distance x from
the sheet? Compare the result of this calculation with that of worked out in the text.
94. A spherical rubber balloon carries a total charge Q distributed uniformly over its surface. At, the rad ius of the
balloon is R. The balloon is then slowly inflated until its radiu s reaches 2R at the time. Determine the electric field due to
this charge as a function of time
(a) at the surface of the balloon,
(b) at the surface of radius R, and
(c) at the surface of radius 2R. Ignore any effect on the electric field due to th e material of the balloon and assume that
the radius increases uniformly with time.3

2.12.29 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7652095. Find the electric field of a large conducting plate containing a net charge q. Let A be area of one side of the plate and h
the thickness of the plate (see below). The charge on the metal plate will distribute mostly on the two plan ar sides and very
little on the edges if the plate is thin.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.12: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
5.10: Electric Charges and Fields (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
6.7: Gauss's Law (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

2.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765192.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer)
Check Your Understanding
5.1. The force would point outward.
5.2. The net force would point 58° below the − x-axis.
5.3.
5.4. We will no longer be able to take advantage of symme try. Instead, we will need to calculate each of the two components
of the electric field with their own integral.
5.5. The point charge would be where a and b are the sides of the rectangle but otherwise identical.
5.6. The electric field would be zero in between, and have m agnitude everywhere else.
Conceptual Questions
1. There are mostly equal numbers of positive and negative c harges present, making the object electrically neutral.
3. a. yes;
b. yes
5. Take an object with a known charge, either positive or negative, and bring it close to the rod. If the kno wn charged object
is positive and it is repelled from the rod, the rod is charged positive. If the positively charged object is attracted to the rod,
the rod is negatively charged.
7. No, the dust is attracted to both because the dust particle m olecules become polarized in the direction of the silk.
9. Yes, polarization charge is induced on the conductor so that the positive charge is nearest the charged rod, causing an
attractive force.
11. Charging by conduction is charging by contact where charge is transferred to the object. Charging by indu ction first
involves producing a polarization charge in the obj ect and then connecting a wire to ground to allow some of the charge to
leave the object, leaving the object charged.
13. This is so that any excess charge is transferred to th e ground, keeping the gasoline receptacles neutral. If there is excess
charge on the gasoline receptacle, a spark could ignite it.
15. The dryer charges the clothes. If they are damp, the presence of water molecules suppresses the charge.
17. There are only two types of charge, attractive and r epulsive. If you bring a charged object near the quar tz, only one of
these two effects will happen, proving there is not a third kind of charge.
19. a. No, since a polarization charge is induced. b. Yes, sin ce the polarization charge would produce only an attra ctive force.
21. The force holding the nucleus together must be greater t han the electrostatic repulsive force on the protons.
23. Either sign of the test charge could be used, but the conve ntion is to use a positive test charge.
25. The charges are of the same sign.
27. At infinity, we would expect the field to go to zero, bu t because the sheet is infinite in extent, this is n ot the case.
Everywhere you are, you see an infinite plane in all dir ections.
29. The infinite charged plate would have everywhere. The field would point toward the plate if it were negativ ely
charged and point away from the plate if it were posi tively charged. The electric field of the parallel p lates would be zero
between them if they had the same charge, and E would be everywhere else. If the charges were opposite, the
situation is reversed, zero outside the plates and betwe en them.
31. yes; no

2.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7651933. At the surface of Earth, the gravitational field is a lways directed in toward Earth’s center. An electric f ield could move a
charged particle in a different direction than toward t he center of Earth. This would indicate an electric field is present.
35. 10
Problems
37. a.;
b.
39.
41. a.;
b. or
43..
45. atomic mass of copper atom times; number of copper atoms =; number of
electrons equals 29 times number of atoms or; or
47.;
49. a. charge 1 is; charge 2 is, to the left,
to the right,
to the right;
b. to the right,
to the right,
to the right,
c.
51.
53.
55. The tension is. The horizontal component of the tensi on is

2.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519The charges can be positive or negative, but both have to be the same sign.
57. Let the charge on one of the spheres be rQ, where r is a fraction between 0 and 1. In the numer ator of Coulomb’s law, the
term involving the charges is. This is equal to. Fi nding the maximum of this term gives
59. Define right to be the positive direction and hence left is the negative direction, then
61. The particles form triangle of sides 13, 13, and 24 c m. The x-components cancel, whereas there is a contribution t o the ycomponent from both charges 24 cm apart. The y-axis passing through the third charge bisects the 24-cm li ne, creating two
right triangles of sides 5, 12, and 13 cm. in the nega tive y-direction since the force is attractive. The net fo rce
from both charges is
63. The diagonal is and the components of the force due to the diagonal charge has a factor;
65.;
67. a.;
b.;
c. on alpha particl
on electron
69.
71.,
73.
75. a.;
b.
77. If the is to the right of, the electric field vector from both charges point to the right.
a.;
b.
79. There is 45° right triangle geometry. The x-components of the electric field at cancel. The y-components give
At the origin we have a a negative charge of magnitide
81.
83.
85.
87. At
At: Put the origin at the end of L.

2.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7651989. a.;
b.
91. a.,
b.,
93.,
95.,
This is independent of the length of the string.
97. circular arc,
y-axis:;
x-axis:,
99. a.;
b. is negative; therefore,, and
101.

2.13.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519
103.
105.

2.13.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519107. The net dipole moment of the molecule is the vector sum of the individual dipole moments between the two O-H. The
separation O-H is 0.9578 angstroms:
Additional Problems
109.
111. Charges Q and q form a right triangle of sides 1 m and Charges 2Q and q form a right triangle of sides 1 m
and.
113. W=0.054J
115. a.;
b.;
c.
117.
119.,
121. Electric field of wire at x:,
123.

2.13.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519Substituting z for a, we have:
125. There is a net force only in the y-direction. Let be the angle the vector from dx to q makes with the x-axis. The
components along the x-axis cancel due to symmetry, leaving the y-component of the force.
Check Your Understanding
6.1. Place it so that its unit normal is perpendicular to.
6.2.
6.3 a.
b.
c.
d. 0
6.4. In this case, there is only. So,yes.
6.5.; This agrees with the calculation of Example 5.5 where we found the electric field by integrating over the
charged wire. Notice how much simpler the calculation of this electric field is with Gauss’s law.
6.6. If there are other charged objects around, then the c harges on the surface of the sphere will not necessari ly be spherically
symmetrical; there will be more in certain direction th an in other directions.
Conceptual Questions
1. a. If the planar surface is perpendicular to the elec tric field vector, the maximum flux would be obtaine d. b. If the planar
surface were parallel to the electric field vector, the m inimum flux would be obtained.
3. true
5. Since the electric field vector has a dependence, the fluxes are the same since.
7. a. no;
b. zero
9. Both fields vary as. Because the gravitational consta nt is so much smaller than, the gravitational field is orders of
magnitude weaker than the electric field.
11. No, it is produced by all charges both inside and outside the Gaussian surface.
13. No, since the situation does not have symmetry, making Gauss ’s law challenging to simplify.
15. Any shape of the Gaussian surface can be used. The only restriction is that the Gaussian integral must be c alculable;
therefore, a box or a cylinder are the most convenient g eometrical shapes for the Gaussian surface.
17. yes
19. Since the electric field is zero inside a conductor, a charge of is induced on the inside surface of the cavity. This
will put a charge of on the outside surface leaving a ne t charge of on the surface.

2.13.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519Problems
21. electric field in direction of unit normal;
electric field opposite to unit normal
23.
25. a.;
b.;
c.
27.
29.
31. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.
33.
35. Make a cube with q at the center, using the cube of side a. This would t ake four cubes of side a to make one side of the
large cube. The shaded side of the small cube would b e 1/24th of the total area of the large cube; there fore, the flux through
the shaded area would be.
37.
39. zero, also because flux in equals flux out
41.
43.
45. a. 0;
b. 0;
c.
47. a. 0;
b.
49. a. Yes, the length of the rod is much greater than the dist ance to the point in question.
b. No, The length of the rod is of the same order of magnit ude as the distance to the point in question.
c. Yes, the length of the rod is much greater than the dist ance to the point in question.
d. No. The length of the rod is of the same order of magnit ude as the distance to the point in question.
51. a.;
b.
53.
55.

2.13.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7651957.
59. integrate by parts:
61.
63. a. Outside:; Inside;
b.
65. a. E inside equals 0;
b.
67.
69. inside since enclosed =0
71. a.;

2.13.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519b.; c. since r would be either inside the second shell or if outsi de then q enclosed
equals 0.
Additional Problems
73.
75. a.; b. zero, since the flux through the upper half cancels the f lux through the lower half of the sphere
77.; There are two contributions to the surface integra l: one at the side of the rectangle at and the oth er at the
side at;
where the minus sign indicates that at, the electric field is along positive x and the unit normal is along negative
x. At, the unit normal and the electric field vector are i n the same direction:
79. didn’t keep consistent directions for the area vectors, or the electric fields
81. a. on one and on the other;
b.
83. Construct a Gaussian cylinder along the z-axis with cross-sectional area A.
85. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e. 0
87. Electric field due to plate without hole:.
Electric field of just hole filled with \(\displaystyle − σE=\frac{−σ}{2ε_0}(1−\frac{z}{\sqrt{R^2+z^2}}).
Thus,
89. a.; b.; c.; d. 0
Challenge Problems
91. Given the referenced link, using a distance to Vega of and a diameter of 2.4 m for the primary mirror, we
find that at a wavelength of 555.6 nm, Vega is emitting at that wavelength. Note that the flux through the
mirror is essentially constant.
93. The symmetry of the system forces to be perpendicula r to the sheet and constant over any plane parallel to the sheet.
To calculate the electric field, we choose the cylind rical Gaussian surface shown. The cross-section area an d the height of the
cylinder are A and 2x, respectively, and the cylinder is positioned so that it is bisected by the plane sheet. Since E is
perpendicular to each end and parallel to the side of the cylinder, we have EA as the flux through each end and there is no
flux through the side. The charge enclosed by the cyl inder is, so from Gauss’s law,, and the electric fiel d of an
infinite sheet of charge is4 5

2.13.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76519, in agreement with the calculation of in the text.
95. There is Q/2 on each side of the plate since the net charge is,
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.11: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
6.8: Gauss's Law (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
3.1: Electric Potential Energy
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
3.E: Practice
3.S: Summary
This page titled 3: Electric Potential and Capacitance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765453.1: Electric Potential Energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the work done by an electric force
Define electric potential energy
Apply work and potential energy in systems with electric char ges
Two terms commonly used to describe electricity are i ts energy and voltage, which we show in this chapter i s directly related to the
potential energy in a system. We know, for example, t hat great amounts of electrical energy can be stored in batteries, are
transmitted cross-country via currents through power li nes, and may jump from clouds to explode the sap of t rees. In a similar
manner, at the molecular level, ions cross cell membran es and transfer information.
Figure: The energy released in a lightning strike is a n excellent illustration of the vast quantities of ene rgy that may be stored
and released by an electric potential difference. In this chapter, we calculate just how much energy can be released in a lightning
strike and how this varies with the height of the clou ds from the ground. (credit: Anthony Quintano)
We also know about voltages associated with electricit y. Batteries are typically a few volts, the outlets i n your home frequently
produce 120 volts, and power lines can be as high as hundreds of thousands of volts. But energy and volta ge are not the same thing.
A motorcycle battery, for example, is small and woul d not be very successful in replacing a much larger car battery, yet each has
the same voltage. In this chapter, we examine the rela tionship between voltage and electrical energy, and begin to explore some of
the many applications of electricity.
When a free positive charge q is accelerated by an electric field, it is given kine tic energy (Figure). The process is analogous
to an object being accelerated by a gravitational f ield, as if the charge were going down an electrical h ill where its electric potential
energy is converted into kinetic energy, although of course the sources of the forces are very different. Let us explore the work done
on a charge q by the electric field in this process, so that we may devel op a definition of electric potential energy.
Figure: A charge accelerated by an electric field i s analogous to a mass going down a hill. In both cases, p otential energy
decreases as kinetic energy increases,. Work is done by a force, but since this force is conservative, we can w rite
.Learning Objectives

3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545The electrostatic or Coulomb force is conservative, which means that the work done on q is independent of the path taken, as we
will demonstrate later. This is exactly analogous to t he gravitational force. When a force is conservative, it is possible to define a
potential energy associated with the force. It is usu ally easier to work with the potential energy (because it depends only on
position) than to calculate the work directly.
To show this explicitly, consider an electric charge f ixed at the origin and move another charge toward q in such a manner
that, at each instant, the applied force exactly bal ances the electric force on Q (Figure). The work done by the applied
force on the charge Q changes the potential energy of Q. We call this potential energy the electrical potential energy of Q.
Figure: Displacement of “test” charge Q in the presence of fixed “source” charge q.
The work done by the applied force when the particle m oves from to may be calculated by
Since the applied force balances the electric force on Q, the two forces have equal magnitude and opposite d irections.
Therefore, the applied force is
where we have defined positive to be pointing away fro m the origin and r is the distance from the origin. The directions of both the
displacement and the applied force in the system in Figur e are parallel, and thus the work done on the system is po sitive.
We use the letter U to denote electric potential energy, which has units of joules (J). When a conservative force does nega tive work,
the system gains potential energy. When a conservativ e force does positive work, the system loses potential e nergy,. In
the system in Figure, the Coulomb force acts in the o pposite direction to the displacement; therefore, the work is negative.
However, we have increased the potential energy in the two-charg e system.
A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm () from a charge q fixed at the origin (Figure).
Naturally, the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q, eventually reaching 15 cm ().
Figure: The charge Q is repelled by q, thus having work done on it and gaining kinetic en ergy.
a. What is the work done by the electric field between and?
b. How much kinetic energy does Q have at?
c. If Q has a mass of, what is the speed of Q at?
Strategy
Calculate the work with the usual definition. Since Q started from rest, this is the same as the kinetic energ y.
Solution
a) Integrating force over distance, we obtainExample: Kinetic Energy of a Charged Particle

3.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545b) Since there are no other forces affecting the cha rge, the net Work on the charge is the same as the work done by the
electric field. Thus, using the work energy theorem, we can conclude that it is also the value of the kinetic energ y at.
c),
Significance
Charge Q was initially at rest; the electric field of q did work on Q, so now Q has kinetic energy equal to the work done
by the electric field.
In this example, the work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is p ositive and results from a loss in U, or a negative
. A value for U can be found at any point by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to
the other point.
Work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is p ositive and results from a loss in U, or a negative.
Mathematically,
Gravitational potential energy and electric potentia l energy are quite analogous. Potential energy account s for work done by a
conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the necessi ty of dealing with the
force directly. It is much more common, for example, t o use the concept of electric potential energy than to deal with the Coulomb
force directly in real-world applications.
In polar coordinates with q at the origin and Q located at r, the displacement element vector is and thus the work bec omes
Notice that this result only depends on the endpoint s and is otherwise independent of the path taken. To explore this further,
compare path to with path in Figure.
Figure:Two paths for displacement to. The work on se gments and are zero due to the electrical force be ing
perpendicular to the displacement along these paths. T herefore, work on paths and are equal.Electric Potential Energy

3.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545The segments and are arcs of circles centered at q. Since the force on Q points either toward or away from q, no work is
done by a force balancing the electric force, becau se it is perpendicular to the displacement along these arcs. Therefore, the only
work done is along segment which is identical to.
One implication of this work calculation is that if we we re to go around the path, the net work would be zero (Figure
). Recall that this is how we determine whether a forc e is conservative or not. Hence, because the electric force is related t o the
electric field by, the electric field is itself conser vative. That is,
Note that Q is a constant.
Figure: A closed path in an electric field. The net work around this path is zero.
Another implication is that we may define an electric potential energy. Recall that the work done by a co nservative force is also
expressed as the difference in the potential energy corresponding to that force. Therefore, the work to b ring a charge from a
reference point to a point of interest may be written as
and, by Equation, the difference in potential energy () of the test charge Q between the two points is
Therefore, we can write a general expression for the poten tial energy of two point charges (in spherical coordinates):
We may take the second term to be an arbitrary consta nt reference level, which serves as the zero reference:
A convenient choice of reference that relies on our common sense is that when the two charges are infinit ely far apart, there is no
interaction between them. (Recall the discussion of ref erence potential energy in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy.)
Taking the potential energy of this state to be zer o removes the term from the equation (just like whe n we say the ground is
zero potential energy in a gravitational potential energy problem), and the potential energy of Q when it is separated from q by a
distance r assumes the form
This formula is symmetrical with respect to and, so it is b est described as the potential energy of the two-charge syst em.
The Electrical Potential Energy of two charges and se parated by is given by,Electric Potential Energy of a Two Charge System

3.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm from a charge q fixed at the origin (Figure).
Naturally, the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q, eventually reaching 15 cm.
Figure: The charge is repelled by, thus having work done on it and losing potential energy.
What is the change in the potential energy of the two-cha rge system from to?
Strategy
Calculate the potential energy with the definition given above:
. Since Q started from rest, this is the same as the kinetic energy.
Solution
We have
Significance
The change in the potential energy is negative, as expected, and equal in magnitude to the change in ki netic energy in
this system. Recall from Example that the change in kinet ic energy was positive.
What is the potential energy of Q relative to the zero reference at infinity at in the a bove example?
Solution
It has kinetic energy of at point and potential e nergy of, which means that as Q approaches
infinity, its kinetic energy totals three times the kinetic energy at, since all of the potential ener gy gets converted to
kinetic.
Due to Coulomb’s law, the forces due to multiple cha rges on a test charge superimpose; they may be cal culated individually and
then added. This implies that the work integrals and h ence the resulting potential energies exhibit the sam e behavior. To
demonstrate this, we consider an example of assembling a system of four charges.Example: Potential Energy of a Charged Particle
Exercise

3.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545Find the amount of work an external agent must do in a ssembling four charges,, and
at the vertices of a square of side 1.0 cm, starting each ch arge from infinity (Figure).
Figure: How much work is needed to assemble this charge configuration?
Strategy
We bring in the charges one at a time, giving them starting locations at infinity and calculating the wo rk to bring them in
from infinity to their final location. We do this in order of increasing charge.
Solution
Step 1. First bring the charge to the origin. Since ther e are no other charges at a finite distance from th is
charge yet, no work is done in bringing it from infinity,
Step 2. While keeping the charge fixed at the origin, bring the charge to
(Figure). Now, the applied force must do work against the force exerted by the charge fixed at the
origin. The work done equals the change in the potential e nergy of the charge:
Figure: Step 2. Work to bring the charge from infi nity.
Step 3. While keeping the charges of and fixed in their places, bring in the charge to
(Figure). The work done in this step isExample: Assembling Four Positive Charges

3.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545
Figure: Step 3. The work to bring the charge from infinity.
Step 4. Finally, while keeping the first three charges in their places, bring the charge to
(Figure). The work done here is
Figure: Step 4. The work to bring the charge from infinity.
Hence, the total work done by the applied force in as sembling the four charges is equal to the sum of th e work in
bringing each charge from infinity to its final positio n:
Significance
The work on each charge depends only on its pairwise i nteractions with the other charges. No more complicated
interactions need to be considered; the work on the third charge only depends on its interaction with the first and second
charges, the interaction between the first and second cha rge does not affect the third.
Is the electrical potential energy of two point char ges positive or negative if the charges are of the s ame sign? Opposite signs?
How does this relate to the work necessary to bring the charge s into proximity from infinity?
Solution
positive, negative, and these quantities are the same as t he work you would need to do to bring the charges in from i nfinity
Note that the electrical potential energy is positive if the two charges are of the same type, either posi tive or negative, and negative
if the two charges are of opposite types. This makes se nse if you think of the change in the potential ene rgy as you bring the
two charges closer or move them farther apart. Dependi ng on the relative types of charges, you may have t o work on the system or
the system would do work on you, that is, your work is either positive or negative. If you have to do posit ive work on the system
(actually push the charges closer), then the energy o f the system should increase. If you bring two positi ve charges or two negative
charges closer, you have to do positive work on the sy stem, which raises their potential energy. Since poten tial energy is
proportional to 1/ r, the potential energy goes up when r goes down between two positive or two negative charges.Exercise

3.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76545On the other hand, if you bring a positive and a neg ative charge nearer, you have to do negative work on the system (the charges
are pulling you), which means that you take energy awa y from the system. This reduces the potential energy. Since potential energy
is negative in the case of a positive and a negative charge pair, the increase in 1/ r makes the potential energy more negative, which
is the same as a reduction in potential energy.
The result from Example may be extended to systems with a ny arbitrary number of charges.
This page titled 3.1: Electric Potential Energy is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.2: Electric Potential Energy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
7.1: Prelude to Electric Potential by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765463.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define electric potential, voltage, and potential differ ence
Define the electron-volt
Calculate electric potential and potential difference from potential energy and electric field
Describe systems in which the electron-volt is a useful unit
Apply conservation of energy to electric systems
Recall that earlier we defined electric field to be a quantity independent of the test charge in a given system, which would
nonetheless allow us to calculate the force that would result on an arbitrary test charge. (The default a ssumption in the absence of
other information is that the test charge is positive.) We briefly defined a field for gravity, but gravi ty is always attractive, whereas
the electric force can be either attractive or repu lsive. Therefore, although potential energy is perfe ctly adequate in a gravitational
system, it is convenient to define a quantity that all ows us to calculate the work on a charge independent of the magnitude of the
charge. Calculating the work directly may be difficul t, since and the direction and magnitude of can be complex for
multiple charges, for odd-shaped objects, and along arb itrary paths. But we do know that because, the work, and hence is
proportional to the test charge. To have a physical quantity that is independent of test charge, we defin e electric potential (or
simply potential, since electric is understood) to be th e potential energy per unit charge:
The electric potential energy per unit charge is
Since U is proportional to q, the dependence on q cancels. Thus, V does not depend on q. The change in potential energy is
crucial, so we are concerned with the difference in potential or potential difference between two points, where
The electric potential difference between points A and B, is defined to be the change in potential energy of a charge
q moved from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given the name volt (V)
after Alessandro V olta.
The familiar term voltage is the common name for electric potential differenc e. Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is quoted, it
is understood to be the potential difference between two points. For example, every battery has two terminals, and its voltage is the
potential difference between them. More fundamentally, the point you choose to be zero volts is arbitrary. Th is is analogous to the
fact that gravitational potential energy has an arb itrary zero, such as sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor. It is worthwhile to
emphasize the distinction between potential difference and electrical potential energy.
The relationship between potential difference (or volt age) and electrical potential energy is given by
orLearning Objectives
Electric Potential
Electric Potential Difference
Potential Difference and Electrical Potential Energy

3.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546V oltage is not the same as energy. V oltage is the ene rgy per unit charge. Thus, a motorcycle battery and a car battery can both have
the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one store s much more energy than
the other because. The car battery can move more char ge than the motorcycle battery, although both are 12-V batteries.
You have a 12.0-V motorcycle battery that can move 5 000 C of charge, and a 12.0-V car battery that can m ove 60,000 C of
charge. How much energy does each deliver? (Assume that t he numerical value of each charge is accurate to th ree significant
figures.)
Strategy
To say we have a 12.0-V battery means that its termina ls have a 12.0-V potential difference. When such a ba ttery moves
charge, it puts the charge through a potential differ ence of 12.0 V, and the charge is given a change in potential energy equal
to. To find the energy output, we multiply the charge mov ed by the potential difference.
Solution
For the motorcycle battery, and. The total energy de livered by the motorcycle battery is
Similarly, for the car battery, and
Significance
V oltage and energy are related, but they are not th e same thing. The voltages of the batteries are ident ical, but the energy
supplied by each is quite different. A car battery h as a much larger engine to start than a motorcycle. Note also that as a
battery is discharged, some of its energy is used int ernally and its terminal voltage drops, such as when headlights dim
because of a depleted car battery. The energy suppli ed by the battery is still calculated as in this exa mple, but not all of
the energy is available for external use.
How much energy does a 1.5-V AAA battery have that can move 100 C?
Answer
Note that the energies calculated in the previous exam ple are absolute values. The change in potential ene rgy for the battery is
negative, since it loses energy. These batteries, like ma ny electrical systems, actually move negative charge —electrons in
particular. The batteries repel electrons from their negative terminals (A) through whatever circuitry is involved and attract them to
their positive terminals (B), as shown in Figure. The change in potential is and the charge q is
negative, so that is negative, meaning the potential ene rgy of the battery has decreased when q has moved from A to B.Example: Calculating Energy
Exercise

3.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546
Figure: A battery moves negative charge from its nega tive terminal through a headlight to its positive ter minal. Appropriate
combinations of chemicals in the battery separate char ges so that the negative terminal has an excess of negat ive charge, which is
repelled by it and attracted to the excess positive ch arge on the other terminal. In terms of potential, t he positive terminal is at a
higher voltage than the negative terminal. Inside th e battery, both positive and negative charges move.
When a 12.0-V car battery powers a single 30.0-W headlight, how many electrons pass through it each second?
Strategy
To find the number of electrons, we must first find t he charge that moves in 1.00 s. The charge moved is related to voltage
and energy through the equations. A 30.0-W lamp use s 30.0 joules per second. Since the battery loses energy,
we have and, since the electrons are going from the negative terminal to the positive, we see that
Solution
To find the charge q moved, we solve the equation:
Entering the values for and, we get
The number of electrons is the total charge divided b y the charge per electron. That is,
Significance
This is a very large number. It is no wonder that we do not ordinarily observe individual electrons with so many being
present in ordinary systems. In fact, electricity ha d been in use for many decades before it was determin ed that the
moving charges in many circumstances were negative. Positive charge moving in the opposite direction of n egative
charge often produces identical effects; this makes it dif ficult to determine which is moving or whether both are movi ng.
How many electrons would go through a 24.0-W lamp?
Answer
The Electron-Volt
The energy per electron is very small in macroscopic situations like that in the previous example—a tiny fraction of a joule. But on
a submicroscopic scale, such energy per particle (ele ctron, proton, or ion) can be of great importance. Fo r example, even a tinyExample: How Many Electrons Move through a Headlight Each Second?
Exercise

3.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546fraction of a joule can be great enough for these p articles to destroy organic molecules and harm livi ng tissue. The particle may do
its damage by direct collision, or it may create harm ful X-rays, which can also inflict damage. It is useful to have an energy unit
related to submicroscopic effects.
Figure shows a situation related to the definition o f such an energy unit. An electron is accelerated betwe en two charged metal
plates, as it might be in an old-model television tu be or oscilloscope. The electron gains kinetic energy that is later converted into
another form—light in the television tube, for exam ple. (Note that in terms of energy, “downhill” for the electron is “uphill” for a
positive charge.) Since energy is related to voltage by, we c an think of the joule as a coulomb-volt.
Figure: A typical electron gun accelerates electrons using a potential difference between two separated me tal plates. By
conservation of energy, the kinetic energy has to equ al the change in potential energy, so. The energy o f the electron in
electron-volts is numerically the same as the voltage b etween the plates. For example, a 5000-V potential d ifference produces
5000-eV electrons. The conceptual construct, namely t wo parallel plates with a hole in one, is shown in (a), while a real electron
gun is shown in (b).
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called the electron-volt (eV), which is the energy
given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a po tential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
An electron accelerated through a potential differen ce of 1 V is given an energy of 1 eV. It follows that an electron accelerated
through 50 V gains 50 eV. A potential difference of 1 00,000 V (100 kV) gives an electron an energy of 100, 000 eV (100 keV), and
so on. Similarly, an ion with a double positive charge accelerated through 100 V gains 200 eV of energy. Th ese simple relationships
between accelerating voltage and particle charges ma ke the electron-volt a simple and convenient energy unit in such
circumstances.
The electron-volt is commonly employed in submicrosco pic processes—chemical valence energies and molecula r and nuclear
binding energies are among the quantities often expr essed in electron-volts. For example, about 5 eV of e nergy is required to break
up certain organic molecules. If a proton is accelera ted from rest through a potential difference of 30 k V, it acquires an energy of 30
keV (30,000 eV) and can break up as many as 6000 of th ese molecules. Nuclear
decay energies are on the order of 1 MeV (1,000,000 eV) per event and can thus produce significant biological damag e.
Conservation of Energy
The total energy of a system is conserved if there i s no net addition (or subtraction) due to work or he at transfer. For conservative
forces, such as the electrostatic force, conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a constant.The Electron-Volt Unit

3.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a system; that is,. A loss of U for a
charged particle becomes an increase in its K. Conservation of energy is stated in equation form as
or
where i and f stand for initial and final conditions. As we have found many times before, considering energy can give us insights
and facilitate problem solving.
a) Calculate the final speed of a free electron acce lerated from rest through a potential difference of 100 V. (Assume that this
numerical value is accurate to three significant figures.)
b) How would this example change with a positron? A positron i s identical to an electron except the charge is positive.
Strategy
We have a system with only conservative forces. Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum, and neglec ting the
gravitational force (we will check on this assumption later), all of the electrical potential energy is c onverted into kinetic
energy. We can identify the initial and final forms of e nergy to be
Solution
a) Conservation of energy states that
Entering the forms identified above, we obtain
We solve this for v:
Entering values for q, V, and m gives
b) It would be going in the opposite direction, with no effec t on the calculations as presented.
Significance
Note that both the charge and the initial voltage ar e negative, as in Figure. From the discussion of elect ric charge
and electric field, we know that electrostatic forces on small particles are generally very large compared with the
gravitational force. The large final speed confirms t hat the gravitational force is indeed negligible her e. The large speed
also indicates how easy it is to accelerate electrons wi th small voltages because of their very small mass. V ol tages much
higher than the 100 V in this problem are typically used in electron guns. These higher voltages produc e electron speeds
so great that effects from special relativity must be taken into account and will be discussed else where. That is why we
consider a low voltage (accurately) in this example.Example: Electrical Potential Energy Converted into Kinetic Energy

3.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Voltage and Electric Field
So far, we have explored the relationship between volta ge and energy. Now we want to explore the relationship b etween voltage
and electric field. We will start with the general cas e for a non-uniform field. Recall that our general formula for the potential
energy of a test charge q at point P relative to reference point R is
When we substitute in the definition of electric field, this becomes
Applying our definition of potential to this potentia l energy, we find that, in general,
From our previous discussion of the potential energy of a charge in an electric field, the result is ind ependent of the path chosen,
and hence we can pick the integral path that is most conven ient.
Consider the special case of a positive point charg e q at the origin. To calculate the potential caused b y q at a distance r from the
origin relative to a reference of 0 at infinity (re call that we did the same for potential energy), let and, with
and use. When we evaluate the integral
for this system, we have
This result,
is the standard form of the potential of a point charge. Th is will be explored further in the next section.
To examine another interesting special case, suppose a uniform electric field is produced by placing a p otential difference (or
voltage) across two parallel metal plates, labeled A and B (Figure). Examining this situation will tell us what voltage is
needed to produce a certain electric field strength. It will also reveal a more fundamental relationship between electric potential and
electric field.Relationship Between Voltage and Electric Field

3.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546
Figure: The relationship between V and E for parallel conducting plates is. (Note that in m agnitude. For a
charge that is moved from plate A at higher potential to plate B at lower potential, a minus sign needs to be included as follows:
From a physicist’s point of view, either or can be used to describe any interaction between charges. However, is a scalar
quantity and has no direction, whereas is a vector q uantity, having both magnitude and direction. (Note t hat the magnitude of the
electric field, a scalar quantity, is represented by E.) The relationship between and is revealed by calcul ating the work done
by the electric force in moving a charge from point A to point B. But, as noted earlier, arbitrary charge distributi ons require
calculus. We therefore look at a uniform electric field as an interesting special case.
The work done by the electric field in Figure to mov e a positive charge q from A, the positive plate, higher potential, to B, the
negative plate, lower potential, is
The potential difference between points A and B is
Entering this into the expression for work yields
Work is: here, since the path is parallel to the field. Thus,. Since we see that
Substituting this expression for work into the previous equation gives
The charge cancels, so we obtain for the voltage between po ints A and B.
where d is the distance from A to B, or the distance between the plates in Figure.
Note that this equation implies that the units for el ectric field are volts per meter. We already know the units for electric field are
newtons per coulomb; thus, the following relation among un its is valid:In uniform E-field only:

3.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Furthermore, we may extend this to the integral form. Su bstituting Equation into our definition for the pot ential difference
between points A and B, we obtain
which simplifies to
As a demonstration, from this we may calculate the pote ntial difference between two points (A and B) equidistant from a point
charge q at the origin, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The arc for calculating the potential diffe rence between two points that are equidistant from a point charge at the
origin.
To do this, we integrate around an arc of the circle of constant radius r between A and B, which means we let, while
using. Thus,
for this system becomes
However, and therefore
This result, that there is no difference in potential along a constant radius from a point charge, will co me in handy when we map
potentials.
Dry air can support a maximum electric field strengt h of about. Above that value, the field creates eno ugh
ionization in the air to make the air a conductor. This allows a discharge or spark that reduces the fiel d. What, then, is the
maximum voltage between two parallel conducting plates s eparated by 2.5 cm of dry air?
Strategy
We are given the maximum electric field E between the plates and the distance d between them. We can use the equation
to calculate the maximum voltage.
Solution
The potential difference or voltage between the plates i s
Entering the given values for E and d givesExample: What Is the Highest Voltage Possible between Two Plates?

3.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546or
(The answer is quoted to only two digits, since the maximum field strength is approximate.)
Significance
One of the implications of this result is that it ta kes about 75 kV to make a spark jump across a 2.5-cm (1-in.) gap, or
150 kV for a 5-cm spark. This limits the voltages that can exist between conductors, perhaps on a power transm ission
line. A smaller voltage can cause a spark if there a re spines on the surface, since sharp points have large r field strengths
than smooth surfaces. Humid air breaks down at a lower fiel d strength, meaning that a smaller voltage will make a spark
jump through humid air. The largest voltages can be b uilt up with static electricity on dry days (Figure).
Figure: A spark chamber is used to trace the paths of h igh-energy particles. Ionization created by the part icles as
they pass through the gas between the plates allows a spa rk to jump. The sparks are perpendicular to the plate s,
following electric field lines between them. The pot ential difference between adjacent plates is not high enough to cause
sparks without the ionization produced by particles fr om accelerator experiments (or cosmic rays). This form of detector
is now archaic and no longer in use except for demonst ration purposes. (credit b: modification of work by Ja ck Collins)
An electron gun (Figure) has parallel plates separat ed by 4.00 cm and gives electrons 25.0 keV of energ y. (a) What is the
electric field strength between the plates? (b) What force would this field exert on a piece of plastic with a charge
that gets between the plates?
Strategy
Strategy
Since the voltage and plate separation are given, the electric field strength can be calculated directly from the expression
. Once we know the electric field strength, we can find t he force on a charge by using. Since the electric
field is in only one direction, we can write this equation in terms of the magnitudes,.
Solution
a. The expression for the magnitude of the electric fie ld between two uniform metal plates is
Since the electron is a single charge and is given 2 5.0 keV of energy, the potential difference must be 2 5.0 kV. Entering
this value for and the plate separation of 0.0400 m, we ob tain
b. The magnitude of the force on a charge in an electri c field is obtained from the equationExample: Field and Force inside an Electron Gun

3.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Substituting known values gives
Significance Note that the units are newtons, since. Bec ause the electric field is uniform between the
plates, the force on the charge is the same no matter wh ere the charge is located between the plates.
Given a point charge at the origin, calculate the p otential difference between point a distance from
q, and a distance from q, where the two points have an angle of between them (Figur e).
Figure: Find the difference in potential between an d.
Strategy
Do this in two steps. The first step is to use and let (point) and
(point, not marked, in the direction of but a dis tance away), with and Then perform the
integral.
The second step is to integrate around an arc of co nstant radius r, which means we let with
limits, still using.
Then add the two results together.
Solution
For the first part, for this system becomes which compute s to
For the second step, becomes, but and therefore. Ad ding
the two parts together, we get 300 V.
Significance/Important
We have demonstrated the use of the integral form of the potential difference to obtain a numerical resu lt. Notice that, in
this particular system, we could have also used the form ula for the potential due to a point charge at the two points and
simply taken the difference.
1. Examine the situation to determine if static electric ity is involved; this may concern separated stationary c harges, the forces
among them, and the electric fields they create.
2. Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Dete rmine
whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly— if so, it may be useful to draw a free-body diagram, usin g electric
field lines.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the pr oblem as stated (identify the knowns). It is important to
distinguish the Coulomb force F from the electric field E, for example.Example: Calculating Potential of a Point Charge
Problem-Solving Strategy: Electrostatics

3.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765465. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be de termined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as request ed.
6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make se nse? Are units correct and the numbers involved reasonable?
Calculations of Electric Potential
The electric potential due to a point charge is can be d educed from.
The electric potential of a point charge is given by
The potential in Equation at infinity is chosen to be zero. Thus, for a point charge decreases with dis tance, whereas for a
point charge decreases with distance squared:
Recall that the electric potential V is a scalar and has no direction, whereas the electr ic field is a vector. To find the voltage due to
a combination of point charges, you add the individua l voltages as numbers. To find the total electric fi eld, you must add the
individual fields as vectors, taking magnitude and direction into account. This is consistent with the fac t that V is closely associated
with energy, a scalar, whereas is closely associated with fo rce, a vector.
Charges in static electricity are typically in the n anocoulomb (nC) to microcoulomb range. What is the vo ltage 5.00 cm
away from the center of a 1-cm-diameter solid metal sphere that has a –3.00-nC static charge?
Strategy
As we discussed in Electric Charges and Fields, charge on a metal sphere spreads out uniformly and produces a field like
that of a point charge located at its center. Thus, we can fin d the voltage using the equation.
Solution
Entering known values into the expression for the poten tial of a point charge (Equation), we obtain
Significance
The negative value for voltage means a positive cha rge would be attracted from a larger distance, since the potential is
lower (more negative) than at larger distances. Conversely, a negative charge would be repelled, as expected.
A demonstration Van de Graaff generator has a 25.0-cm-diameter metal sphere that produces a voltage of 100 kV near its
surface (Figure).
a) What excess charge resides on the sphere? (Assume tha t each numerical value here is shown with three significant figures.)
b) What is the potential inside the metal sphere?Electric Potential of a Point Charge
Example: What Voltage Is Produced by a Small Charge on a Metal Sphere?
Example: What Is the Excess Charge on a Van de Graaff Generator?

3.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546
Figure: The voltage of this demonstration Van de Graa ff generator is measured between the charged sphere an d ground.
Earth’s potential is taken to be zero as a reference. The potential of the charged conducting sphere is the same as that of an
equal point charge at its center.
Strategy
The potential on the surface is the same as that of a point charge at the center of the sphere, 12.5 cm awa y. (The radius of
the sphere is 12.5 cm.) We can thus determine the excess ch arge using Equation
Solution
a) Solving for and entering known values gives
b)
Recall that the electric field inside a conductor i s zero. Hence, any path from a point on the surface to any point in the
interior will have an integrand of zero when calculat ing the change in potential, and thus the potential in the interior of
the sphere is identical to that on the surface.
Significance
This is a relatively small charge, but it produces a rather large voltage. We have another indication her e that it is difficult
to store isolated charges.
The voltages in both of these examples could be measu red with a meter that compares the measured potentia l with ground
potential. Ground potential is often taken to be zero (instead of taking the potential at infinity to be zero). It is the potential
difference between two points that is of importance, a nd very often there is a tacit assumption that some r eference point, such as

3.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Earth or a very distant point, is at zero potential. As noted earlier, this is analogous to taking sea leve l as when considering
gravitational potential energy.
Systems of Multiple Point Charges
Just as the electric field obeys a superposition princi ple, so does the electric potential. Consider a syste m consisting of N charges
. What is the net electric potential V at a space point P from these charges? Each of these charges is a source charge that
produces its own electric potential at point P, independent of whatever other changes may be doing. Let be the electric
potentials at P produced by the charges, respectively. Then, the n et electric potential at that point is equal to th e sum
of these individual electric potentials. You can ea sily show this by calculating the potential energy of a test charge when you bring
the test charge from the reference point at infinity to point P:
Note that electric potential follows the same principle of superposition as electric field and electric poten tial energy. To show this
more explicitly, note that a test charge at the po int P in space has distances of from the N charges fixed in space
above, as shown in Figure. Using our formula for the p otential of a point charge for each of these (assume d to be point)
charges, we find that
Therefore, the electric potential energy of the test cha rge is
which is the same as the work to bring the test charge into the system, as found in the first section of the chapter.
Figure: Notation for direct distances from charges to a space point P.
An electric dipole is a system of two equal but opposite charges a fixed distance apart. This system is used to model many
real-world systems, including atomic and molecular in teractions. One of these systems is the water molecule, un der certain
circumstances. These circumstances are met inside a m icrowave oven, where electric fields with alternating d irections make
the water molecules change orientation. This vibration is the same as heat at the molecular level.
Consider the dipole in Figure with the charge magnitude of and separation distance
a) What is the potential at the following locations in s pace? (a) (0, 0, 1.0 cm); (b) (0, 0, –5.0 cm); (c) (3.0 cm, 0, 2.0 cm).
d) What is the potential on the x-axis? Electric Potential Due to Multiple Point Charges
Example: Electric Potential of a Dipole

3.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546
Figure: A general diagram of an electric dipole, an d the notation for the distances from the individual charges to a point P
in space.
Strategy
Apply to each of these three points.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
d. The x-axis the potential is zero, due to the equal and opposite charges the same distance from it.
Significance
Note that evaluating potential is significantly simpl er than electric field, due to potential being a sca lar instead of a
vector.

Potential of Continuous Charge Distributions
We have been working with point charges a great deal, b ut what about continuous charge distributions? Recall from Equation
that
We may treat a continuous charge distribution as a co llection of infinitesimally separated individual poin ts. This yields the integral
for the potential at a point P. Note that is the distance from each individual po int in the charge distribution to the point P. As we
saw in Electric Charges and Fields, the infinitesimal charges are given byElectric Potential Due to a Continuous Charge Distribution

3.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546where is linear charge density, is the charge per unit area, and is the charge per unit volume.
Find the electric potential of a uniformly charged, nonconducting wire with linear density (coulomb/meter) and length L at a
point that lies on a line that divides the wire into two equa l parts.
Strategy
To set up the problem, we choose Cartesian coordinates in such a way as to exploit the symmetry in the proble m as much as
possible. We place the origin at the center of the wir e and orient the y-axis along the wire so that the ends of the wire are a t
. The field point P is in the xy-plane and since the choice of axes is up to us, we ch oose the x-axis to pass through
the field point P, as shown in Figure.
Figure: We want to calculate the electric potential due to a line of charge.
Solution
Consider a small element of the charge distribution between y and. The charge in this cell is and the
distance from the cell to the field point P is. Therefore, the potential becomes
Significance
Note that this was simpler than the equivalent problem for electric field, due to the use of scalar quanti ties. Recall that
we expect the zero level of the potential to be at i nfinity, when we have a finite charge. To examine this, we take the
limit of the above potential as x approaches infinity; in this case, the terms inside the natural log approach one, and
hence the potential approaches zero in this limit. Note that we could have done this problem equivalently in cylindrical
coordinates; the only effect would be to substitute r for x and z for y.Example: Potential of a Line of Charge

3.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546A ring has a uniform charge density, with units of co ulomb per unit meter of arc. Find the electric poten tial at a point on the
axis passing through the center of the ring.
Strategy
We use the same procedure as for the charged wire. T he difference here is that the charge is distribute d on a circle. We
divide the circle into infinitesimal elements shaped as arcs on the circle and use cylindrical coordinat es shown in Figure
Figure: We want to calculate the electric potential due to a ring of charge.
Solution
A general element of the arc between and is of leng th and therefore contains a charge equal to. The
element is at a distance of from P, and therefore the potential is
Significance
This result is expected because every element of the r ing is at the same distance from point P. The net potential at P is
that of the total charge placed at the common distance,.
A disk of radius R has a uniform charge density with units of coulomb meter squared. Find the electric potential at any po int
on the axis passing through the center of the disk.
Strategy
We divide the disk into ring-shaped cells, and make u se of the result for a ring worked out in the previou s example, then
integrate over r in addition to. This is shown in Figure.Example: Potential Due to a Ring of Charge
Example: Potential Due to a Uniform Disk of Charge

3.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546
Figure: We want to calculate the electric potential due to a disk of charge.
Solution
An infinitesimal width cell between cylindrical coordi nates r and shown in Figure will be a ring of charges
whose electric potential at the field point has the fol lowing expression
where
The superposition of potential of all the infinitesima l rings that make up the disk gives the net potentia l at point P. This
is accomplished by integrating from to:
Significance
The basic procedure for a disk is to first integrate a round and then over r. This has been demonstrated for uniform
(constant) charge density. Often, the charge density wil l vary with r, and then the last integral will give different results.
Find the electric potential due to an infinitely long uni formly charged wire.
Strategy
Since we have already worked out the potential of a fi nite wire of length L in Example, we might wonder if taking
in our previous result will work:
However, this limit does not exist because the argument of the logarithm becomes [2/0] as, so this way of fin ding V
of an infinite wire does not work. The reason for thi s problem may be traced to the fact that the charge s are not localized in
some space but continue to infinity in the direction of the wire. Hence, our (unspoken) assumption that zero potential must
be an infinite distance from the wire is no longer valid.
To avoid this difficulty in calculating limits, let us use the definition of potential by integrating o ver the electric field from
the previous section, and the value of the electric fi eld from this charge configuration from the previous chap ter.Example: Potential Due to an Infinite Charged Wire

3.2.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76546Solution
We use the integral
where R is a finite distance from the line of charge, as shown in Figure.
Figure: Points of interest for calculating the potenti al of an infinite line of charge.
With this setup, we use and to obtain
Now, if we define the reference potential at, this simpli fies to
Note that this form of the potential is quite usable; it is 0 at 1 m and is undefined at infinity, which is why we could not
use the latter as a reference.
Significance
Although calculating potential directly can be quite convenient, we just found a system for which this stra tegy does not
work well. In such cases, going back to the definition of p otential in terms of the electric field may offer a way for ward.
What is the potential on the axis of a nonuniform ring of charge, where the charge density is?
Solution
It will be zero, as at all points on the axis, there are equal and opposite charges equidistant from the point of interest. Note
that this distribution will, in fact, have a dipole moment.
This page titled 3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.3: Electric Potential and Potential Difference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
7.4: Calculations of Electric Potential by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

3.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765493.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define equipotential surfaces and equipotential lines
Explain the relationship between equipotential lines a nd electric field lines
Map equipotential lines for one or two point charges
Describe the potential of a conductor
Compare and contrast equipotential lines and elevatio n lines on topographic maps
We can represent electric potentials (voltages) picto rially, just as we drew pictures to illustrate electric fields. This is not surprising,
since the two concepts are related. Consider Figure, wh ich shows an isolated positive point charge and its ele ctric field lines,
which radiate out from a positive charge and terminat e on negative charges. We use blue arrows to represe nt the magnitude and
direction of the electric field, and we use green lin es to represent places where the electric potential is constant. These are called
equipotential surfaces in three dimensions, or equipotential lines in two dimensions. The term equipotential is also used as a
noun, referring to an equipotential line or surface. The potential for a point charge is the same anywhere on an imaginary sphere of
radius r surrounding the charge. This is true because the p otential for a point charge is given by and thus h as the same
value at any point that is a given distance r from the charge. An equipotential sphere is a circle in the two-dimensional view of
Figure. Because the electric field lines point radially awa y from the charge, they are perpendicular to the equipoten tial lines.
Figure: An isolated point charge Q with its electric field lines in blue and equipotential lines in green. The potential is the
same along each equipotential line, meaning that no work is required to move a charge anywhere along one of those lines. Work is
needed to move a charge from one equipotential line to another. Equipotential lines are perpendicular t o electric field lines in every
case. For a three-dimensional version, explore the fir st media link.
It is important to note that equipotential lines are always perpendicular to ele ctric field lines. No work is required to move a charge
along an equipotential, since. Thus, the work is
Work is zero if the direction of the force is perpe ndicular to the displacement. Force is in the same dire ction as, so motion along
an equipotential must be perpendicular to. More precisel y, work is related to the electric field by
Note that in Equation, and symbolize the magnitud es of the electric field and force, respectively. Nei ther nor is zero
and is also not zero. So must be 0, meaning must be. In other words, motion along an equipotential is perpen dicular to
E.
One of the rules for static electric fields and cond uctors is that the electric field must be perpendic ular to the surface of any
conductor. This implies that a conductor is an equipotential surface in static situat ions. There can be no voltage difference acrossLearning Objectives

3.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549the surface of a conductor, or charges will flow. One of the uses of this fact is that a conductor can be fixed at what we consider
zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good conductor—a process called grounding. Grounding can be a useful safety tool.
For example, grounding the metal case of an electrical ap pliance ensures that it is at zero volts relative to Ea rth.
Figure: The electric field lines and equipotential l ines for two equal but opposite charges. The equipoten tial lines can be drawn
by making them perpendicular to the electric field lines, if those are known. Note that the potential is greatest (most positive) near
the positive charge and least (most negative) near the negative charge. For a three-dimensional version, exp lore the first media link.
Because a conductor is an equipotential, it can repla ce any equipotential surface. For example, in Figure, a charged spherical
conductor can replace the point charge, and the elec tric field and potential surfaces outside of it will be unchanged, confirming the
contention that a spherical charge distribution is equiv alent to a point charge at its center.
Figure shows the electric field and equipotential li nes for two equal and opposite charges. Given the ele ctric field lines, the
equipotential lines can be drawn simply by making th em perpendicular to the electric field lines. Conver sely, given the
equipotential lines, as in Figure, the electric fie ld lines can be drawn by making them perpendicular to the equipotentials, as
in Figure.
Figure: (a) These equipotential lines might be measure d with a voltmeter in a laboratory experiment. (b) The corresponding
electric field lines are found by drawing them perpe ndicular to the equipotentials. Note that these field s are consistent with two
equal negative charges. For a three-dimensional version, play with the first media link.
To improve your intuition, we show a three-dimensional variant of the potential in a system with two opposing charges. Figure
displays a three-dimensional map of electric poten tial, where lines on the map are for equipotential su rfaces. The hill is at the
positive charge, and the trough is at the negative c harge. The potential is zero far away from the charges. Note that the cut off at a
particular potential implies that the charges are on co nducting spheres with a finite radius.
A two-dimensional map of the cross-sectional plane th at contains both charges is shown in Figure. The line that is equidistant
from the two opposite charges corresponds to zero pote ntial, since at the points on the line, the positive po tential from the positive
charge cancels the negative potential from the nega tive charge. Equipotential lines in the cross-section al plane are closed loops,
which are not necessarily circles, since at each point, the n et potential is the sum of the potentials from each charge.

3.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549
Figure: The Figure shows two-dimensional field and vol tage patterns. Top: A uniformly charged rod. Middle: A dipole. In both
cases, the diagram on the left shows the field vectors a nd constant-voltage curves, while the one on the righ t shows the voltage (updown coordinate) as a function of x and y. Interpret ing the field diagrams: Each arrow represents the fiel d at the point where its tail
has been positioned. For clarity, some of the arrows in regions of very strong field strength are not shown --- they would be too
long to show. Interpreting the constant-voltage curve s: In regions of very strong fields, the curves are not shown because they
would merge together to make solid black regions. Int erpreting the perspective plots: Keep in mind that ev en though we're
visualizing things in three dimensions, these are really two-dimensional voltage patterns being represented. T he third (up-down)
dimension represents voltage, not position.
Bottom: a cross-section of the electric potential map of two opposite charges of equal magnitude. The poten tial is negative near the
negative charge and positive near the positive charge.
One of the most important cases is that of the familia r parallel conducting plates shown in Figure. Between the plates, the
equipotentials are evenly spaced and parallel. The sa me field could be maintained by placing conducting plates at the equipotential
lines at the potentials shown.

3.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549
Figure: The electric field and equipotential lines b etween two metal plates. Note that the electric fiel d is perpendicular to the
equipotentials and hence normal to the plates at thei r surface as well as in the center of the region betwe en them.
Consider the parallel plates Figure. These have equi potential lines that are parallel to the plates in th e space between and
evenly spaced. An example of this (with sample values) is given in Figure. We could draw a similar set of equipotential
isolines for gravity on hills. If the hill has any extent at the same slope, the isolines along that extent would be parallel to each
other. Furthermore, in regions of constant slope, the isolines would be evenly spaced. An example of real to pographic lines is
shown in Figure.
Figure. (a) A topographical map of Devil’s Tower, Wy oming. Lines that are close together indicate very ste ep terrain. (b) A
perspective photo of Devil’s Tower shows just how steep i ts sides are. Notice the top of the tower has the same sh ape as the center
of the topographical map.
You have seen the equipotential lines of a point char ge in Figure. How do we calculate them? For example, if we have a
charge at the origin, what are the equipotential surf aces at which the potential is (a) 100 V, (b) 50 V, (c) 20 V, and (d)
10 V?
Strategy
Set the equation for the potential of a point charge equal to a constant and solve for the remaining va riable(s). Then
calculate values as needed.
Solution
In, let V be a constant. The only remaining variable is r; hence,. Thus, the equipotential
surfaces are spheres about the origin. Their locations are:
a.;
b.;
c.;Example: Calculating Equipotential Lines

3.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549d..
Significance
This means that equipotential surfaces around a point charge are spheres of constant radius, as shown earlie r, with welldefined locations.
Two large conducting plates carry equal and opposite charges, with a surface charge density of magnitude, as
shown in Figure. The separation between the plates is.
a. What is the electric field between the plates?
b. What is the potential difference between the plates?
c. What is the distance between equipotential planes whic h differ by 100 V?
Figure: The electric field between oppositely charge d parallel plates. A portion is released at the positiv e plate.
Strategy
1. Since the plates are described as “large” and the distan ce between them is not, we will approximate each of them as an
infinite plane, and apply the result from Gauss’s law in th e previous chapter.
2. Use.
3. Since the electric field is constant, find the ratio o f 100 V to the total potential difference; then calcula te this fraction of
the distance.
Solution
a. The electric field is directed from the positive to the negative plate as shown in the figure, and its m agnitude is given
by
b. To find the potential difference between the pla tes, we use a path from the negative to the positive plate that is
directed against the field. The displacement vector and the electric field are antiparallel so. The
potential difference between the positive plate and the n egative plate is thenExample: Potential Difference between Oppositely Charged Parallel Plates

3.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549c. The total potential difference is 500 V, so 1/5 of the distance between the plates will be the distance b etween 100-V
potential differences. The distance between the plates is 6.5 mm, so there will be 1.3 mm between 100-V pote ntial
differences.
Significance
You have now seen a numerical calculation of the location s of equipotentials between two charged parallel plates.
Distribution of Charges on Conductors
In Example with a point charge, we found that the eq uipotential surfaces were in the form of spheres, with the point charge at
the center. Given that a conducting sphere in electro static equilibrium is a spherical equipotential surf ace, we should expect that we
could replace one of the surfaces in Example with a conducting sphere and have an identical solution o utside the sphere.
Inside will be rather different, however.
Figure: An isolated conducting sphere.
To investigate this, consider the isolated conducting sphere of Figure that has a radius R and an excess charge q. To find the
electric field both inside and outside the sphere, not e that the sphere is isolated, so its surface change distribution and the electric
field of that distribution are spherically symmetric. We can therefore represent the field as. To calcu late, we apply
Gauss’s law over a closed spherical surface S of radius r that is concentric with the conducting sphere. Since is constant and
on the sphere,
For, is within the conductor, so recall from our pre vious study of Gauss’s law that and Gauss’s law gives,
as expected inside a conductor at equilibrium. If, S encloses the conductor so. From Gauss’s law,
The electric field of the sphere may therefore be wri tten as
and

3.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549As expected, in the region, the electric field due to a charge q placed on an isolated conducting sphere of radius R is identical
to the electric field of a point charge q located at the center of the sphere.
To find the electric potential inside and outside th e sphere, note that for, the potential must be the s ame as that of an isolated
point charge q located at,
simply due to the similarity of the electric field.
For, so V(r) is constant in this region. Since,
We will use this result to show that
for two conducting spheres of radii and, with surfa ce charge densities and respectively, that are co nnected by a thin
wire, as shown in Figure. The spheres are sufficiently se parated so that each can be treated as if it were iso lated (aside from
the wire). Note that the connection by the wire means th at this entire system must be an equipotential.
Figure: Two conducting spheres are connected by a thi n conducting wire.
We have just seen that the electrical potential at the su rface of an isolated, charged conducting sphere of radi us R is
The electrical potential is the same along all material s connect by a conductor
Now, the spheres are connected by a conductor and are ther efore at the same potential; hence
and
The net charge on a conducting sphere and its surface charge density are related by. Substituting this eq uation into the
previous one, we find
indicates that the surface charge density is higher a t locations with a small radius of curvature than at locations
with a large radius of curvature.Electric Potential Along Conducting Surfaces
Distribution of charge along surfaces

3.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76549Obviously, two spheres connected by a thin wire do not c onstitute a typical conductor with a variable radius of curvature.
Nevertheless, this result does at least provide a quali tative idea of how charge density varies over the su rface of a conductor. The
equation indicates that where the radius of curvature is l arge (points B and D in Figure), and E are small.
Similarly, the charges tend to be denser where the cu rvature of the surface is greater, as demonstrated by the charge distribution on
oddly shaped metal (Figure). The surface charge den sity is higher at locations with a small radius of cur vature than at
locations with a large radius of curvature.
Figure: The surface charge density and the electric f ield of a conductor are greater at regions with small er radii of curvature.
A practical application of this phenomenon is the lightning rod, which is simply a grounded metal rod with a sharp en d pointing
upward. As positive charge accumulates in the ground du e to a negatively charged cloud overhead, the elect ric field around the
sharp point gets very large. When the field reaches a value of approximately (the dielectric strength of the air), the
free ions in the air are accelerated to such high e nergies that their collisions with air molecules actua lly ionize the molecules. The
resulting free electrons in the air then flow throug h the rod to Earth, thereby neutralizing some of the positive charge. This keeps
the electric field between the cloud and the ground from getting large enough to produce a lightning bo lt in the region around the
rod.
An important application of electric fields and equi potential lines involves the heart. The heart relies o n electrical signals to
maintain its rhythm. The movement of electrical sign als causes the chambers of the heart to contract an d relax. When a person has
a heart attack, the movement of these electrical sig nals may be disturbed. An artificial pacemaker and a defibrillator can be used to
initiate the rhythm of electrical signals. The equipo tential lines around the heart, the thoracic region, and the axis of the heart are
useful ways of monitoring the structure and functions of the heart. An electrocardiogram (ECG) measures th e small electric signals
being generated during the activity of the heart.

This page titled 3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.6: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
7.3: Electric Potential and Potential Difference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

3.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765483.4: Determining Field from Potential
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how to calculate the electric field in a system fro m the given potential
Calculate the electric field in a given direction from a given potential
Calculate the electric field throughout space from a giv en potential
Recall that we were able, in certain systems, to calcula te the potential by integrating over the electric f ield. As you may already
suspect, this means that we may calculate the electric field by taking derivatives of the potential, alth ough going from a scalar to a
vector quantity introduces some interesting wrinkles. We frequently need to calculate the force in a sy stem; since it is often
simpler to calculate the potential directly, there are sy stems in which it is useful to calculate V and then derive from it.
In general, regardless of whether the electric field is uniform, it points in the direction of decreasin g potential, because the force on
a positive charge is in the direction of and also i n the direction of lower potential V. Furthermore, the magnitude of equals the
rate of decrease of V with distance. The faster V decreases over distance, the greater the electric f ield. This gives us the following
result.
In equation form, the relationship between voltage and uni form electric field is
where is the distance over which the change in poten tial takes place. The minus sign tells us that poi nts in the
direction of decreasing potential. The electric field is said to be the gradient (as in grade or slope) of the electric potential.
Figure: The electric field component along the displ acement is given by. Note that A and B are assumed t o be
so close together that the field is constant along.
For continually changing potentials, and become inf initesimals, and we need differential calculus to de termine the electric
field. As shown in Figure, if we treat the distance as very small so that the electric field is essentiall y constant over it, we
find that
Therefore, the electric field components in the Cartesian d irections are given by
This allows us to define the “grad” or “del” vector op erator, which allows us to compute the gradient in one step. In Cartesian
coordinates, it takes the formLearning Objectives
Relationship between Voltage and Uniform Electric Field

3.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76548With this notation, we can calculate the electric field f rom the potential with
a process we call calculating the gradient of the potential.
If we have a system with either cylindrical or spheri cal symmetry, we only need to use the del operator in the appropriate
coordinates:
Calculate the electric field of a point charge from the p otential.
Strategy
The potential is known to be, which has a spherical sym metry. Therefore, we use the spherical del operator
(Equation) into Equation:
Solution
Performing this calculation gives us
This equation simplifies to
as expected.
Significance
We not only obtained the equation for the electric field of a point particle that we’ve seen before, we al so have a
demonstration that points in the direction of decrea sing potential, as shown in Figure.Example: Electric Field of a Point Charge

3.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76548
Figure: Electric field vectors inside and outside a un iformly charged sphere.
Use the potential found previously to calculate the electric field along the axis of a rin g of charge (Figure).
Figure: We want to calculate the electric field fro m the electric potential due to a ring charge.
Strategy
In this case, we are only interested in one dimension, the z-axis. Therefore, we use
with the potential
found previously.
Solution
Taking the derivative of the potential yieldsExample: Electric Field of a Ring of Charge

3.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76548Significance
Again, this matches the equation for the electric fie ld found previously. It also demonstrates a system in wh ich using the
full del operator is not necessary.
Which coordinate system would you use to calculate the elec tric field of a dipole?
Answer
Any, but cylindrical is closest to the symmetry of a dipole.

This page titled 3.4: Determining Field from Potential is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.5: Determining Field from Potential by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

3.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765503.5: Applications of Electrostatics
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe some of the many practical applications of elec trostatics, including several printing technologies
Relate these applications to Newton’s second law and the e lectric force
The study of electrostatics has proven useful in man y areas. This module covers just a few of the many appl ications of
electrostatics.
The Van de Graaff Generator
Van de Graaff generators (or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage due to static
electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 (based on original
suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research. Figure shows a schematic of a large researc h version. Van de
Graaffs use both smooth and pointed surfaces, and co nductors and insulators to generate large static ch arges and, hence, large
voltages.
A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere because it moves quickly to the outer surface. Practical limits arise
because the large electric fields polarize and even tually ionize surrounding materials, creating free c harges that neutralize excess
charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits.
Figure: Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A bat tery (A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed conductor, the points
of which spray the charge onto a moving insulating be lt near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on top in the large sphere picks
up the charge. (The induced electric field at the p oints is so large that it removes the charge from the b elt.) This can be done
because the charge does not remain inside the conducti ng sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion source inside the sphere
produces positive ions, which are accelerated away fro m the positive sphere to high velocities.Learning Objectives

3.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76550Xerography
Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography—a word coined from the Greek words xeros for dry and
graphos for writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplif ied form in Figure.
Figure: Xerography is a dry copying process based on el ectrostatics. The major steps in the process are the char ging of the
photoconducting drum, transfer of an image, creating a positive charge duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the
drum, and transfer of toner to the paper. Not shown a re heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.
A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with posit ive charge from points on a device called a corotron. Selenium is a
substance with an interesting property—it is a photoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator when in the dark and a conductor
when exposed to light.
In the first stage of the xerography process, the c onducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negati ve charge is induced under
the thin layer of uniformly positively charged sele nium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum is exposed to the image of
whatever is to be copied. In locations where the imag e is light, the selenium becomes conducting, and the positive charge is
neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, so the image has been transferred to the drum.
The third stage takes a dry black powder, called tone r, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it is attracted to the positive
regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is gi ven a greater positive charge than on the drum so tha t it will pull the toner
from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through heated pressure rolle rs, which melt and
permanently adhere the toner to the fibers of the paper.
Laser Printers
Laser printers use the xerographic process to make hi gh-quality images on paper, employing a laser to prod uce an image on the
photoconducting drum as shown in Figure. In its most common application, the laser printer receives outpu t from a computer,
and it can achieve high-quality output because of t he precision with which laser light can be controlled. Many laser printers do
significant information processing, such as making so phisticated letters or fonts, and in the past may have contained a computer
more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.

3.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76550
Figure: In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned acr oss a photoconducting drum, leaving a positively charg ed image. The
other steps for charging the drum and transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser l ight can be very
precisely controlled, enabling laser printers to produ ce high-quality images.
Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting
The ink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text an d graphics, also employs electrostatics. A nozzle make s a
fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given a n electrostatic charge (Figure).
Once charged, the droplets can be directed, using pai rs of charged plates, with great precision to form le tters and images on paper.
Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary colors, usually cyan, magenta, and
yellow, much as a color television produces color. (This is more difficult with xerography, requiring multiple dr ums and toners.)
Figure: The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces sma ll ink droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various
computer-driven devices are then used to direct the d roplets to the correct positions on a page.
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto oddly shaped surfaces. Mutual repul sion of like charges
causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface ten sion forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike c harges to the surface
to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach hard -to-get-to places, applying an even coat in a contr olled manner. If the object is a
conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to th e surface, tending to bring the drops in perpendicul arly. Corners and points on
conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be applied.
Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning
Another important application of electrostatics is fou nd in air cleaners, both large and small. The electro static part of the process
places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then pa sses the air through an
oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the cha rged particles (Figure)
Large electrostatic precipitators are used industrially to remove over of the partic les from stack gas emissions associated
with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, of ten in conjunction with the home heating and air con ditioning system, are
very effective in removing polluting particles, irritan ts, and allergens.

3.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76550
Figure: (a) Schematic of an electrostatic precipitat or. Air is passed through grids of opposite charge. The first grid charges
airborne particles, while the second attracts and coll ects them. (b) The dramatic effect of electrostatic p recipitators is seen by the
absence of smoke from this power plant. (credit b: mod ification of work by “Cmdalgleish”/Wikimedia Commons)
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 3.5: Applications of Electrostatics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.7: Applications of Electrostatics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

3.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/767353.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the concepts of a capacitor and its capacitanc e
Describe how to evaluate the capacitance of a system of conductors
Capacitors are important components of electrical cir cuits in many electronic devices, including pacemake rs, cell phones, and
computers. In this chapter, we study their properties, and, over the next few chapters, we examine their func tion in combination
with other circuit elements. By themselves, capacito rs are often used to store electrical energy and rel ease it when needed; with
other circuit components, capacitors often act as p art of a filter that allows some electrical signals t o pass while blocking others.
You can see why capacitors are considered one of the fund amental components of electrical circuits.
Figure: The tree-like branch patterns in this clear a crylic block are created by irradiating the block w ith an electron beam. This
tree is known as a Lichtenberg figure, named for the German physicist Georg Christof Lichtenberg (1742–1799), who was the first
to study these patterns. The “branches” are created by the dielectric breakdown produced by a strong electr ic field. (Bert Hickman).
A capacitor is a device used to store electrical charge and ele ctrical energy. It consists of at least two electrical co nductors
separated by a distance. (Note that such electrical c onductors are sometimes referred to as “electrodes,” but more correctly, they are
“capacitor plates.”) The space between capacitors may simply be a vacuum, and, in that case, a capacitor is then known as a
“vacuum capacitor.” However, the space is usually filled with an insulating material known as a dielectric. (You will learn more
about dielectrics in the sections on dielectrics lat er in this chapter.) The amount of storage in a capa citor is determined by a
property called capacitance, which you will learn more about a bit later in this sect ion.
Capacitors have applications ranging from filtering s tatic from radio reception to energy storage in hear t defibrillators. Typically,
commercial capacitors have two conducting parts clos e to one another but not touching, such as those in Fi gure. Most of the
time, a dielectric is used between the two plates. When battery terminals are connected to an initially unc harged capacitor, the
battery potential moves a small amount of charge of magnitude from the positive plate to the negative p late. The capacitor
remains neutral overall, but with charges and residing on opposite plates.Learning Objectives

3.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735
Figure: Both capacitors shown here were initially unc harged before being connected to a battery. They no w have charges of
and (respectively) on their plates. (a) A parallel- plate capacitor consists of two plates of opposite charg e with area A
separated by distance d. (b) A rolled capacitor has a dielectric material between its two conducting sheets (plates).
A system composed of two identical parallel-conducting plates separated by a distance is called a parallel-plate capacitor (Figure
). The magnitude of the electrical field in the spa ce between the parallel plates is, where denotes the surface charge
density on one plate (recall that is the charge Q per the surface area A). Thus, the magnitude of the field is directly propor tional to
Q.
Figure: The charge separation in a capacitor shows tha t the charges remain on the surfaces of the capacitor plates. Electrical
field lines in a parallel-plate capacitor begin with positive charges and end with negative charges. The m agnitude of the electrical
field in the space between the plates is in direct pro portion to the amount of charge on the capacitor.
Capacitors with different physical characteristics (su ch as shape and size of their plates) store different amounts of charge for the
same applied voltage across their plates. The capacitance of a capacitor is defined as the ratio of the maxi mum charge that
can be stored in a capacitor to the applied voltage across its plates. In other words, capacitance is the largest amount of charge
per volt that can be stored on the device:

3.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735The SI unit of capacitance is the farad (), named after Michael Faraday (1791–1867). Since c apacitance is the charge per unit
voltage, one farad is one coulomb per one volt, or
By definition, a 1.0-F capacitor is able to store 1.0 C of charge (a very large amount of charge) when th e potential difference
between its plates is only 1.0 V. One farad is therefor e a very large capacitance. Typical capacitance val ues range from picofarads (
) to millifarads, which also includes microfarads.. Capacitors can be produced in
various shapes and sizes (Figure).
Figure: These are some typical capacitors used in elect ronic devices. A capacitor’s size is not necessarily rela ted to its
capacitance value.
Calculation of Capacitance
We can calculate the capacitance of a pair of conductors wi th the standard approach that follows.
1. Assume that the capacitor has a charge.
2. Determine the electrical field between the conductor s. If symmetry is present in the arrangement of conductors, you may
be able to use Gauss’s law for this calculation.
3. Find the potential difference between the conductors fr om
where the path of integration leads from one conductor t o the other. The magnitude of the potential difference i s then
4. With known, obtain the capacitance directly from Equati on.
To show how this procedure works, we now calculate the capa citances of parallel-plate, spherical, and cylindrical capacitors. In all
cases, we assume vacuum capacitors (empty capacitors) with n o dielectric substance in the space between conductors.
Parallel-Plate Capacitor
The parallel-plate capacitor (Figure) has two identi cal conducting plates, each having a surface area, separated by a distance
. When a voltage is applied to the capacitor, it sto res a charge, as shown. We can see how its capacitan ce may depend on
and by considering characteristics of the Coulomb f orce. We know that force between the charges increases with charge values
and decreases with the distance between them. We shou ld expect that the bigger the plates are, the more charge they can store.
Thus, should be greater for a larger value of. Simil arly, the closer the plates are together, the greate r the attraction of the
opposite charges on them. Therefore, should be greater for a smaller.Problem-Solving Strategy: Calculating Capacitance

3.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735
Figure: In a parallel-plate capacitor with plates sep arated by a distance \(d\), each plate has the same surface area \(A\).
We define the surface charge density on the plates as
We know from previous chapters that when is small, the electrical field between the plates is fairly unifor m (ignoring edge
effects) and that its magnitude is given by
where the constant is the permittivity of free space,. The SI unit of F/m is equivalent to. Since
the electrical field between the plates is uniform, the potential difference between the plates is
Therefore Equation gives the capacitance of a parallel -plate capacitor as
Notice from this equation that capacitance is a funct ion only of the geometry and what material fills the space between the plates
(in this case, vacuum) of this capacitor. In fact, th is is true not only for a parallel-plate capacitor, bu t for all capacitors: The
capacitance is independent of or. If the charge chang es, the potential changes correspondingly so that remains con stant.
a. What is the capacitance of an empty parallel-plate ca pacitor with metal plates that each have an area of, sep arated
by 1.00 mm?
b. How much charge is stored in this capacitor if a voltage of is applied to it?
Strategy
Finding the capacitance is a straightforward applica tion of Equation. Once we find, we can find the char ge stored
by using Equation.Example: Capacitance and Charge Stored in a Parallel-Plate Capacitor

3.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735Solution
1. Entering the given values into Equation yields
This small capacitance value indicates how difficult it is to make a device with a large capacitance.
2. Inverting Equation and entering the known values into this equation gives
Significance
This charge is only slightly greater than those foun d in typical static electricity applications. Since air breaks down
(becomes conductive) at an electrical field strengt h of about 3.0 MV/m, no more charge can be stored on t his capacitor
by increasing the voltage.
Suppose you wish to construct a parallel-plate capacit or with a capacitance of 1.0 F. What area must you u se for each plate if
the plates are separated by 1.0 mm?
Solution
Rearranging Equation, we obtain
Each square plate would have to be 10 km across. It us ed to be a common prank to ask a student to go to th e laboratory
stockroom and request a 1-F parallel-plate capacitor, until stockroom attendants got tired of the joke.
The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is 2.0 p F. If the area of each plate is, what is the plate separati on?
Answer
Verify that and have the same physical units.
Spherical Capacitor
A spherical capacitor is another set of conductors who se capacitance can be easily determined (Figure). It consists of two
concentric conducting spherical shells of radii (inn er shell) and (outer shell). The shells are given equa l and opposite charges
and, respectively. From symmetry, the electrical fi eld between the shells is directed radially outward. We can obtain the
magnitude of the field by applying Gauss’s law over a spherical Gaussian surface of radius r concentric with the shells. The
enclosed charge is; therefore we have
Thus, the electrical field between the conductors isExample: A 1-F Parallel-Plate Capacitor
Exercise
Exercise

3.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735We substitute this into Equation and integrate along a radial path between the shells:
In this equation, the potential difference between the pl ates is
We substitute this result into Equation to find the ca pacitance of a spherical capacitor:
Figure: A spherical capacitor con sists of two concentric conducting spheres. Note that the charg es on a conductor reside
on its surface.
Calculate the capacitance of a single isolated cond ucting sphere of radius and compare it with Equation in the limit as
Strategy
We assume that the charge on the sphere is, and so we follow the four steps outlined earlier. We also assu me the other
conductor to be a concentric hollow sphere of infinite ra dius.
Solution
On the outside of an isolated conducting sphere, the el ectrical field is given by Equation. The magnitude of the
potential difference between the surface of an isolated sp here and infinity is
The capacitance of an isolated sphere is thereforeExample: Capacitance of an Isolated Sphere

3.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735Significance
The same result can be obtained by taking the limit of Equation as. A single isolated sphere is there fore
equivalent to a spherical capacitor whose outer shell has an infinitely large radius.
The radius of the outer sphere of a spherical capac itor is five times the radius of its inner shell. What are the dimensions of this
capacitor if its capacitance is 5.00 pF?
Answer
3.59 cm, 17.98 cm

Cylindrical Capacitor
A cylindrical capacitor consists of two concentric, c onducting cylinders (Figure). The inner cylinder, of radius, may either
be a shell or be completely solid. The outer cylinde r is a shell of inner radius. We assume that the le ngth of each cylinder is l and
that the excess charges and reside on the inner and oute r cylinders, respectively.
Figure: A cylindrical capacitor consists of two concen tric, conducting cylinders. Here, the charge on the outer surface of the
inner cylinder is positive (indicated by) and the ch arge on the inner surface of the outer cylinder is ne gative (indicated by).
With edge effects ignored, the electrical field betwee n the conductors is directed radially outward from th e common axis of the
cylinders. Using the Gaussian surface shown in Figure, we ha ve
Therefore, the electrical field between the cylinders is
where is the unit radial vector along the radius of the cylinder. We can substitute into Equation and fi nd the potential
difference between the cylinders:
Thus, the capacitance of a cylindrical capacitor isExercise

3.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735As in other cases, this capacitance depends only on the g eometry of the conductor arrangement. An important a pplication of
Equation is the determination of the capacitance pe r unit length of a coaxial cable, which is commonly used to transmit timevarying electrical signals. A coaxial cable consists of two concentric, cylindrical conductors s eparated by an insulating material.
(Here, we assume a vacuum between the conductors, but the physics is qualitatively almost the same when the spa ce between the
conductors is filled by a dielectric.) This configu ration shields the electrical signal propagating down the inner conductor from
stray electrical fields external to the cable. Curr ent flows in opposite directions in the inner and the outer conductors, with the outer
conductor usually grounded. Now, from Equation, the capac itance per unit length of the coaxial cable is given by
In practical applications, it is important to selec t specific values of. This can be accomplished with appropriate choices of radii
of the conductors and of the insulating material between them.
When a cylindrical capacitor is given a charge of 0.500 nC, a potential difference of 20.0 V is measured between the cylinders.
a. What is the capacitance of this system?
b. If the cylinders are 1.0 m long, what is the ratio of t heir radii?
Answer a
25.0 pF
Answer b
9.2

Several types of practical capacitors are shown in Figu re. Common capacitors are often made of two small pie ces of metal foil
separated by two small pieces of insulation (Figure). The metal foil and insulation are encased in a pro tective coating, and
two metal leads are used for connecting the foils to an external circuit. Some common insulating materials are mica, ceramic,
paper, and Teflon™ non-stick coating.
Another popular type of capacitor is an electrolytic capacitor. It consists of an oxidized metal in a conducting p aste. The main
advantage of an electrolytic capacitor is its high capacitance relative to other common types of capac itors. For example,
capacitance of one type of aluminum electrolytic ca pacitor can be as high as 1.0 F. However, you must be ca reful when using an
electrolytic capacitor in a circuit, because it only functions correctly when the metal foil is at a hig her potential than the conducting
paste. When reverse polarization occurs, electrolyt ic action destroys the oxide film. This type of capac itor cannot be connected
across an alternating current source, because half of the time, ac voltage would have the wrong polarity, as an alternating current
reverses its polarity (see Alternating-Current Circuts on alternating-current circuits).
A variable air capacitor (Figure) has two sets of parallel plates. One set of p lates is fixed (indicated as “stator”), and the
other set of plates is attached to a shaft that can be rotated (indicated as “rotor”). By turning the sh aft, the cross-sectional area in the
overlap of the plates can be changed; therefore, the capacitance of this system can be tuned to a desire d value. Capacitor tuning has
applications in any type of radio transmission and in receiving radio signals from electronic devices. Any time you tune your car
radio to your favorite station, think of capacitance.Exercise

3.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735
Figure: In a variable air capacitor, capacitance ca n be tuned by changing the effective area of the pl ates. (credit: modification
of work by Robbie Sproule)
The symbols shown in Figure are circuit representations of various types of capacitors. We generally use the symbol shown in
Figure. The symbol in Figure represents a variable-c apacitance capacitor. Notice the similarity of these symbols to the
symmetry of a parallel-plate capacitor. An electroly tic capacitor is represented by the symbol in part Figure, where the curved
plate indicates the negative terminal.
Figure: This shows three different circuit representati ons of capacitors. The symbol in (a) is the most commonl y used one. The
symbol in (b) represents an electrolytic capacitor. Th e symbol in (c) represents a variable-capacitance capa citor.
An interesting applied example of a capacitor model comes from cell biology and deals with the electrical potential in the plasma
membrane of a living cell (Figure). Cell membranes separate cells from their surroundings, but allow so me selected ions to
pass in or out of the cell. The potential differenc e across a membrane is about 70 mV. The cell membrane may be 7 to 10 nm thick.
Treating the cell membrane as a nano-sized capacitor, the estimate of the smallest electrical field str ength across its ‘plates’ yields
the value
This magnitude of electrical field is great enough to crea te an electrical spark in the air.
Figure: The semipermeable membrane of a biological c ell has different concentrations of ions on its interio r surface than on its
exterior. Diffusion moves the (potassium) and (chlori de) ions in the directions shown, until the Coulomb fo rce halts further
transfer. In this way, the exterior of the membrane a cquires a positive charge and its interior surface acqu ires a negative charge,
creating a potential difference across the membrane. The membrane is normally impermeable to (sodium io ns).

3.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76735This page titled 3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.2: Capacitors and Capacitance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
8.1: Prelude to Capacitance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

3.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/767363.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how to determine the equivalent capacitance of cap acitors in series and in parallel combinations
Compute the potential difference across the plates and th e charge on the plates for a capacitor in a network and dete rmine
the net capacitance of a network of capacitors
Several capacitors can be connected together to be u sed in a variety of applications. Multiple connection s of capacitors behave as a
single equivalent capacitor. The total capacitance of this equivalent single capacitor depends both on the individual capacitors and
how they are connected. Capacitors can be arranged in two simple and common types of connections, known as series and
parallel, for which we can easily calculate the total capacit ance. These two basic combinations, series and parallel, can also be
used as part of more complex connections.
The Series Combination of Capacitors
Figure illustrates a series combination of three capac itors, arranged in a row within the circuit. As for an y capacitor, the
capacitance of the combination is related to both charge and voltage:
When this series combination is connected to a batte ry with voltage V, each of the capacitors acquires an identical charge Q. To
explain, first note that the charge on the plate con nected to the positive terminal of the battery is a nd the charge on the plate
connected to the negative terminal is. Charges are then induced on the other plates so that the sum of the charges on all plates,
and the sum of charges on any pair of capacitor plat es, is zero. However, the potential drop on one capacit or may be
different from the potential drop on another capac itor, because, generally, the capacitors may have dif ferent
capacitances. The series combination of two or three capacitors resembles a single capacitor with a smalle r capacitance. Generally,
any number of capacitors connected in series is equ ivalent to one capacitor whose capacitance (called th e equivalent capacitance)
is smaller than the smallest of the capacitances in t he series combination. Charge on this equivalent capa citor is the same as the
charge on any capacitor in a series combination: Th at is, all capacitors of a series combination have the same charge. This
occurs due to the conservation of charge in the circ uit. When a charge Q in a series circuit is removed from a plate of the f irst
capacitor (which we denote as), it must be placed on a pla te of the second capacitor (which we denote as), and so on.
Figure: (a) Three capacitors are connected in series. The magnitude of the charge on each plate is Q. (b) The network of
capacitors in (a) is equivalent to one capacitor that has a smaller capacitance than any of the individual capacitances in (a), and the
charge on its plates is Q.
We can find an expression for the total (equivalent) capacitance by considering the voltages across the individual capacitors. The
potentials across capacitors 1, 2, and 3 are, respecti vely,,, and. These potentials must sum up toLearning Objectives

3.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76736the voltage of the battery, giving the following potentia l balance:
Potential is measured across an equivalent capacitor that holds charge and has an equivalent capacitance. Entering the
expressions for,, and, we get
Canceling the charge Q, we obtain an expression containing the equivalent capaci tance,, of three capacitors connected in series:
This expression can be generalized to any number of capacito rs in a series network.
For capacitors connected in a series combination, the reciprocal of the equivalent capacitance is the sum of reciprocals of
individual capacitances:
Find the total capacitance for three capacitors conn ected in series, given their individual capacitances a re,,
and.
Strategy
Because there are only three capacitors in this net work, we can find the equivalent capacitance by using Equation with
three terms.
Solution
We enter the given capacitances into Equation:
Now we invert this result and obtain
Significance
Note that in a series network of capacitors, the equiva lent capacitance is always less than the smallest in dividual
capacitance in the network.
The Parallel Combination of Capacitors
A parallel combination of three capacitors, with one plate of each capacitor connected to one side of th e circuit and the other plate
connected to the other side, is illustrated in Figure. Since the capacitors are connected in parallel, they all have the sameSeries Combination
Example: Equivalent Capacitance of a Series Network

3.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76736voltage V across their plates. However, each capacitor in the parallel network may store a different charge. To find the equivalent
capacitance of the parallel network, we note that th e total charge Q stored by the network is the sum of all the individua l
charges:
On the left-hand side of this equation, we use the rel ation, which holds for the entire network. On the righ t-hand side of
the equation, we use the relations,, and for the three c apacitors in the network. In this way we obtain
This equation, when simplified, is the expression for the equ ivalent capacitance of the parallel network of three capac itors:
This expression is easily generalized to any number of capac itors connected in parallel in the network.
For capacitors connected in a parallel combination, t he equivalent (net) capacitance is the sum of all ind ividual capacitances in
the network,
Figure: (a) Three capacitors are connected in parall el. Each capacitor is connected directly to the batt ery. (b) The charge on the
equivalent capacitor is the sum of the charges on the individual capacitors.
Find the net capacitance for three capacitors connect ed in parallel, given their individual capacitances are,, and
Strategy
Because there are only three capacitors in this net work, we can find the equivalent capacitance by using Equation with
three terms.
Solution
Entering the given capacitances into Equation yields
Significance
Note that in a parallel network of capacitors, the eq uivalent capacitance is always larger than any of the individual
capacitances in the network.
Capacitor networks are usually some combination of ser ies and parallel connections, as shown in Figure. To find the net
capacitance of such combinations, we identify parts tha t contain only series or only parallel connections, and find their equivalentParallel Combination
Example: Equivalent Capacitance of a Parallel Network

3.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76736capacitances. We repeat this process until we can de termine the equivalent capacitance of the entire ne twork. The following
example illustrates this process.
Figure: (a) This circuit contains both series and paral lel connections of capacitors. (b) and are in series; their equivalent
capacitance is c) The equivalent capacitance is con nected in parallel with. Thus, the equivalent capac itance of the entire
network is the sum of and.
Find the total capacitance of the combination of cap acitors shown in Figure. Assume the capacitances are kn own to three
decimal places (). Round your answer to three decimal places.
Strategy
We first identify which capacitors are in series and which are in parallel. Capacitors and are in serie s. Their
combination, labeled is in parallel with.
Solution
Since and are in series, their equivalent capacitance is obtained with Equation:
Therefor
Capacitance is connected in parallel with the third capacitance, so we use Equation find the equivalent
capacitance C of the entire network:
Determine the net capacitance C of the capacitor combination shown in Figure when th e capacitances are
, and. When a 12.0-V potential difference is mainta ined across the combination, find the charge and th e
voltage across each capacitor.Example: Equivalent Capacitance of a Network
Example: Network of Capacitors

3.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76736
Figure: (a) A capacitor combination. (b) An equival ent two-capacitor combination.
Strategy
We first compute the net capacitance of the parallel connection and. Then C is the net capacitance of the series
connection and. We use the relation to find the c harges, and, and the voltages, and
across capacitors 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Solution
The equivalent capacitance for and is
The entire three-capacitor combination is equivalent t o two capacitors in series,
Consider the equivalent two-capacitor combination in Figure. Since the capacitors are in series, they have the
same charge,. Also, the capacitors share the 12.0-V pote ntial difference, so
Now the potential difference across capacitor 1 is
Because capacitors 2 and 3 are connected in parallel, they are at the same potential difference:
Hence, the charges on these two capacitors are, respectively,
Significance As expected, the net charge on the parallel combination of and is
Determine the net capacitance C of each network of capacitors shown below. Assume that,
and. Find the charge on each capacitor, assuming there is a potential difference of 12.0 V across each network.Exercise

3.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76736
Answer a
Answer b
Answer c
This page titled 3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.3: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

3.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/767373.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how energy is stored in a capacitor
Use energy relations to determine the energy stored in a capacitor network
Most of us have seen dramatizations of medical personne l using a defibrillator to pass an electrical current through a patient’s heart
to get it to beat normally. Often realistic in detai l, the person applying the shock directs another pe rson to “make it 400 joules this
time.” The energy delivered by the defibrillator is stored in a capacitor and can be adjusted to fit the situation. SI units of joules are
often employed. Less dramatic is the use of capacitor s in microelectronics to supply energy when batterie s are charged (Figure
). Capacitors are also used to supply energy for flash lam ps on cameras.
Figure: The capacitors on the circuit board for an e lectronic device follow a labeling convention that identifies each one with a
code that begins with the letter “C.”
The energy stored in a capacitor is electrostatic p otential energy and is thus related to the charge Q and voltage V between the
capacitor plates. A charged capacitor stores energy in the electrical field between its plates. As the capa citor is being charged, the
electrical field builds up. When a charged capacito r is disconnected from a battery, its energy remains in the field in the space
between its plates.
To gain insight into how this energy may be expressed (in terms of Q and V), consider a charged, empty, parallel-plate capacit or;
that is, a capacitor without a dielectric but with a vacuum between its plates. The space between its plates has a volume Ad, and it
is filled with a uniform electrostatic field E. The total energy of the capacitor is contained wi thin this space. The energy density
in this space is simply divided by the volume Ad. If we know the energy density, the energy can be fo und as.
We will learn in Electromagnetic Waves (after completing the study of Maxwell’s equations) t hat the energy density in a region
of free space occupied by an electrical field E depends only on the magnitude of the field and is
If we multiply the energy density by the volume betwee n the plates, we obtain the amount of energy stored b etween the plates of a
parallel-plate capacitor.
In this derivation, we used the fact that the electri cal field between the plates is uniform so that and. Because
, we can express this result in other equivalent forms:
The expression in Equation for the energy stored in a parallel-plate capacitor is generally valid for all types of capacitors. To
see this, consider any uncharged capacitor (not nece ssarily a parallel-plate type). At some instant, we conn ect it across a battery,
giving it a potential difference between its plates. Initially, the charge on the plates is. As the cap acitor is being
charged, the charge gradually builds up on its plates, and after some time, it reaches the value Q. To move an infinitesimal chargeLearning Objectives

3.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76737dq from the negative plate to the positive plate (fro m a lower to a higher potential), the amount of work dW that must be done on
dq is.
This work becomes the energy stored in the electrical field of the capacitor. In order to charge the capac itor to a charge Q, the total
work required is
Since the geometry of the capacitor has not been spec ified, this equation holds for any type of capacitor. T he total work W needed
to charge a capacitor is the electrical potential e nergy stored in it, or. When the charge is expresse d in coulombs,
potential is expressed in volts, and the capacitance is e xpressed in farads, this relation gives the energy in joul es.
Knowing that the energy stored in a capacitor is, we can now find the energy density stored in a vacuum between
the plates of a charged parallel-plate capacitor. W e just have to divide by the volume Ad of space between its plates and take
into account that for a parallel-plate capacitor, we have and. Therefore, we obtain
We see that this expression for the density of energy stored in a parallel-plate capacitor is in accorda nce with the general relation
expressed in Equation. We could repeat this calculat ion for either a spherical capacitor or a cylindrica l capacitor—or other
capacitors—and in all cases, we would end up with the general r elation given by Equation.
Calculate the energy stored in the capacitor network in Figure 8.3.4a when the capacitors are fully charged and when the
capacitances are, and, respectively.
Strategy
We use Equation to find the energy, and stored in capacitors 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The total energy is the
sum of all these energies.
Solution
The total energy stored in this network is
Significance
We can verify this result by calculating the energy stored in the single capacitor, which is found to be
equivalent to the entire network. The voltage across the network is 12.0 V. The total energy obtained in this way agrees
with our previously obtained result,
The potential difference across a 5.0-pF capacitor is 0.40 V. (a) What is the energy stored in this capacit or? (b) The potential
difference is now increased to 1.20 V. By what factor is the st ored energy increased?
AnswerEnergy Stored in a Capacitor
Exercise

3.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76737a.; b. 9 times
In a cardiac emergency, a portable electronic device known as an automated external defibrillator (AED) can be a lifesaver. A
defibrillator (Figure) delivers a large charge in a short burst, or a shock, to a person’s heart to correct abnormal heart rhythm
(an arrhythmia). A heart attack can arise from the o nset of fast, irregular beating of the heart—called c ardiac or ventricular
fibrillation. Applying a large shock of electrical ene rgy can terminate the arrhythmia and allow the body’ s natural pacemaker to
resume its normal rhythm. Today, it is common for amb ulances to carry AEDs. AEDs are also found in many public places. These
are designed to be used by lay persons. The device automatically diagnoses the patient’s heart rhythm and then applies the shock
with appropriate energy and waveform. CPR (cardiopulmo nary resuscitation) is recommended in many cases bef ore using a
defibrillator.
Figure: Automated external defibrillators are found in many public places. These portable units provide ve rbal instructions for
use in the important first few minutes for a person suff ering a cardiac attack.
A heart defibrillator delivers of energy by dischargin g a capacitor initially at. What is its capacitance?
Strategy
We are given and V, and we are asked to find the capacitance C. We solve Equation for C and substitute.
Solution
Solving this expression for C and entering the given values yields.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.4: Energy Stored in a Capacitor by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Example: Capacitance of a Heart Defibrillator

3.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/767383.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the effects a dielectric in a capacitor has on capacitance and other properties
Calculate the capacitance of a capacitor containing a di electric
As we discussed earlier, an insulating material placed b etween the plates of a capacitor is called a dielect ric. Inserting a dielectric
between the plates of a capacitor affects its capacita nce. To see why, let’s consider an experiment described in Figure. Initially,
a capacitor with capacitance when there is air between its plates is charged by a battery to voltage. Wh en the capacitor is
fully charged, the battery is disconnected. A charge then resides on the plates, and the potential diffe rence between the plates is
measured to be. Now, suppose we insert a dielectric th at totally fills the gap between the plates. If we monitor the voltage, we
find that the voltmeter reading has dropped to a smaller value. We write this new voltage value as a fraction of the original
voltage, with a positive number.
The constant in this equation is called the dielectric constant of the material between the plates, and its value is characteristic for
the material. A detailed explanation for why the die lectric reduces the voltage is given in the next sec tion. Different materials have
different dielectric constants (a table of values fo r typical materials is provided in the next section). Once the battery becomes
disconnected, there is no path for a charge to flow to the battery from the capacitor plates. Hence, the in sertion of the dielectric has
no effect on the charge on the plate, which remains at a value of. Therefore, we find that the capacitan ce of the capacitor with a
dielectric is
This equation tells us that the capacitance of an empty (vacuum) capacitor can be increased by a factor of when we insert
a dielectric material to completely fill the space betwee n its plates. Note that Equation can also be used for an empty
capacitor by setting. In other words, we can say that the di electric constant of the vacuum is 1, which is a reference v alue.
Figure: (a) When fully charged, a vacuum capacitor has a voltage and charge (the charges remain on pla te’s inner
surfaces; the schematic indicates the sign of charge on each plate). (b) In step 1, the battery is disconnecte d. Then, in step 2, a
dielectric (that is electrically neutral) is inserted into the charged capacitor. When the voltage across t he capacitor is now measured,
it is found that the voltage value has decreased to. The schematic indicates the sign of the induced charge that is now
present on the surfaces of the dielectric material bet ween the plates.Learning Objectives

3.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76738The principle expressed by Equation is widely used in the construction industry (Figure). Metal plates in an electronic
stud finder act effectively as a capacitor. You plac e a stud finder with its flat side on the wall and move it continually in the
horizontal direction. When the finder moves over a wo oden stud, the capacitance of its plates changes, be cause wood has a
different dielectric constant than a gypsum wall. This change triggers a signal in a circuit, and thus the stud is detec ted.
Figure: An electronic stud finder is used to detect wo oden studs behind drywall.
The electrical energy stored by a capacitor is also a ffected by the presence of a dielectric. When the e nergy stored in an empty
capacitor is, the energy stored in a capacitor with a dielectric is smaller by a factor of.
As a dielectric material sample is brought near an em pty charged capacitor, the sample reacts to the elec trical field of the charges
on the capacitor plates. Just as we learned in Electric Charges and Fields on electrostatics, there will be the induced charges o n the
surface of the sample; however, they are not free ch arges like in a conductor, because a perfect insulat or does not have freely
moving charges. These induced charges on the dielect ric surface are of an opposite sign to the free charg es on the plates of the
capacitor, and so they are attracted by the free cha rges on the plates. Consequently, the dielectric is “ pulled” into the gap, and the
work to polarize the dielectric material between the plates is done at the expense of the stored electrical energy, which is reduced,
in accordance with Equation.
An empty 20.0-pF capacitor is charged to a potential difference of 40.0 V. The charging battery is then disconnected, and a
piece of Teflon™ with a dielectric constant of 2.1 is i nserted to completely fill the space between the cap acitor plates (see
Figure). What are the values of:
a. the capacitance,
b. the charge of the plate,
c. the potential difference between the plates, and
d. the energy stored in the capacitor with and without die lectric?Example: Inserting a Dielectric into an Isolated Capacitor

3.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76738Strategy
We identify the original capacitance and the origi nal potential difference between the plates. We
combine Equation with other relations involving capac itance and substitute.
Solution
a. The capacitance increases to
b. Without dielectric, the charge on the plates is
Since the battery is disconnected before the dielectri c is inserted, the plate charge is unaffected by the d ielectric and
remains at 0.8 nC.
c. With the dielectric, the potential difference becomes
d. The stored energy without the dielectric is
With the dielectric inserted, we use Equation to find th at the stored energy decreases to
Significance
Notice that the effect of a dielectric on the capaci tance of a capacitor is a drastic increase of its c apacitance. This effect
is far more profound than a mere change in the geometr y of a capacitor.
When a dielectric is inserted into an isolated and cha rged capacitor, the stored energy decreases to 33% of its ori ginal value.
a. What is the dielectric constant?
b. How does the capacitance change?
Answer
a. 3.0; b.
This page titled 3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.5: Capacitor with a Dielectric by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.Exercise

3.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765523.E: Practice
Electric Potential Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electric Potential Energy
1. Would electric potential energy be meaningful if the el ectric field were not conservative?
2. Why do we need to be careful about work done on the system versus work done by the system in calculations?
3. Does the order in which we assemble a system of point charges a ffect the total work done?
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
4. Discuss how potential difference and electric field strengt h are related. Give an example.
5. What is the strength of the electric field in a region wh ere the electric potential is constant?
6. If a proton is released from rest in an electric fie ld, will it move in the direction of increasing or d ecreasing potential? Also
answer this question for an electron and a neutron. Expla in why.
7. V oltage is the common word for potential difference. Wh ich term is more descriptive, voltage or potential diffe rence?
8. If the voltage between two points is zero, can a test charge be moved between them with zero net work being done? Can
this necessarily be done without exerting a force? Explain.
9. What is the relationship between voltage and energy? More precisely, what is the relationship between potentia l difference
and electric potential energy?
10. V oltages are always measured between two points. Why?
11. How are units of volts and electron-volts related? How do the y differ?
12. Can a particle move in a direction of increasing electr ic potential, yet have its electric potential energy d ecrease? Explain
Calculations of Electric Potential
13. Compare the electric dipole moments of charges sepa rated by a distance d and charges separated by a d istance
d/2.
14. Would Gauss’s law be helpful for determining the electric field of a dipole? Why?
15. In what region of space is the potential due to a u niformly charged sphere the same as that of a point charge? In what
region does it differ from that of a point charge?
16. Can the potential of a nonuniformly charged sphere be the same as that of a point charge? Explain.
Determining Field from Potential
17. If the electric field is zero throughout a region, must the electric potential also be zero in that region?
18. Explain why knowledge of is not sufficient to determine. What about the other way around?
Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
19. If two points are at the same potential, are there any el ectric field lines connecting them?
20. Suppose you have a map of equipotential surfaces space d 1.0 V apart. What do the distances between the surf aces in a
particular region tell you about the strength of the in that region?
21. Is the electric potential necessarily constant over th e surface of a conductor?
22. Under electrostatic conditions, the excess charge on a conductor resides on its surface. Does this mean that all of the
conduction electrons in a conductor are on the surface?

3.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655223. Can a positively charged conductor be at a negative potentia l? Explain.
24. Can equipotential surfaces intersect?
Applications of Electrostatics
25. Why are the metal support rods for satellite network dish es generally grounded?
26. (a) Why are fish reasonably safe in an electrical storm?
(b) Why are swimmers nonetheless ordered to get out of the water in the same circumstance?
27. What are the similarities and differences between the process es in a photocopier and an electrostatic precipitator?
28. About what magnitude of potential is used to charge th e drum of a photocopy machine? A web search for “xerog raphy”
may be of use.
Problems
Electric Potential Energy
29. Consider a charge fixed at a site with another char ge (charge, mass) moving in the
neighboring space. (a) Evaluate the potential energy of when it is 4.0 cm from. (b) If starts from rest from a point
4.0 cm from, what will be its speed when it is 8.0 cm from? (Note: is held fixed in its place.)
30. Two charges and are placed symmetrically along the x-axis at. Consider a charge
of charge and mass 10.0 mg moving along the y-axis. If starts from rest at, what is its speed when
it reaches?
31. To form a hydrogen atom, a proton is fixed at a poin t and an electron is brought from far away to a distan ce of
, the average distance between proton and electron in a hydrogen atom. How much work is done?
32. (a) What is the average power output of a heart defi brillator that dissipates 400 J of energy in 10.0 ms? (b) Considering
the high-power output, why doesn’t the defibrillator prod uce serious burns?
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
33. Find the ratio of speeds of an electron and a negati ve hydrogen ion (one having an extra electron) acce lerated through the
same voltage, assuming non-relativistic final speeds. Take the mass of the hydrogen ion to be.
34. An evacuated tube uses an accelerating voltage of 40 kV to accelerate electrons to hit a copper plate a nd produce X-rays.
Non-relativistically, what would be the maximum speed of th ese electrons?
35. Show that units of V/m and N/C for electric field strength are indeed equivalent.
36. What is the strength of the electric field between t wo parallel conducting plates separated by 1.00 cm and having a
potential difference (voltage) between them of?
37. The electric field strength between two parallel conductin g plates separated by 4.00 cm is.
(a) What is the potential difference between the plates?
(b) The plate with the lowest potential is taken to b e zero volts. What is the potential 1.00 cm from that plate and 3.00
cm from the other?
38. The voltage across a membrane forming a cell wall is 80.0 mV and the membrane is 9.00 nm thick. What is the electric
field strength? (The value is surprisingly large, but c orrect.) You may assume a uniform electric field.
39. Two parallel conducting plates are separated by 10.0 cm, an d one of them is taken to be at zero volts.
(a) What is the electric field strength between them, if the potential 8.00 cm from the zero volt plate (and 2.00 cm from
the other) is 450 V?
(b) What is the voltage between the plates?

3.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655240. Find the maximum potential difference between two para llel conducting plates separated by 0.500 cm of air, given the
maximum sustainable electric field strength in air to be.
41. An electron is to be accelerated in a uniform electric f ield having a strength of.
(a) What energy in keV is given to the electron if it is ac celerated through 0.400 m?
(b) Over what distance would it have to be accelerated to inc rease its energy by 50.0 GeV?
42. Use the definition of potential difference in terms of electric field to deduce the formula for potential difference between
and for a point charge located at the origin. Here r is th e spherical radial coordinate.
43. The electric field in a region is pointed away from the z-axis and the magnitude depends upon the distance fr om the
axis. The magnitude of the electric field is given as where is a constant. Find the potential difference b etween
points and, explicitly stating the path over which you con duct the integration for the line integral.
44. Singly charged gas ions are accelerated from rest thro ugh a voltage of 13.0 V. At what temperature will the av erage
kinetic energy of gas molecules be the same as that given these ions?
Calculations of Electric Potential
45. A 0.500-cm-diameter plastic sphere, used in a static electricity demonstration, has a uniformly distribut ed 40.0-pC charge
on its surface. What is the potential near its surface?
46. How far from a point charge is the potential 100 V? At what dis tance is it?
47. If the potential due to a point charge is at a dis tance of 15.0 m, what are the sign and magnitude of th e
charge?
48. In nuclear fission, a nucleus splits roughly in half. (a) What is the potential from a fragment that has 4 6
protons in it? (b) What is the potential energy in MeV of a similarly charged fragment at this distance?
49. A research Van de Graaff generator has a 2.00-m-diamet er metal sphere with a charge of 5.00 mC on it. Assume the
potential energy is zero at a reference point infinitely f ar away from the Van de Graaff.
(a) What is the potential near its surface?
(b) At what distance from its center is the potential 1.00 MV?
(c) An oxygen atom with three missing electrons is rele ased near the Van de Graaff generator. What is its kin etic
energy in MeV when the atom is at the distance found in par t b?
50. An electrostatic paint sprayer has a 0.200-m-diamete r metal sphere at a potential of 25.0 kV that repel s paint droplets
onto a grounded object.
(a) What charge is on the sphere?
(b) What charge must a 0.100-mg drop of paint have to a rrive at the object with a speed of 10.0 m/s?
51. (a) What is the potential between two points situated 10 cm a nd 20 cm from a point charge?
(b) To what location should the point at 20 cm be mov ed to increase this potential difference by a factor of two?
52. Find the potential at points, and in the diagram due to the two given charges.

3.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
53. Two charges and are separated by 4.0 cm on the z-axis symmetrically about origin, with the positive on e
uppermost. Two space points of interest and are loc ated 3.0 cm and 30 cm from origin at an angle 30° with respect to
the z-axis. Evaluate electric potentials at and in two ways:
(a) Using the exact formula for point charges, and
(b) using the approximate dipole potential formula.
54. (a) Plot the potential of a uniformly charged 1-m ro d with 1 C/m charge as a function of the perpendicul ar distance from
the center. Draw your graph from to.
(b) On the same graph, plot the potential of a point charge wi th a 1-C charge at the origin.
(c) Which potential is stronger near the rod? (d) W hat happens to the difference as the distance increas es? Interpret
your result.
Determining Field from Potential
55. Throughout a region, equipotential surfaces are give n by. The surfaces are equally spaced with for
for for. What is the electric field in this region?
56. In a particular region, the electric potential is given b y. What is the electric field in this region?
57. Calculate the electric field of an infinite line charge, throughout space.
Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
58. Two very large metal plates are placed 2.0 cm apart, wi th a potential difference of 12 V between them. Consi der one plate
to be at 12 V, and the other at 0 V. (a) Sketch the equipoten tial surfaces for 0, 4, 8, and 12 V.
(b) Next sketch in some electric field lines, and confir m that they are perpendicular to the equipotential lines.
59. A very large sheet of insulating material has had an excess of electrons placed on it to a surface charge density of
(a) As the distance from the sheet increases, does the potential increase or decrease? Can you explain why wi thout any
calculations? Does the location of your reference point m atter?
(b) What is the shape of the equipotential surfaces?
(c) What is the spacing between surfaces that differ by 1.0 0 V?
60. A metallic sphere of radius 2.0 cm is charged with ch arge, which spreads on the surface of the sphere
uniformly. The metallic sphere stands on an insulated stand and is surrounded by a larger metallic spheric al shell, of inner
radius 5.0 cm and outer radius 6.0 cm. Now, a charge of is placed on the inside of the spherical shell, which
spreads out uniformly on the inside surface of the shell. I f potential is zero at infinity, what is the potential of
(a) the spherical shell,
(b) the sphere,
(c) the space between the two,

3.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552(d) inside the sphere, and
(e) outside the shell?
61. Two large charged plates of charge density face each othe r at a separation of 5.0 mm.
(a) Find the electric potential everywhere.
(b) An electron is released from rest at the negative pla te; with what speed will it strike the positive plate?
62. A long cylinder of aluminum of radius R meters is cha rged so that it has a uniform charge per unit length on its surface of
(a) Find the electric field inside and outside the cylind er.
(b) Find the electric potential inside and outside th e cylinder. (c) Plot electric field and electric pot ential as a function
of distance from the center of the rod.
63. Two parallel plates 10 cm on a side are given equal a nd opposite charges of magnitude.The plates are 1.5 mm
apart. What is the potential difference between the plate s?
64. The surface charge density on a long straight metall ic pipe is. What is the electric potential outside a nd inside the pipe?
Assume the pipe has a diameter of 2a.

3.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
65. Concentric conducting spherical shells carry charges Q and –Q, respectively. The inner shell has negligible thic kness.
What is the potential difference between the shells?
66. Shown below are two concentric spherical shells of negli gible thicknesses and radii and. The inner and ou ter shell
carry net charges and, respectively, where both and are positive. What is the electric potential in the regions (a)
, (b), and (c)?

3.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655267. A solid cylindrical conductor of radius a is surround ed by a concentric cylindrical shell of inner radiu s b. The solid
cylinder and the shell carry charges Q and –Q, respectively. Assuming that the length L of both conductors is much greater
than a or b, what is the potential difference between the two conducto rs?
Applications of Electrostatics
68. (a) What is the electric field 5.00 m from the cent er of the terminal of a Van de Graaff with a 3.00-mC c harge, noting that
the field is equivalent to that of a point charge at the ce nter of the terminal?
(b) At this distance, what force does the field exert on a charge on the Van de Graaff’s belt?
69. (a) What is the direction and magnitude of an elect ric field that supports the weight of a free electron near the surface of
Earth?
(b) Discuss what the small value for this field implies regarding the relative strength of the gravitational and
electrostatic forces.
70. A simple and common technique for accelerating electr ons is shown in Figure, where there is a uniform elect ric
field between two plates. Electrons are released, usual ly from a hot filament, near the negative plate, and there is a small hole
in the positive plate that allows the electrons to continu e moving.
(a) Calculate the acceleration of the electron if the fie ld strength is.
(b) Explain why the electron will not be pulled back to the positive plate once it moves through the hole.
Figure: Parallel conducting plates with opposite char ges on them create a relatively uniform electric fie ld used to accelerate
electrons to the right. Those that go through the hol e can be used to make a TV or computer screen glow or to produce X-rays.
71. In a Geiger counter, a thin metallic wire at the cente r of a metallic tube is kept at a high voltage with respect to the metal
tube. Ionizing radiation entering the tube knocks el ectrons off gas molecules or sides of the tube that then accelerate towards
the center wire, knocking off even more electrons. T his process eventually leads to an avalanche that is detectable as a
current. A particular Geiger counter has a tube of ra dius R and the inner wire of radius a is at a potential of volts with
respect to the outer metal tube. Consider a point P at a dis tance s from the center wire and far away from the ends.
(a) Find a formula for the electric field at a point P inside using the infinite wire approximation.
(b) Find a formula for the electric potential at a point P inside.
(c) Use, and find the value of the electric field at a point 1.00 cm from the center.

3.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
72. The practical limit to an electric field in air is about. Above this strength, sparking takes place bec ause air
begins to ionize.
(a) At this electric field strength, how far would a p roton travel before hitting the speed of light (ign ore relativistic
effects)?
(b) Is it practical to leave air in particle accelerators?
73. To form a helium atom, an alpha particle that contai ns two protons and two neutrons is fixed at one locat ion, and two
electrons are brought in from far away, one at a time. The first electron is placed at from the alpha pa rticle
and held there while the second electron is brought to from the alpha particle on the other side from t he first
electron. See the final configuration below.
(a) How much work is done in each step?
(b) What is the electrostatic energy of the alpha partic le and two electrons in the final configuration?
74. Find the electrostatic energy of eight equal charges ea ch fixed at the corners of a cube of side 2 cm.
75. The probability of fusion occurring is greatly enha nced when appropriate nuclei are brought close toget her, but mutual
Coulomb repulsion must be overcome. This can be done using the kinetic energy of high-temperature gas io ns or by
accelerating the nuclei toward one another.
(a) Calculate the potential energy of two singly charged nu clei separated by.
(b) At what temperature will atoms of a gas have an ave rage kinetic energy equal to this needed electrical potential
energy?
76. A bare helium nucleus has two positive charges and a m ass of.
(a) Calculate its kinetic energy in joules at of the spe ed of light.
(b) What is this in electron-volts?
(c) What voltage would be needed to obtain this energy?
77. An electron enters a region between two large parallel plates made of aluminum separated by a distance of 2.0 cm and
kept at a potential difference of 200 V. The electr on enters through a small hole in the negative plat e and moves toward the
positive plate. At the time the electron is near the negative plate, its speed is. Assume the electric f ield between
the plates to be uniform, and find the speed of electron a t

3.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552(a) 0.10 cm,
(b) 0.50 cm,
(c) 1.0 cm, and
(d) 1.5 cm from the negative plate, and
(e) immediately before it hits the positive plate.
78. How far apart are two conducting plates that have an e lectric field strength of between them, if their
potential difference is 15.0 kV?
79. (a) Will the electric field strength between two para llel conducting plates exceed the breakdown strength of dry air, which
is, if the plates are separated by 2.00 mm and a potenti al difference of is applied?
(b) How close together can the plates be with this applied voltage?
80. Membrane walls of living cells have surprisingly larg e electric fields across them due to separation of i ons. What is the
voltage across an 8.00-nm-thick membrane if the elect ric field strength across it is 5.50 MV/m? You may as sume a uniform
electric field.
81. A double charged ion is accelerated to an energy of 32.0 keV by the electric field between two parallel c onducting plates
separated by 2.00 cm. What is the electric field strengt h between the plates?
82. The temperature near the center of the Sun is thought to be 15 million degrees Celsius () (or kelvin). Th rough
what voltage must a singly charged ion be accelerate d to have the same energy as the average kinetic ene rgy of ions at this
temperature?
83. A lightning bolt strikes a tree, moving 20.0 C of char ge through a potential difference of 1.
(a) What energy was dissipated?
(b) What mass of water could be raised from 15°C to the boiling point and then boiled by this energy?
(c) Discuss the damage that could be caused to the tree by the expansion of the boiling steam.
84. What is the potential from a proton (the average d istance between the proton and electron in a hydroge n
atom)?
85. (a) A sphere has a surface uniformly charged with 1.00 C. At what distance from its center is the potential 5.00 MV? (b)
What does your answer imply about the practical aspect of isolating such a large charge?
86. What are the sign and magnitude of a point charge that pr oduces a potential of –2.00 V at a distance of 1.00 mm?
87. In one of the classic nuclear physics experiments at the beginning of the twentieth century, an alpha par ticle was
accelerated toward a gold nucleus, and its path was su bstantially deflected by the Coulomb interaction. If the energy of the

3.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552doubly charged alpha nucleus was 5.00 MeV, how close to the gold nucleus (79 protons) could it come before being
deflected?
Additional Problems
88. A 12.0-V battery-operated bottle warmer heats 50.0 g of glass, of baby formula, and of aluminum
from 20.0°C to 90.0°C.
(a) How much charge is moved by the battery?
(b) How many electrons per second flow if it takes 5.00 min to warm the formula? (Hint: Assume that the specifi c heat
of baby formula is about the same as the specific heat of wat er.)
89. A battery-operated car uses a 12.0-V system. Find the charge the batteries must be able to move in order to accelerate the
750 kg car from rest to 25.0 m/s, make it climb a hig h hill, and finally cause it to travel at a constant 25.0 m/s
while climbing with force for an hour.
90. (a) Find the voltage near a 10.0 cm diameter metal sphere tha t has 8.00 C of excess positive charge on it.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
91. A uniformly charged half-ring of radius 10 cm is plac ed on a nonconducting table. It is found that 3.0 cm a bove the
center of the half-ring the potential is –3.0 V with respe ct to zero potential at infinity. How much charge is in t he half-ring?
92. A glass ring of radius 5.0 cm is painted with a charged paint such that the charge density around the ring varies
continuously given by the following function of the polar angle. Find the potential at a point 15
cm above the center.
93. A CD disk of radius () is sprayed with a charged paint so that the charge varies continually with radial di stance
rfrom the center in the following manner:. Find the potent ial at a point 4 cm above the center.
94. (a) What is the final speed of an electron accelerat ed from rest through a voltage of 25.0 MV by a negativ ely charged Van
de Graff terminal? (b) What is unreasonable about this resu lt? (c) Which assumptions are responsible?
95. A large metal plate is charged uniformly to a densi ty of. How far apart are the equipotential surfaces
that represent a potential difference of 25 V?
96. Your friend gets really excited by the idea of maki ng a lightning rod or maybe just a sparking toy by c onnecting two
spheres as shown in Figure 7.39, and making so small th at the electric field is greater than the dielectric strength of air,
just from the usual 150 V/m electric field near the surface of the Earth. If is 10 cm, how small does need to be, and
does this seem practical? (Hint: recall the calculation for electric field at the surf ace of a conductor from Gauss’s Law.)
97. (a) Find limit of the potential of a finite uniforml y charged rod and show that it coincides with that of a point
charge formula. (b) Why would you expect this result?
98. A small spherical pith ball of radius 0.50 cm is paint ed with a silver paint and then of charge is placed on it. The
charged pith ball is put at the center of a gold spherical shell of inner radius 2.0 cm and outer radius 2.2 cm.
(a) Find the electric potential of the gold shell with respect to zero potential at infinity.
(b) How much charge should you put on the gold shell if you wan t to make its potential 100 V?
99. Two parallel conducting plates, each of cross-section al area, are 2.0 cm apart and uncharged. If
electrons are transferred from one plate to the other,
(a) what is the potential difference between the plates?
(b) What is the potential difference between the positi ve plate and a point 1.25 cm from it that is between the plate s?
100. A point charge of is placed at the center of an unc harged spherical conducting shell of inner radius 6.0
cm and outer radius 9.0 cm. Find the electric potential at

3.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552(a)
(b)
(c).
101. Earth has a net charge that produces an electric field o f approximately 150 N/C downward at its surface.
(a) What is the magnitude and sign of the excess char ge, noting the electric field of a conducting sphere is equivalent
to a point charge at its center?
(b) What acceleration will the field produce on a free e lectron near Earth’s surface?
(c) What mass object with a single extra electron will have it s weight supported by this field?
102. Point charges of and are placed 0.500 m apart.
(a) At what point along the line between them is the elect ric field zero?
(b) What is the electric field halfway between them?
103. What can you say about two charges and, if the electric fie ld one-fourth of the way from to is zero?
104. Calculate the angular velocity of an electron orbi ting a proton in the hydrogen atom, given the radiu s of the orbit is
. You may assume that the proton is stationary and the centripetal force is supplied by Coulomb attraction.
105. An electron has an initial velocity of in a uniform electric field. The field accelerates the
electron in the direction opposite to its initial veloc ity.
(a) What is the direction of the electric field?
(b) How far does the electron travel before coming to rest?
(c) How long does it take the electron to come to rest?
(d) What is the electron’s velocity when it returns to its s tarting point?
Challenge Problems
106. Three and three ions are placed alternately and e qually spaced around a circle of radius 50 nm. Find the
electrostatic energy stored.
107. Look up (presumably online, or by dismantling an old device and making measurements) the magnitude of t he potential
deflection plates (and the space between them) in an ink jet printer. Then look up the speed with which th e ink comes out the
nozzle. Can you calculate the typical mass of an ink d rop?
108. Use the electric field of a finite sphere with constan t volume charge density to calculate the electric p otential,
throughout space. Then check your results by calculati ng the electric field from the potential.
109. Calculate the electric field of a dipole throughout space from the potential.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Capacitors and Capacitance Practice
Conceptual Questions
Capacitors and Capacitance
1. Does the capacitance of a device depend on the applie d voltage? Does the capacitance of a device depend o n the charge
residing on it?
2. Would you place the plates of a parallel-plate capacitor closer together or farther apart to increase their capa citance?

3.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765523. The value of the capacitance is zero if the plates are no t charged. True or false?
4. If the plates of a capacitor have different areas, wil l they acquire the same charge when the capacitor is connected across a
battery?
5. Does the capacitance of a spherical capacitor depend o n which sphere is charged positively or negatively?
Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
6. If you wish to store a large amount of charge in a ca pacitor bank, would you connect capacitors in series o r in parallel?
Explain.
7. What is the maximum capacitance you can get by connectin g three 1.0-μF capacitors? What is the minimum capacitance?
Energy Stored in a Capacitor
8. If you wish to store a large amount of energy in a ca pacitor bank, would you connect capacitors in series or parallel?
Explain.
Capacitor with a Dielectric
9. Discuss what would happen if a conducting slab rather th an a dielectric were inserted into the gap between the capacitor
plates.
10. Discuss how the energy stored in an empty but charged capacitor changes when a dielectric is inserted if (a) the capacitor
is isolated so that its charge does not change; (b) the capacitor remains connected to a battery so that the potential difference
between its plates does not change.
Molecular Model of a Dielectric
11. Distinguish between dielectric strength and dielectric const ant.
12. Water is a good solvent because it has a high dielectric constant. Explain.
13. Water has a high dielectric constant. Explain why it is t hen not used as a dielectric material in capacitors.
14. Elaborate on why molecules in a dielectric material experience net forces on them in a non-uniform elec trical field but
not in a uniform field.
15. Explain why the dielectric constant of a substance c ontaining permanent molecular electric dipoles decr eases with
increasing temperature.
16. Give a reason why a dielectric material increases cap acitance compared with what it would be with air between the plates
of a capacitor. How does a dielectric material also all ow a greater voltage to be applied to a capacitor? (The dielectric thus
increases C and permits a greater V.)
17. Elaborate on the way in which the polar character of water molecules helps to explain water’s relatively lar ge dielectric
constant.
18. Sparks will occur between the plates of an air-filled capacitor at a lower voltage when the air is humid th an when it is dry.
Discuss why, considering the polar character of water molecu les.
Problems
Capacitors and Capacitance
19. What charge is stored in a 180.0-μF capacitor when 120.0 V is applied to it?
20. Find the charge stored when 5.50 V is applied to an 8.00-p F capacitor.
21. Calculate the voltage applied to a 2.00-μF capacitor when it holds 3.10μC of charge.
22. What voltage must be applied to an 8.00-nF capacitor to s tore 0.160 mC of charge?
23. What capacitance is needed to store 3.00μC of charge at a voltage of 120 V?

3.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655224. What is the capacitance of a large Van de Graaff gene rator’s terminal, given that it stores 8.00 mC of char ge at a voltage
of 12.0 MV?
25. The plates of an empty parallel-plate capacitor of capac itance 5.0 pF are 2.0 mm apart. What is the area of each pla te?
26. A 60.0-pF vacuum capacitor has a plate area of. What is t he separation between its plates?
27. A set of parallel plates has a capacitance of 5.0µF. How much charge must be added to the plates to incre ase the potential
difference between them by 100 V?
28. Consider Earth to be a spherical conductor of radius 6400 km and calculate its capacitance.
29. If the capacitance per unit length of a cylindrical c apacitor is 20 pF/m, what is the ratio of the radii of the two cylinders?
30. An empty parallel-plate capacitor has a capacitance o f 20µF. How much charge must leak off its plates before the voltage
across them is reduced by 100 V?
Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
31. A 4.00-pF is connected in series with an 8.00-pF capaci tor and a 400-V potential difference is applied acr oss the pair. (a)
What is the charge on each capacitor?
(b) What is the voltage across each capacitor?
32. Three capacitors, with capacitances of and, respec tively, are connected in parallel. A
500-V potential difference is applied across the co mbination. Determine the voltage across each capacito r and the charge on
each capacitor.
33. Find the total capacitance of this combination of series and parallel capacitors shown below.
34. Suppose you need a capacitor bank with a total capacit ance of 0.750 F but you have only 1.50-mF capacitors at your
disposal. What is the smallest number of capacitors you could connect together to achieve your goal, and how would you
connect them?
35. What total capacitances can you make by connecting a 5.00-μF and a 8.00-μF capacitor?
36. Find the equivalent capacitance of the combination of seri es and parallel capacitors shown below.
37. Find the net capacitance of the combination of series and parallel capacitors shown below.

3.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
38. A 40-pF capacitor is charged to a potential differe nce of 500 V. Its terminals are then connected to th ose of an uncharged
10-pF capacitor. Calculate:
(a) the original charge on the 40-pF capacitor;
(b) the charge on each capacitor after the connection is made; and
(c) the potential difference across the plates of each ca pacitor after the connection.
39. A 2.0-μF capacitor and a 4.0-μF capacitor are connected in series across a 1.0-kV pot ential. The charged capacitors are
then disconnected from the source and connected to e ach other with terminals of like sign together. Find t he charge on each
capacitor and the voltage across each capacitor.
Energy Stored in a Capacitor
40. How much energy is stored in an 8.00-μF capacitor whose plates are at a potential difference o f 6.00 V?
41. A capacitor has a charge of 2.5μC when connected to a 6.0-V battery. How much energy is stor ed in this capacitor?
42. How much energy is stored in the electrical field of a metal sp here of radius 2.0 m that is kept at a 10.0-V potential?
43. (a) What is the energy stored in the 10.0-μF capacitor of a heart defibrillator charged to?
(b) Find the amount of the stored charge.
44. In open-heart surgery, a much smaller amount of energ y will defibrillate the heart.
(a) What voltage is applied to the 8.00-μF capacitor of a heart defibrillator that stores 40.0 J o f energy?
(b) Find the amount of the stored charge.
45. A 165-μF capacitor is used in conjunction with a dc motor. How much energy is stored in it when 119 V is applied?
46. Suppose you have a 9.00-V battery, a 2.00-μF capacitor, and a 7.40-μF capacitor.
(a) Find the charge and energy stored if the capacitors are connected to the battery in series.
(b) Do the same for a parallel connection.
47. An anxious physicist worries that the two metal shelves of a wood frame bookcase might obtain a high voltage if charged
by static electricity, perhaps produced by friction.
(a) What is the capacitance of the empty shelves if they h ave area and are 0.200 m apart?
(b) What is the voltage between them if opposite charges of magnitude 2.00 nC are placed on them?
(c) To show that this voltage poses a small hazard, calculate the energy stored.
(d) The actual shelves have an area 100 times smaller than t hese hypothetical shelves. Are his fears justified?
48. A parallel-plate capacitor is made of two square plat es 25 cm on a side and 1.0 mm apart. The capacitor i s connected to a
50.0-V battery. With the battery still connected, t he plates are pulled apart to a separation of 2.00 mm. What are the energies
stored in the capacitor before and after the plates are pulled farther apart? Why does the energy decr ease even though work is
done in separating the plates?
49. Suppose that the capacitance of a variable capacitor can be manually changed from 100 pF to 800 pF by turn ing a dial,
connected to one set of plates by a shaft, from 0° to 180°. With the dial set at 180°180° (corresponding to C=800pF), the

3.E.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552capacitor is connected to a 500-V source. After char ging, the capacitor is disconnected from the source, and the dial is turned
to 0°. If friction is negligible, how much work is required to tu rn the dial from 180° to 0°?
Capacitor with a Dielectric
50. Show that for a given dielectric material, the maximu m energy a parallel-plate capacitor can store is dir ectly proportional
to the volume of dielectric.
51. An air-filled capacitor is made from two flat parallel pla tes 1.0 mm apart. The inside area of each plate is 8.0cm28. 0cm2.
(a) What is the capacitance of this set of plates?
(b) If the region between the plates is filled with a material whose dielectric constant is 6.0, what is the n ew
capacitance?
52. A capacitor is made from two concentric spheres, one with ra dius 5.00 cm, the other with radius 8.00 cm.
(a) What is the capacitance of this set of conductors?
(b) If the region between the conductors is filled with a material whose dielectric constant is 6.00, what is the
capacitance of the system?
53. A parallel-plate capacitor has charge of magnitude 9.00μC on each plate and capacitance 3.00μF when there is air
between the plates. The plates are separated by 2.00 mm. With the charge on the plates kept constant, a die lectric with
is inserted between the plates, completely filling the volu me between the plates.
(a) What is the potential difference between the pla tes of the capacitor, before and after the dielectric has been
inserted?
(b) What is the electrical field at the point midway betwe en the plates before and after the dielectric is insert ed?
54. Some cell walls in the human body have a layer of neg ative charge on the inside surface. Suppose that the su rface charge
densities are, the cell wall is thick, and the cell wall material has a dielectric constant of
κ=5.4.
(a) Find the magnitude of the electric field in the wall be tween two charge layers.
(b) Find the potential difference between the inside and t he outside of the cell. Which is at higher potential?
(c) A typical cell in the human body has volume. E stimate the total electrical field energy stored in the wall of
a cell of this size when assuming that the cell is spherica l. (Hint: Calculate the volume of the cell wall.)
55. A parallel-plate capacitor with only air between its plates is charged by connecting the capacitor to a b attery. The
capacitor is then disconnected from the battery, without any of the charge leaving the plates.
(a) A voltmeter reads 45.0 V when placed across the ca pacitor. When a dielectric is inserted between the pl ates,
completely filling the space, the voltmeter reads 11.5 V. What is the dielectric constant of the material?
(b) What will the voltmeter read if the dielectric i s now pulled away out so it fills only one-third of the space between
the plates?
Molecular Model of a Dielectric
56. Two flat plates containing equal and opposite charge s are separated by material 4.0 mm thick with a diele ctric constant of
5.0. If the electrical field in the dielectric is 1.5 MV/m, what are
(a) the charge density on the capacitor plates, and
(b) the induced charge density on the surfaces of the diele ctric?
57. For a Teflon™-filled, parallel-plate capacitor, the area of the plate is and the spacing between the pl ates is 0.50
mm. If the capacitor is connected to a 200-V battery, find
(a) the free charge on the capacitor plates,
(b) the electrical field in the dielectric, and

3.E.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552(c) the induced charge on the dielectric surfaces.
58. Find the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor h aving plates with a surface area of and separated b y 0.100 mm
of Teflon™.
59. (a) What is the capacitance of a parallel-plate cap acitor with plates of area that are separated by 0.0 200 mm of
neoprene rubber?
(b) What charge does it hold when 9.00 V is applied to it?
60. Two parallel plates have equal and opposite charges. When the space between the plates is evacuated, the e lectrical field
is. When the space is filled with dielectric, the elect rical field is.
(a) What is the surface charge density on each surface of the dielectric?
(b) What is the dielectric constant?
61. The dielectric to be used in a parallel-plate capac itor has a dielectric constant of 3.60 and a dielec tric strength of
. The capacitor has to have a capacitance of 1.25 nF and must be able to withstand a maximum potential di fference
5.5 kV. What is the minimum area the plates of the capacit or may have?
62. When a 360-nF air capacitor is connected to a power s upply, the energy stored in the capacitor is 18.5μJ. While the
capacitor is connected to the power supply, a slab of dielectric is inserted that completely fills the spa ce between the plates.
This increases the stored energy by 23.2μJ.
(a) What is the potential difference between the capacitor plates?
(b) What is the dielectric constant of the slab?
63. A parallel-plate capacitor has square plates that are 8.00 cm on each side and 3.80 mm apart. The space be tween the
plates is completely filled with two square slabs of d ielectric, each 8.00 cm on a side and 1.90 mm thick. On e slab is Pyrex
glass and the other slab is polystyrene. If the potentia l difference between the plates is 86.0 V, find how much electrical
energy can be stored in this capacitor.
Additional Problems
64. A capacitor is made from two flat parallel plates pl aced 0.40 mm apart. When a charge of 0.020μC is placed on the plates
the potential difference between them is 250 V.
(a) What is the capacitance of the plates?
(b) What is the area of each plate?
(c) What is the charge on the plates when the potential dif ference between them is 500 V?
(d) What maximum potential difference can be applie d between the plates so that the magnitude of electr ical fields
between the plates does not exceed 3.0 MV/m?
65. An air-filled (empty) parallel-plate capacitor is mad e from two square plates that are 25 cm on each side and 1.0 mm
apart. The capacitor is connected to a 50-V battery and fully charged. It is then disconnected from the b attery and its plates
are pulled apart to a separation of 2.00 mm.
(a) What is the capacitance of this new capacitor?
(b) What is the charge on each plate?
(c) What is the electrical field between the plates?
66. Suppose that the capacitance of a variable capacitor can be manually changed from 100 to 800 pF by turnin g a dial
connected to one set of plates by a shaft, from 0° to 180°. With the dial set at 180° (corresponding to C=800pF), the
capacitor is connected to a 500-V source. After char ging, the capacitor is disconnected from the source, and the dial is turned
to 0°. (a) What is the charge on the capacitor? (b) What is th e voltage across the capacitor when the dial is set to 0°?

3.E.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655267. Earth can be considered as a spherical capacitor with two plates, where the negative plate is the surface of Earth and the
positive plate is the bottom of the ionosphere, which is located at an altitude of approximately 70 km. T he potential
difference between Earth’s surface and the ionosphere i s about 350,000 V.
(a) Calculate the capacitance of this system.
(b) Find the total charge on this capacitor.
(c) Find the energy stored in this system.
68. A 4.00-μF capacitor and a 6.00-μF capacitor are connected in parallel across a 600-V suppl y line.
(a) Find the charge on each capacitor and voltage across e ach.
(b) The charged capacitors are disconnected from the line and from each other. They are then reconnecte d to each other
with terminals of unlike sign together. Find the final charg e on each capacitor and the voltage across each.
69. Three capacitors having capacitances of 8.40, 8.40, an d 4.20 μF, respectively, are connected in series across a 36.0 -V
potential difference.
(a) What is the charge on the 4.20-μF capacitor?
(b) The capacitors are disconnected from the potenti al difference without allowing them to discharge. They are then
reconnected in parallel with each other with the posit ively charged plates connected together. What is the voltage
across each capacitor in the parallel combination?
70. A parallel-plate capacitor with capacitance 5.0μF is charged with a 12.0-V battery, after which the batt ery is
disconnected. Determine the minimum work required to in crease the separation between the plates by a factor of 3.
71. (a) How much energy is stored in the electrical fields in th e capacitors (in total) shown below?
(b) Is this energy equal to the work done by the 400-V sour ce in charging the capacitors?
72. Three capacitors having capacitances 8.4, 8.4, and 4.2 μF are connected in series across a 36.0-V potential differen ce.
(a) What is the total energy stored in all three capaci tors?
(b) The capacitors are disconnected from the potenti al difference without allowing them to discharge. They are then
reconnected in parallel with each other with the posit ively charged plates connected together. What is the total energy
now stored in the capacitors?
73. (a) An 8.00-μF capacitor is connected in parallel to another capa citor, producing a total capacitance of 5.00μF. What is
the capacitance of the second capacitor?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
74. (a) On a particular day, it takes of electrical ene rgy to start a truck’s engine. Calculate the capaci tance of a
capacitor that could store that amount of energy at 12.0 V.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
75. (a) A certain parallel-plate capacitor has plates o f area, separated by 0.0100 mm of nylon, and stores 0.170 C of
charge. What is the applied voltage?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible or inconsistent?
76. A prankster applies 450 V to an 80.0-μF capacitor and then tosses it to an unsuspecting vic tim. The victim’s finger is
burned by the discharge of the capacitor through 0.2 00 g of flesh. Estimate, what is the temperature incr ease of the flesh? Is
it reasonable to assume that no thermodynamic phase chan ge happened?

3.E.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552Challenge Problems
77. A spherical capacitor is formed from two concentric s pherical conducting spheres separated by vacuum. The inner sphere
has radius 12.5 cm and the outer sphere has radius 14.8 cm. A potential difference of 120 V is applied to the capac itor.
(a) What is the capacitance of the capacitor?
(b) What is the magnitude of the electrical field at r=12.6cm, just outside the inner sphere?
(c) What is the magnitude of the electrical field at r=14.7cm, just inside the outer sphere?
(d) For a parallel-plate capacitor the electrical fi eld is uniform in the region between the plates, exc ept near the edges
of the plates. Is this also true for a spherical capacitor?
78. The network of capacitors shown below are all uncharged when a 300-V potential is applied between points A an d B with
the switch S open.
(a) What is the potential difference?
(b) What is the potential at point E after the switch is cl osed?
(c) How much charge flows through the switch after it is closed?
79. Electronic flash units for cameras contain a capaci tor for storing the energy used to produce the flash. In one such unit the
flash lasts for 1/675 fraction of a second with an average l ight power output of 270 kW.
(a) If the conversion of electrical energy to light is 95% efficient (because the rest of the energy go es to thermal
energy), how much energy must be stored in the capacitor fo r one flash?
(b) The capacitor has a potential difference between its plates of 125 V when the stored energy equals t he value stored
in part (a). What is the capacitance?
80. A spherical capacitor is formed from two concentric spherical conducting shells separated by a vacuum. The inner sphere
has radius 12.5 cm and the outer sphere has radius 14.8 cm. A potential difference of 120 V is applied to the capac itor.
(a) What is the energy density at r=12.6cm, just outside the inner sphere?
(b) What is the energy density at r=14.7cm, just inside the outer sphere?
(c) For the parallel-plate capacitor the energy dens ity is uniform in the region between the plates, exce pt near the edges
of the plates. Is this also true for the spherical capacitor?
81. A metal plate of thickness t is held in place betwee n two capacitor plates by plastic pegs, as shown below. The effect of
the pegs on the capacitance is negligible. The area o f each capacitor plate and the area of the top and bottom surfaces of the
inserted plate are all A. What is the capacitance of this system?

3.E.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
82. A parallel-plate capacitor is filled with two dielect rics, as shown below. When the plate area is A and sep aration between
plates is d, show that the capacitance is given by.
83. A parallel-plate capacitor is filled with two dielect rics, as shown below. Show that the capacitance is given b y
84. A capacitor has parallel plates of area separated by 2.0 mm. The space between the plates is filled wit h
polystyrene.
(a) Find the maximum permissible voltage across the capaci tor to avoid dielectric breakdown.
(b) When the voltage equals the value found in part (a), find the surface charge density on the surface of the diel ectric.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

3.E.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552Practice Answers
Check Your Understanding
1.
2. It has kinetic energy of at point and potential energy of J, which means that as Q approaches
infinity, its kinetic energy totals three times the kin etic energy at, since all of the potential energy gets converted to kinetic.
3. positive, negative, and these quantities are the same as t he work you would need to do to bring the charges in from i nfinity
4.
5. –2.00 C,
6. It would be going in the opposite direction, with no effe ct on the calculations as presented.
7. Given a fixed maximum electric field strength, the pot ential at which a strike occurs increases with increa sing height
above the ground. Hence, each electron will carry more energy. Determining if there is an effect on the tota l number of
electrons lies in the future.
8.; recall that the electric field inside a conductor is zero. Hence,
any path from a point on the surface to any point in the interior will have an integrand of zero when cal culating the change in
potential, and thus the potential in the interior of th e sphere is identical to that on the surface.
9. The x-axis the potential is zero, due to the equal and opp osite charges the same distance from it. On the z-axis, we may
superimpose the two potentials; we will find that for, aga in the potential goes to zero due to cancellation.
10. It will be zero, as at all points on the axis, there are equal and opposite charges equidistant from the point of interest. Note
that this distribution will, in fact, have a dipole moment.
11. Any, but cylindrical is closest to the symmetry of a dipole.
12. infinite cylinders of constant radius, with the line charge as the axis
Conceptual Questions
1. No. We can only define potential energies for conservativ e fields.
3. No, though certain orderings may be simpler to compute.
5. The electric field strength is zero because electri c potential differences are directly related to the f ield strength. If the
potential difference is zero, then the field strength must also be zero.
7. Potential difference is more descriptive because it in dicates that it is the difference between the electri c potential of two
points.
9. They are very similar, but potential difference is a feature of the system; when a charge is introduced t o the system, it will
have a potential energy which may be calculated by multipl ying the magnitude of the charge by the potential diff erence.
11. An electron-volt is a volt multiplied by the charge of an electron. V olts measure potential difference, e lectron-volts are a
unit of energy.
13. The second has 1/4 the dipole moment of the first.
15. The region outside of the sphere will have a potentia l indistinguishable from a point charge; the interio r of the sphere will
have a different potential.
17. No. It will be constant, but not necessarily zero.
19. no

3.E.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655221. No; it might not be at electrostatic equilibrium.
23. Yes. It depends on where the zero reference for potential is. (Though this might be unusual.)
25. So that lightning striking them goes into the ground instea d of the television equipment.
27. They both make use of static electricity to stick sma ll particles to another surface. However, the precipitat or has to charge
a wide variety of particles, and is not designed to make su re they land in a particular place.
Problems
29. a.;
b.
31.
33. so that or.
35.
37. a.;
b.
39. a.;
b.
41. a. and,so that;
b.
43. One possibility is to stay at constant radius and go a long the arc from to, which will have zero potentia l due to the
path being perpendicular to the electric field. Then in tegrate from a to b:
45.
47.; The charge is positive because the potential is positi ve.
49. a.;
b.;
c.
51.; a. Relative to origin, find the potential at each point and then calculate the difference.;
b. To double the potential difference, move the poin t from 20 cm to infinity; the potential at 20 cm is halfway between
zero and that at 10 cm.
53. a. and;
b. and
55. The problem is describing a uniform field, so in the –z-direction.
57. Apply with to the potential calculated earlier, as
expected.
59. a. increases; the constant (negative) electric fiel d has this effect, the reference point only matters for magnitude; b. they
are planes parallel to the sheet; c. 0.006 m
61. a. from the previous chapter, the electric field has magnitude in the region between the plates and zero outside;
defining the negatively charged plate to be at the origin and zero potential, with the positively charge d plate located at +5mm

3.E.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552in the z-direction, V=1.7×104VV=1.7×104Vso the potential is 0 for for for
b.
63.
65. In the region, and E is zero elsewhere; hence, the potential difference is.
67. From previous results., note that b is a very conveni ent location to define the zero level of
potential:.
69. a.;The electric field is towards the surface of Earth.
b. The coulomb force is much stronger than gravity.
71. We know from the Gauss’s law chapter that the electric field for an infinite line charge is, and from earl ier in
this chapter that the potential of a wire-cylinder sys tem of this sort is by integration. We are not giv en, but
we are given a fixed; thus, we know that and hence. W e may substitute this back in to find
a.;
b.;
c.
73. a.;
b.
75. a. \(\displaystyle U=2.30×10^{−16}J;
b.
77. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
79. a. No, the field strength is smaller than the breakdown stren gth for air.
b.
81.
83. a. Energy=;
b.;
c. The expansion of the steam upon boiling can literall y blow the tree apart.
85. a.;
b. A 1-C charge is a very large amount of charge; a sphere o f 1.80 km is impractical.
87. The alpha particle approaches the gold nucleus until its original energy is converted to potential energ y.
, so
(Size of gold nucleus is about).

3.E.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552Additional Problems
89.
91.
93.
95. Recall from the previous chapter that the electric field is uniform throughout space, and that for unif orm fields
we have for the relation. Thus, we get for the distance be tween 25-V equipotentials.
97. a. Take the result from Example 7.13, divide both the numerator and the denominator by x, take the limit of that, and then
apply a Taylor expansion to the resulting log to get:;
b. which is the result we expect, because at great distances, this should look like a point charge of
99. a.;
b.
101. a.;
b.;
c.
103. If the electric field is zero ¼ from the way of and, then we know from that so
that; the charge is 9 times larger than.
105. a. The field is in the direction of the electron’s in itial velocity.
b.. Also,,;
c.;
d. (opposite its initial velocity)
Challenge Problems
107. Answers will vary. This appears to be proprietary informa tion, and ridiculously difficult to find. Speeds will be 20 m/s
or less, and there are claims of grams for the mass of a drop.
109. Apply with to the potential calculated earlier, wit h, and
assume that the axis of the dipole is aligned with th e z-axis of the coordinate system. Thus, the potential is
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Check Your Understanding
1.
3. 3.59 cm, 17.98 cm

3.E.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765524. a. 25.0 pF;
b. 9.2
5. a.;
b.;
c.
6. a.; b. 9 times
7. a. 3.0; b.
9. a.;
b.;
c.; d.
Conceptual Questions
1. no; yes
3. false
5. no
7.
9. answers may vary
11. Dielectric strength is a critical value of an electri cal field above which an insulator starts to conduct; a dielectric constant
is the ratio of the electrical field in vacuum to the net e lectrical field in a material.
13. Water is a good solvent.
15. When energy of thermal motion is large (high temper ature), an electrical field must be large too in ord er to keep electric
dipoles aligned with it.
17. answers may vary
Problems
19. 21.6 mC
21. 1.55 V
23. 25.0 nF
25.
27. 500 µC
29. 1:16
31. a. 1.07 nC;
b. 267 V, 133 V
33.
34. 500 capacitors; connected in parallel
35. (series) and (parallel)
37.
39. 0.89 mC; 1.78 mC; 444 V
41.

3.E.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7655243. a. 405 J; b. 90.0 mC
45. 1.15 J
47. a.;
b. 0.453 V;
c.;
d. no
49. 0.7 mJ
51. a. 7.1 pF;
b. 42 pF
53. a. before 3.00 V; after 0.600 V;
b. before 1500 V/m; after 300 V/m
55. a. 3.91;
b. 22.8 V
57. a. 37 nC;
b. 0.4 MV/m;
c. 19 nC
59. a.;
b.
61.
63.
Additional Problems
65. a. 0.277 nF;
b. 27.7 nC;
c. 50 kV/m
67. a. 0.065 F;
b. 23,000 C;
c. 4.0 GJ
69. a.; b. 10.8 V
71. a. 0.13 J;
b. no, because of resistive heating in connecting wires th at is always present, but the circuit schematic does not indicate
resistors

3.E.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76552
73. a.;
b. You cannot have a negative capacitance.
c. The assumption that they were hooked up in paralle l, rather than in series, is incorrect. A parallel conn ection always
produces a greater capacitance, while here a smaller c apacitance was assumed. This could only happen if the
capacitors are connected in series.
75. a. 14.2 kV;
b. The voltage is unreasonably large, more than 100 ti mes the breakdown voltage of nylon.
c. The assumed charge is unreasonably large and cannot be stored in a capacitor of these dimensions.
Challenge Problems
77. a. 89.6 pF;
b. 6.09 kV/m;
c. 4.47 kV/m;
d. no
79. a. 421 J;
b. 53.9 mF
81.
83. proof
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 3.E: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
7.9: Electric Potential (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
8.8: Capacitance (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
7.10: Electric Potential (Answer) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
8.9: Capacitance (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

3.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765533.S: Summary

3.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76553Key Terms
electric dipole system of two equal but opposite charges a fixed distance apart
electric dipole momentquantity defined as for all dipoles, where the vecto r
points from the negative to positive charge
electric potential potential energy per unit charge
electric potential differencethe change in potential energy of a charge q moved between two
points, divided by the charge.
electric potential energypotential energy stored in a system of charged objects due to the
charges
electron-voltenergy given to a fundamental charge accelerated th rough a
potential difference of one volt
electrostatic precipitatorsfilters that apply charges to particles in the air, th en attract those
charges to a filter, removing them from the airstream
equipotential line two-dimensional representation of an equipotential sur face
equipotential surfacesurface (usually in three dimensions) on which all poin ts are at the
same potential
groundingprocess of attaching a conductor to the earth to ensur e that there is
no potential difference between it and Earth
ink jet printersmall ink droplets sprayed with an electric charge are controlled by
electrostatic plates to create images on paper
photoconductorsubstance that is an insulator until it is exposed to lig ht, when it
becomes a conductor
Van de Graaff generatormachine that produces a large amount of excess charge, used for
experiments with high voltage
voltagechange in potential energy of a charge moved from o ne point to
another, divided by the charge; units of potential d ifference are
joules per coulomb, known as volt
xerography dry copying process based on electrostatics
capacitance amount of charge stored per unit volt
capacitor device that stores electrical charge and electrical e nergy
dielectric insulating material used to fill the space between two plates
dielectric breakdownphenomenon that occurs when an insulator becomes a con ductor in
a strong electrical field
dielectric constantfactor by which capacitance increases when a dielectri c is inserted
between the plates of a capacitor
dielectric strengthcritical electrical field strength above which molecu les in insulator
begin to break down and the insulator starts to conduc t
energy densityenergy stored in a capacitor divided by the volume b etween the
plates
induced electric-dipole momentdipole moment that a nonpolar molecule may acquire when it is
placed in an electrical field

3.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76553induced electrical fieldelectrical field in the dielectric due to the presen ce of induced
charges
induced surface charges charges that occur on a dielectric surface due to its polarization
parallel combinationcomponents in a circuit arranged with one side of eac h component
connected to one side of the circuit and the other si des of the
components connected to the other side of the circuit
parallel-plate capacitorsystem of two identical parallel conducting plates separ ated by a
distance
series combinationcomponents in a circuit arranged in a row one after the other in a
circuit

3.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76553Key Equations
Potential energy of a two-charge system
Work done to assemble a system of charges for
Potential difference or
Electric potential
Potential difference between two points
Electric potential of a point charge
Electric potential of a system of point charges
Electric dipole moment
Electric potential due to a dipole
Electric potential of a continuous charge distributio n
Electric field components
Del operator in Cartesian coordinates
Electric field as gradient of potential
Del operator in cylindrical coordinates
Del operator in spherical coordinates
Capacitance
Capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor
Capacitance of a vacuum spherical capacitor
Capacitance of a vacuum cylindrical capacitor
Capacitance of a series combination
Capacitance of a parallel combination
Energy density
Energy stored in a capacitor
Capacitance of a capacitor with dielectric
Energy stored in an isolated capacitor with dielectric
Dielectric constant
Induced electrical field in a dielectric

3.S.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76553Summary
Electric Potential Energy
The work done to move a charge from point A to B in an electric field is path independent, and the work around a closed path is
zero. Therefore, the electric field and electric force a re conservative.
We can define an electric potential energy, which between point charges is, with the zero reference taken to be at
infinity.
The superposition principle holds for electric potenti al energy; the potential energy of a system of multiple charges is the sum of
the potential energies of the individual pairs.
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
Electric potential is potential energy per unit charge.
The potential difference between points A and B,, that is, the change in potential of a charge q moved from A to B, is
equal to the change in potential energy divided by the ch arge.
Potential difference is commonly called voltage, repres ented by the symbol:
or
An electron-volt is the energy given to a fundamental ch arge accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
Calculations of Electric Potential
Electric potential is a scalar whereas electric field is a vector.
Addition of voltages as numbers gives the voltage due to a co mbination of point charges, allowing us to use the principle o f
superposition: \(\displaystyle V_P=k\sum_1^N\frac{q_i}{r_ i}|).
An electric dipole consists of two equal and opposite charg es a fixed distance apart, with a dipole moment.
Continuous charge distributions may be calculated with.
Determining Field from Potential
Just as we may integrate over the electric field to calcu late the potential, we may take the derivative of the poten tial to calculate
the electric field.
This may be done for individual components of the electric field, or we may calculate the entire electric field vect or with the
gradient operator.
Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
An equipotential surface is the collection of points in sp ace that are all at the same potential. Equipotential lin es are the twodimensional representation of equipotential surfaces.
Equipotential surfaces are always perpendicular to ele ctric field lines.
Conductors in static equilibrium are equipotential surface s.
Topographic maps may be thought of as showing gravitationa l equipotential lines.
Applications of Electrostatics
Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in stati c equilibrium.
In addition to research using equipment such as a Van de Gra aff generator, many practical applications of electrost atics exist,
including photocopiers, laser printers, ink jet printers, and electrostatic air filters.
Capacitors and Capacitance
A capacitor is a device that stores an electrical charg e and electrical energy. The amount of charge a vacuum c apacitor can store
depends on two major factors: the voltage applied and the capacitor’s physical characteristics, such as its size and geometry.
The capacitance of a capacitor is a parameter that tel ls us how much charge can be stored in the capacitor per u nit potential
difference between its plates. Capacitance of a system of conductors depends only on the geometry of their arrang ement and

3.S.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76553physical properties of the insulating material that fill s the space between the conductors. The unit of capacitance is the farad,
where.
Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
When several capacitors are connected in a series com bination, the reciprocal of the equivalent capacitanc e is the sum of the
reciprocals of the individual capacitances.
When several capacitors are connected in a parallel co mbination, the equivalent capacitance is the sum of the individual
capacitances.
When a network of capacitors contains a combination of s eries and parallel connections, we identify the series and parallel
networks, and compute their equivalent capacitances step by step until the entire network becomes reduced to one equivalent
capacitance.
Energy Stored in a Capacitor
Capacitors are used to supply energy to a variety of devic es, including defibrillators, microelectronics such as c alculators, and
flash lamps.
The energy stored in a capacitor is the work required to charge the capacitor, beginning with no charge on its pl ates. The energy
is stored in the electrical field in the space between the capacitor plates. It depends on the amount of electrical charge on the
plates and on the potential difference between the plates.
The energy stored in a capacitor network is the sum of th e energies stored on individual capacitors in the network. It can be
computed as the energy stored in the equivalent capacitor of the network.
Capacitor with a Dielectric
The capacitance of an empty capacitor is increased by a factor of when the space between its plates is completel y filled by a
dielectric with dielectric constant.
Each dielectric material has its specific dielectric c onstant.
The energy stored in an empty isolated capacitor is de creased by a factor of κκ when the space between its plates is completely
filled with a dielectric with dielectric constant.
This page titled 3.S: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
7.8: Electric Potential (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
8.7: Capacitance (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Current and Resistance
4.1: Electrical Current
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
4.4: Ohm's Law
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
4.6: Superconductors
4.7: Practice
4.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
4.S: Summary
This page titled 4: Current and Resistance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765574.1: Electrical Current
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe an electrical current
Define the unit of electrical current
Explain the direction of current flow
In this chapter, we study the electrical current thro ugh a material, where the electrical current is the ra te of flow of charge. We also
examine a characteristic of materials known as the r esistance. Resistance is a measure of how much a mate rial impedes the flow of
charge, and it will be shown that the resistance depend s on temperature. In general, a good conductor, such as copper, gold, or
silver, has very low resistance. Some materials, called su perconductors, have zero resistance at very low temperat ures.
Figure: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses supercond ucting magnets and produces high-resolution images with out the
danger of radiation. The image on the left shows the spacing of vertebrae along a human spinal column, wit h the circle indicating
where the vertebrae are too close due to a ruptured disc. On the right is a picture of the MRI instrument, which surrounds the
patient on all sides. A large amount of electrical cu rrent is required to operate the electromagnets (cred it right: modification of work
by “digital cat”/Flickr).
High currents are required for the operation of elect romagnets. Because of the resistance of the wires, high currents make the wires
of the electromagnet very hot limiting the strength that can possibly be obtained. Superconductors can be used to make
electromagnets that are 10 times stronger than the strongest electromagnets made out from conventional c onductors. These
superconducting magnets are used in the construction of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices that ca n be used to make highresolution images of the human body. The chapter-op ening picture shows an MRI image of the vertebrae of a human subject and
the MRI device itself.
When charges move, they are accelerated in response to an electrical field created by a voltage differe nce. The charges lose
potential energy and gain kinetic energy as they tra vel through a potential difference where the electri cal field does work on the
charge.
Although charges do not require a material to flow th rough, the majority of this chapter deals with understa nding the movement of
charges through a material.
The rate at which the charges flow past a location—th at is, the amount of charge per unit time—is known as the electrical current.
When charges flow through a medium, the current depen ds on the voltage applied, the material through which the charges flow,
and the state of the material. Of particular interest is th e motion of charges in a conducting wire.
Defining Current and the Ampere
Electrical current is defined to be the rate at whic h charge flows. When there is a large current present, such as that used to run a
refrigerator, a large amount of charge moves through the wire in a small amount of time. If the current is small, such as that used to
operate a handheld calculator, a small amount of charge mo ves through the circuit over a long period of time.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

4.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76557The average electrical current is the rate at which cha rge flows,
where is the amount of net charge passing through a given cross-sectional area in time (Figure). The SI unit for
current is the ampere (A), named for the French physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). Since, we see that an
ampere is defined as one coulomb of charge passing throu gh a given area per second:
The instantaneous electrical current, or simply the electrical current, is the time derivative of the charge that flows an d is
found by taking the limit of the average electrical curre nt as.
Most electrical appliances are rated in amperes (or amps) r equired for proper operation, as are fuses and circuit b reakers.
Figure: The rate of flow of charge is current. An am pere is the flow of one coulomb of charge through an area in one second.
A current of one amp would result from electrons flo wing through the area A each second.
The main purpose of a battery in a car or truck is to run the electric starter motor, which starts the engine. The operation of
starting the vehicle requires a large current to be supplied by the battery. Once the engine starts, a devi ce called an alternator
takes over supplying the electric power required for ru nning the vehicle and for charging the battery.
a. What is the average current involved when a truck batte ry sets in motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an e ngine?
b. How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow from the batt ery?
Strategy
We can use the definition of the average current in Equation to find the average current in part (a), si nce charge and
time are given. For part (b), once we know the average current, we use Equation to find the time required fo r 1.00 C of
charge to flow from the battery.
Solution
a. Entering the given values for charge and time into the d efinition of current gives
b. Solving the relationship for time and entering the known values for charge and current givesElectrical Current
Example: Calculating the Average Current

4.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76557Significance
a. This large value for current illustrates the fact tha t a large charge is moved in a small amount of time. The currents in
these “starter motors” are fairly large to overcome the i nertia of the engine.
b. A high current requires a short time to supply a large a mount of charge. This large current is needed to supply the
large amount of energy needed to start the engine.
Consider a charge moving through a cross-section of a wire where the charge is modeled as. Here, is
the charge after a long period of time, as time app roaches infinity, with units of coulombs, and is a tim e constant with units of
seconds (Figure). What is the current through the wire?
Figure: A graph of the charge moving through a cross- section of a wire over time.
Strategy
The current through the cross-section can be found f rom. Notice from the figure that the charge increase s to
and the derivative decreases, approaching zero, as time inc reases (Figure).
Solution
The derivative can be found using.
Figure: A graph of the current flowing through the wire over time.Example: Calculating Instantaneous Currents

4.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76557Significance
The current through the wire in question decreases e xponentially, as shown in Figure. In later chapters, it will be
shown that a time-dependent current appears when a ca pacitor charges or discharges through a resistor. R ecall that a
capacitor is a device that stores charge. You will learn ab out the resistor in Model of Conduction in Metals.
Handheld calculators often use small solar cells to supply the energy required to complete the calculati ons needed to complete
your next physics exam. The current needed to run you r calculator can be as small as 0.30 mA. How long would it take for
1.00 C of charge to flow from the solar cells? Can so lar cells be used, instead of batteries, to start tr aditional internal
combustion engines presently used in most cars and trucks?
Answer
The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be
This is slightly less than an hour. This is quite differ ent from the 5.55 ms for the truck battery. The calc ulator takes a very
small amount of energy to operate, unlike the truck’ s starter motor. There are several reasons that vehicle s use batteries and
not solar cells. Aside from the obvious fact that a ligh t source to run the solar cells for a car or truck is not always available,
the large amount of current needed to start the engi ne cannot easily be supplied by present-day solar cel ls. Solar cells can
possibly be used to charge the batteries. Charging t he battery requires a small amount of energy when co mpared to the
energy required to run the engine and the other acc essories such as the heater and air conditioner. Prese nt day solarpowered cars are powered by solar panels, which may power an el ectric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
Circuit breakers in a home are rated in amperes, no rmally in a range from 10 amps to 30 amps, and are use d to protect the
residents from harm and their appliances from damag e due to large currents. A single 15-amp circuit brea ker may be used to
protect several outlets in the living room, whereas a single 20-amp circuit breaker may be used to prote ct the refrigerator in the
kitchen. What can you deduce from this about current used b y the various appliances?
Answer
The total current needed by all the appliances in th e living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
Current in a Circuit
In order for charge to flow through an appliance, su ch as the headlight shown in Figure, there must be a complete path (or
circuit) from the positive terminal to the negative termin al. Consider a simple circuit of a car battery, a swi tch, a headlight lamp,
and wires that provide a current path between the comp onents. In order for the lamp to light, there must be a complete path for
current flow. In other words, a charge must be able to leave the positive terminal of the battery, travel through the component, and
back to the negative terminal of the battery. The swi tch is there to control the circuit. Part (a) of the figure shows the simple circuit
of a car battery, a switch, a conducting path, and a hea dlight lamp. Also shown is the schematic of the circuit [part (b)]. A
schematic is a graphical representation of a circuit and is very useful in visualizing the main features of a circuit. Schematics use
standardized symbols to represent the components in a circuits and solid lines to represent the wires conn ecting the components.
The battery is shown as a series of long and short lin es, representing the historic voltaic pile. The lamp is shown as a circle with a
loop inside, representing the filament of an incande scent bulb. The switch is shown as two points with a cond ucting bar to connect
the two points and the wires connecting the components are shown as solid lines. The schematic in part (c) shows the direction of
current flow when the switch is closed.Exercise
Exercise

4.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76557
Figure: (a) A simple electric circuit of a headlight (lamp), a battery, and a switch. When the switch is c losed, an uninterrupted
path for current to flow through is supplied by condu cting wires connecting a load to the terminals of a b attery. (b) In this
schematic, the battery is represented by parallel line s, which resemble plates in the original design of a ba ttery. The longer lines
indicate the positive terminal. The conducting wires are shown as solid lines. The switch is shown, in the open position, as two
terminals with a line representing a conducting bar t hat can make contact between the two terminals. The lamp is represented by a
circle encompassing a filament, as would be seen in an incandescent light bulb. (c) When the switch is closed, the circuit is
complete and current flows from the positive terminal to the negative terminal of the battery.
When the switch is closed in Figure, there is a compl ete path for charges to flow, from the positive term inal of the battery,
through the switch, then through the headlight and b ack to the negative terminal of the battery. Note th at the direction of current
flow is from positive to negative. The direction of co nventional current is always represented in the direc tion that positive charge
would flow, from the positive terminal to the negative term inal.
The conventional current flows from the positive term inal to the negative terminal, but depending on the actual situation, positive
charges, negative charges, or both may move. In metal wires, for example, current is carried by electrons— that is, negative
charges move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both positive and negative charg es move. This is also true in nerve cells.
A closer look at the current flowing through a wire i s shown in Figure. The figure illustrates the movement of charged
particles that compose a current. The fact that con ventional current is taken to be in the direction th at positive charge would flow is
because electricity was discovered before electrons an d protons were.
Figure: Current I is the rate at which charge moves through an area A, such as the cross-section of a wire. Conventional
current is defined to move in the direction of the e lectrical field. (a) Positive charges move in the dire ction of the electrical field,
which is the same direction as conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electrical field.
Conventional current is in the direction opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow of electr ons is sometimes referred
to as electronic flow.
In a conducting metal, the current flow is due primar ily to electrons flowing from the negative material to the positive material, but
for historical reasons, we consider the positive curr ent flow and the current is shown to flow from the pos itive terminal of the
battery to the negative terminal.
It is important to realize that an electrical field is present in conductors and is responsible for produ cing the current (Figure).
In previous chapters, we considered the static electrica l case, where charges in a conductor quickly redistri bute themselves on the
surface of the conductor in order to cancel out the external electrical field and restore equilibrium. In the case of an electrical
circuit, the charges are prevented from ever reachi ng equilibrium by an external source of electric po tential, such as a battery. The
energy needed to move the charge is supplied by the elec tric potential from the battery.
Although the electrical field is responsible for the motion of the charges in the conductor, the work don e on the charges by the
electrical field does not increase the kinetic ener gy of the charges. We will show that the electrical fiel d is responsible for keeping
the electric charges moving at a “drift velocity.”

4.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76557This page titled 4.1: Electrical Current is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.2: Electrical Current by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
9.1: Prelude to Current and Resistance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765584.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the drift velocity of charges moving through a met al
Define the vector current density
Describe the operation of an incandescent lamp
When electrons move through a conducting wire, they d o not move at a constant velocity, that is, the elect rons do not move in a
straight line at a constant speed. Rather, they inter act with and collide with atoms and other free electr ons in the conductor. Thus,
the electrons move in a zig-zag fashion and drift th rough the wire. We should also note that even though it is convenient to discuss
the direction of current, current is a scalar quantit y. When discussing the velocity of charges in a curren t, it is more appropriate to
discuss the current density.
Drift Velocity
Electrical signals move very rapidly. Telephone conv ersations carried by currents in wires cover large di stances without noticeable
delays. Lights come on as soon as a light switch is mo ved to the ‘on’ position. Most electrical signals car ried by currents travel at
speeds on the order of a significant fraction of t he speed of light. Interestingly, the individual char ges that make up the
current move much slower on average, typically drifti ng at speeds on the order of. How do we reconcile thes e two speeds,
and what does it tell us about standard conductors?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the f act that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance. Thus, when a free
charge is forced into a wire, as in Figure, the inco ming charge pushes other charges ahead of it due to the repulsive force
between like charges. These moving charges push on char ges farther down the line. The density of charge in a system cannot easily
be increased, so the signal is passed on rapidly. The re sulting electrical shock wave moves through the system at nearly the speed of
light. To be precise, this fast-moving signal, or shock wave, i s a rapidly propagating change in the electrical field.
Figure: When charged particles are forced into this v olume of a conductor, an equal number are quickly f orced to leave. The
repulsion between like charges makes it difficult to i ncrease the number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters, another
leaves almost immediately, carrying the signal rapidly forward.
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. (In fa ct, good electrical
conductors are often good heat conductors too, becau se large numbers of free electrons can transport ther mal energy as well as
carry electrical current.) Figure shows how free electr ons move through an ordinary conductor. The distance that an individual
electron can move between collisions with atoms or ot her electrons is quite small. The electron paths th us appear nearly random,
like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an el ectrical field in the conductor that causes the ele ctrons to drift in the direction
shown (opposite to the field, since they are negative). The drift velocity is the average velocity of the free charges. Drift
velocity is quite small, since there are so many fre e charges. If we have an estimate of the density of fre e electrons in a conductor,
we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current. The larger the density, the lower the velocity required for a given current.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76558
Figure: Free electrons moving in a conductor make ma ny collisions with other electrons and other particles. A typical path of
one electron is shown. The average velocity of the fr ee charges is called the drift velocity and for elec trons, it is in the direction
opposite to the electrical field. The collisions norma lly transfer energy to the conductor, requiring a co nstant supply of energy to
maintain a steady current.
Free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms o f the conductor. The electrical field does work in mo ving the electrons
through a distance, but that work does not increase t he kinetic energy (nor speed) of the electrons. The work is transferred to the
conductor’s atoms, often increasing temperature. Th us, a continuous power input is required to keep a curr ent flowing. (An
exception is superconductors, for reasons we shall ex plore in a later chapter. Superconductors can have a steady current without a
continual supply of energy—a great energy savings.) For a conductor that is not a superconductor, the su pply of energy can be
useful, as in an incandescent light bulb filament (Fi gure). The supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the
tungsten filament, so that the filament glows.
Figure: The incandescent lamp is a simple design. A tun gsten filament is placed in a partially evacuated gla ss envelope. One
end of the filament is attached to the screw base, whi ch is made out of a conducting material. The second e nd of the filament is
attached to a second contact in the base of the bulb. The two contacts are separated by an insulating mater ial. Current flows through
the filament, and the temperature of the filament b ecomes large enough to cause the filament to glow and produce light. However,
these bulbs are not very energy efficient, as evident from the heat coming from the bulb. In the year 201 2, the United States, along
with many other countries, began to phase out incande scent lamps in favor of more energy-efficient lamps, su ch as light-emitting
diode (LED) lamps and compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) (credit right: modification of work by Serge Saint).
We can obtain an expression for the relationship bet ween current and drift velocity by considering the n umber of free charges in a
segment of wire, as illustrated in Figure. The number of free charges per unit volume, or the number densi ty of free charges, is
given the symbol where
The value of depends on the material. The shaded seg ment has a volume, so that the number of free charg es in the volume
is. The charge in this segment is thus, where is the amount of charge on each carrier. (The magnitud e of the
charge of electrons is.) Current is charge moved per unit time; thus, if all the original charges move o ut of this
segment in time dt, the current is
Rearranging terms gives
where

4.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76558 is the drift velocity,
is the free charge density,
is the cross-sectional area of the wire, and
is the current through the wire.
The carriers of the current each have charge q and move with a drift velocity of magnitude.
Figure: All the charges in the shaded volume of this w ire move out in a time dt, having a drift velocity of magnitude.
Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire sto ry. The speed of an electron is sometimes much greater than its drift velocity. In
addition, not all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely, and those that do move might move somewha t faster or slower
than the drift velocity. So what do we mean by free electron s?
Atoms in a metallic conductor are packed in the form of a lattice structure. Some electrons are far enoug h away from the atomic
nuclei that they do not experience the attraction o f the nuclei as strongly as the inner electrons do. Th ese are the free electrons.
They are not bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “sea” of electrons. When an electrical field
is applied, these free electrons respond by accelerat ing. As they move, they collide with the atoms in the lattice and with other
electrons, generating thermal energy, and the conducto r gets warmer. In an insulator, the organization of the atoms and the structure
do not allow for such free electrons.
As you know, electric power is usually supplied to equi pment and appliances through round wires made of a co nducting material
(copper, aluminum, silver, or gold) that are strande d or solid. The diameter of the wire determines the c urrent-carrying capacity—
the larger the diameter, the greater the current-car rying capacity. Even though the current-carrying cap acity is determined by the
diameter, wire is not normally characterized by the d iameter directly. Instead, wire is commonly sold in a unit known as “gauge.”
Wires are manufactured by passing the material throu gh circular forms called “drawing dies.” In order to make thinner wires,
manufacturers draw the wires through multiple dies of successively thinner diameter. Historically, the gauge o f the wire was related
to the number of drawing processes required to manufac ture the wire. For this reason, the larger the gauge, t he smaller the
diameter. In the United States, the American Wire Gauge (A WG) was developed to standardize the system. Household wir ing
commonly consists of 10-gauge (2.588-mm diameter) t o 14-gauge (1.628-mm diameter) wire. A device used to m easure the gauge
of wire is shown in Figure.
Figure: A device for measuring the gauge of electric al wire. As you can see, higher gauge numbers indicate thinner wires.

4.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76558Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a copp er wire with a diameter of 2.053 mm (12-gauge) carryin g a 20.0-A current,
given that there is one free electron per copper ato m. (Household wiring often contains 12-gauge copper wire, and the
maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20.0 A.) The density of copper is and the atomic mass of
copper is 63.54 g/mol.
Strategy
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equat ion. The current is and is the
charge of an electron. We can calculate the area of a cross-section of the wire using the formula, where i s one-half
the diameter. The given diameter is 2.053 mm, so r is 1.0265 mm. We are given the density of copper,, and
the atomic mass of copper is. We can use these two q uantities along with Avogadro’s number,
, to determine n, the number of free electrons per cubic meter.
Solution
First, we calculate the density of free electrons in co pper. There is one free electron per copper atom. T herefore, the
number of free electrons is the same as the number of copper atoms per. We can now find n as follows:
The cross-sectional area of the wire is
Rearranging to isolate drift velocity gives
Significance
The minus sign indicates that the negative charges ar e moving in the direction opposite to conventional c urrent. The
small value for drift velocity (on the order of co nfirms that the signal moves on the order of times faster
(about than the charges that carry it.
In Example, the drift velocity was calculated for a 2.053-mm diameter (12-gauge) copper wire carrying a 20-amp current.
Would the drift velocity change for a 1.628-mm diameter (14-gauge) wire carrying the same 20-amp current?
Answer
The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than th e diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloc ity is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12gauge wire carrying the same current. The number of elec trons per cubic meter will remain constant.Example: Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire
Exercise

4.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76558Current Density
Although it is often convenient to attach a negative or positive sign to indicate the overall direction of motion of the charges,
current is a scalar quantity, It is often necessary to discuss the details of the motion of the charge, instead of discussing the
overall motion of the charges. In such cases, it is ne cessary to discuss the current density,, a vector qua ntity. The current density
is the flow of charge through an infinitesimal area, d ivided by the area. The current density must take int o account the local
magnitude and direction of the charge flow, which va ries from point to point. The unit of current density is ampere per meter
squared, and the direction is defined as the direction of net flow of positive charges through the area.
Figure: The current density is defined as the current passing through an infinitesimal cross-sectional area di vided by the
area. The direction of the current density is the dir ection of the net flow of positive charges and the ma gnitude is equal to the
current divided by the infinitesimal area.
The relationship between the current and the current density can be seen in Figure. The differential cur rent flow through the
area is found as
where is the angle between the area and the current density. The total current passing through area can be found by integrating
over the area,
Consider the magnitude of the current density, which is th e current divided by the area:
Thus, the current density is. If q is positive, is in the same direction as the elect rical field. If q is negative, is in
the opposite direction of. Either way, the direction of the current density is in the direction of the electr ical field.
The current supplied to a lamp with a 100-W light bu lb is 0.87 amps. The lamp is wired using a copper wire wit h diameter
2.588 mm (10-gauge). Find the magnitude of the current de nsity.
Strategy
The current density is the current moving through a n infinitesimal cross-sectional area divided by the area. We can calculate
the magnitude of the current density using. The cu rrent is given as 0.87 A. The cross-sectional area can be
calculated to be.
Solution
Calculate the current density using the given current a nd the area, found to be.
Significance
The current density in a conducting wire depends on t he current through the conducting wire and the cross- sectional
area of the wire. For a given current, as the diameter of the wire increases, the charge density decreases.Example: Calculating the Current Density in a Wire

4.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76558The current density is proportional to the current a nd inversely proportional to the area. If the curren t density in a conducting
wire increases, what would happen to the drift velocity of th e charges in the wire?
Answer
The current density in a conducting wire increases due to an increase in current. The drift velocity is i nversely proportional
to the current, so the drift velocity would decrease.
What is the significance of the current density? Th e current density is proportional to the current, and the current is the number of
charges that pass through a cross-sectional area per second. The charges move through the conductor, ac celerated by the electric
force provided by the electrical field. The electri cal field is created when a voltage is applied across t he conductor. In Ohm’s Law,
we will use this relationship between the current dens ity and the electrical field to examine the relatio nship between the current
through a conductor and the voltage applied.

This page titled 4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.3: Model of Conduction in Metals by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

4.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765594.3: Resistivity and Resistance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Differentiate between resistance and resistivity
Define the term conductivity
Describe the electrical component known as a resistor
State the relationship between resistance of a resistor and i ts length, cross-sectional area, and resistivity
State the relationship between resistivity and temperature
What drives current? We can think of various devices—s uch as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on—tha t are necessary to
maintain a current. All such devices create a potent ial difference and are referred to as voltage source s. When a voltage source is
connected to a conductor, it applies a potential di fference V that creates an electrical field. The electrical fi eld, in turn, exerts force
on free charges, causing current. The amount of curr ent depends not only on the magnitude of the voltag e, but also on the
characteristics of the material that the current is flowing through. The material can resist the flow of the charges, and the measure
of how much a material resists the flow of charges is known as the resistivity. This resistivity is crudely analogous to the fricti on
between two materials that resists motion.
Resistivity
When a voltage is applied to a conductor, an electri cal field is created, and charges in the conductor feel a force due to the
electrical field. The current density that results d epends on the electrical field and the properties of the material. This dependence
can be very complex. In some materials, including me tals at a given temperature, the current density is a pproximately proportional
to the electrical field. In these cases, the current den sity can be modeled as
where is the electrical conductivity. The electrical conductivity is analogous to therm al conductivity and is a measure of a
material’s ability to conduct or transmit electricit y. Conductors have a higher electrical conductivity than insulators. Since the
electrical conductivity is, the units are
Here, we define a unit named the ohm with the Greek symbol uppercase omega,. The unit is named after Georg Simon Ohm,
whom we will discuss later in this chapter. The is use d to avoid confusion with the number 0. One ohm equals one volt per amp:
. The units of electrical conductivity are therefore.
Conductivity is an intrinsic property of a material. Another intrinsic property of a material is the resi stivity, or electrical resistivity.
The resistivity of a material is a measure of how str ongly a material opposes the flow of electrical curr ent. The symbol for
resistivity is the lowercase Greek letter rho,, and resist ivity is the reciprocal of electrical conductivity:
The unit of resistivity in SI units is the ohm-meter. We can define the resistivity in terms of the elect rical field and the
current density.
The greater the resistivity, the larger the field ne eded to produce a given current density. The lower the resistivity, the larger the
current density produced by a given electrical fiel d. Good conductors have a high conductivity and low re sistivity. Good insulators
have a low conductivity and a high resistivity. Table l ists resistivity and conductivity values for various mate rials.
Table: Resistivities and Conductivities of Various Mate rials at 20 °C[1] Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impurities.Learning Objectives

4.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559Material Conductivity, Resistivity, Temperature Coefficient
Conductors
Silver 0.0038
Copper 0.0039
Gold 0.0034
Aluminum 0.0039
Tungsten 0.0045
Iron 0.0065
Platinum 0.0039
Steel
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn. Ni alloy) 0.000002
Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy) 0.00003
Mercury 0.0009
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy) 0.0004
Semiconductors [1]
Carbon (pure) -0.0005
Carbon -0.0005
Germanium (pure) -0.048
Germanium -0.050
Silicon (pure) 2300 -0.075
Silicon 0.1 - 2300 -0.07
Insulators
Amber
Glass
Lucite
Mica
Quartz (fused)
Rubber (hard)
Sulfur
Teflon
Wood TM

4.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559The materials listed in the table are separated int o categories of conductors, semiconductors, and insula tors, based on broad
groupings of resistivity. Conductors have the smalles t resistivity, and insulators have the largest; sem iconductors have intermediate
resistivity. Conductors have varying but large, free charge densities, whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are
not free to move. Semiconductors are intermediate, ha ving far fewer free charges than conductors, but havi ng properties that make
the number of free charges depend strongly on the ty pe and amount of impurities in the semiconductor. The se unique properties of
semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics, as we will explore in later chapters.
Temperature Dependence of Resistivity
Looking back at Table, you will see a column labele d “Temperature Coefficient.” The resistivity of some materials has a
strong temperature dependence. In some materials, su ch as copper, the resistivity increases with increasi ng temperature. In fact, in
most conducting metals, the resistivity increases with increasing temperature. The increasing temperature ca uses increased
vibrations of the atoms in the lattice structure of the metals, which impede the motion of the electron s. In other materials, such as
carbon, the resistivity decreases with increasing tempera ture. In many materials, the dependence is approximate ly linear and can be
modeled using a linear equation:
where is the resistivity of the material at temperat ure T, is the temperature coefficient of the material, and is the resistivity at
, usually taken as.
Note also that the temperature coefficient is negati ve for the semiconductors listed in Table, meaning that their resistivity
decreases with increasing temperature. They become b etter conductors at higher temperature, because inc reased thermal agitation
increases the number of free charges available to ca rry current. This property of decreasing with temperat ure is also related to the
type and amount of impurities present in the semiconduct ors.
Resistance
We now consider the resistance of a wire or component. The resistance is a measure of how difficult it is to pass current through a
wire or component. Resistance depends on the resistivi ty. The resistivity is a characteristic of the materia l used to fabricate a wire
or other electrical component, whereas the resistance is a characteristic of the wire or component.
To calculate the resistance, consider a section of c onducting wire with cross-sectional area A, length L, and resistivity. A battery
is connected across the conductor, providing a pote ntial difference across it (Figure). The potential di fference produces an
electrical field that is proportional to the current d ensity, according to.
Figure: A potential provided by a battery is applied to a segment of a conductor with a cross-sectional are a and a length.
The magnitude of the electrical field across the seg ment of the conductor is equal to the voltage divide d by the length,,
and the magnitude of the current density is equal t o the current divided by the cross-sectional area,. Using this information
and recalling that the electrical field is proporti onal to the resistivity and the current density, we c an see that the voltage is
proportional to the current:

4.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559The ratio of the voltage to the current is defined as the resistance:
The resistance of a cylindrical segment of a conducto r is equal to the resistivity of the material times the length divided by the
area:
The unit of resistance is the ohm,. For a given voltage, the higher the resistance, the lower the current.
Resistors
A common component in electronic circuits is the re sistor. The resistor can be used to reduce current fl ow or provide a voltage
drop. Figure shows the symbols used for a resistor in sc hematic diagrams of a circuit. Two commonly used stan dards for
circuit diagrams are provided by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI, pronounced “AN-see”) and the In ternational
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). Both systems are commonly used. We use the ANSI standard in this text fo r its visual
recognition, but we note that for larger, more comple x circuits, the IEC standard may have a cleaner pre sentation, making it easier
to read.
Figure: Symbols for a resistor used in circuit diagrams. (a) The ANSI symbol; (b) the IEC symbol.
Material and shape dependence of resistance
A resistor can be modeled as a cylinder with a cross-s ectional area A and a length L, made of a material with a resistivity (Figure
). The resistance of the resistor is
Figure: A model of a resistor as a uniform cylinder of length L and cross-sectional area A. Its resistance to the flow of current
is analogous to the resistance posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the greater its resista nce. The larger its crosssectional area A, the smaller its resistance.
The most common material used to make a resistor is carbon. A carbon track is wrapped around a ceramic co re, and two copper
leads are attached. A second type of resistor is the me tal film resistor, which also has a ceramic core. The track is made from a
metal oxide material, which has semiconductive prope rties similar to carbon. Again, copper leads are insert ed into the ends of the
resistor. The resistor is then painted and marked for id entification. A resistor has four colored bands, as shown i n Figure.Definition: Resistance

4.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559
Figure: Many resistors resemble the figure shown above. The four bands are used to identify the resistor. The f irst two colored
bands represent the first two digits of the resistance of the resistor. The third color is the multiplier. The fourth color represents the
tolerance of the resistor. The resistor shown has a resista nce of
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Som e ceramic insulators, such as those used to support po wer lines, have
resistances of or more. A dry person may have a ha nd-to-foot resistance of whereas the resistance of t he human heart is
about A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a resistance of, and superconductors ha ve no
resistance at all at low temperatures. As we have seen, resistance is related to the shape of an object and the material of which it is
composed.
The resistance of an object also depends on temperatu re, since is directly proportional to. For a cylin der, we know, so
if L and A do not change greatly with temperature, R has the same temperature dependence as. (Examinati on of the coefficients
of linear expansion shows them to be about two orders of magnitude less than typical temperature coeffic ients of resistivity, so the
effect of temperature on L and A is about two orders of magnitude less than on.) Thus,
is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where is the original resistance (usually taken to be
and R is the resistance after a temperature change. The color code gives the resistance of the resistor at a temperature of
Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of tempe rature on resistance (Figure). One of the most common thermometers
is based on the thermistor, a semiconductor crystal with a strong temperature dependence, the resistance o f which is measured to
obtain its temperature. The device is small, so that it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part o f a person it touches.
Figure: These familiar thermometers are based on the a utomated measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-dep endent
resistance.
Examples
A car headlight filament is made of tungsten and has a cold resistance of 0.350Ω. If the filament is a cylinder 4.00 cm long (it
may be coiled to save space), what is its diameter?
Strategy
We can rearrange the equation to find the cross-sec tional area of the filament from the given informa tion. Then
its diameter can be found by assuming it has a circular cr oss-section.Example:Calculating Resistor Diameter: A Headlight Filament

4.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559Solution
The cross-sectional area, found by rearranging the exp ression for the resistance of a cylinder given in, is
Substituting the given values, and taking ρ from Table, yie lds
The area of a circle is related to its diameter by
Solving for the diameter, and substituting the value foun d for, gives
Discussion
The diameter is just under a tenth of a millimeter. It is quoted to only two digits, because ρ is known to only two di gits.
Calculate the current density, resistance, and electric al field of a 5-m length of copper wire with a diamet er of 2.053 mm (12gauge) carrying a current of.
Strategy
We can calculate the current density by first findin g the cross-sectional area of the wire, which is, and the
definition of current density. The resistance can be found using the length of the wire, the area, and the
resistivity of copper, where. The resistivity and cu rrent density can be used to find the
electrical field.
Solution
First, we calculate the current density:
The resistance of the wire is
Finally, we can find the electrical field:
SignificanceExample: Current Density, Resistance, and Electrical field for a Current-Carrying Wire

4.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559From these results, it is not surprising that copper is used for wires for carrying current because the resist ance is quite
small. Note that the current density and electrical fi eld are independent of the length of the wire, but th e voltage depends
on the length.
A common type of wire found in DC applications is 22AW G (“American Wire Gauge”; see “Additional Resources” at t he end
of this section) copper solid-conductor hookup wire. T his type of wire has circular cross-section with diamet er 0.644 mm.
What is the resistance of 3 m of this wire? Assume copper c onductivity of.
Solution
From the problem statement, the diameter mm,, and m.
The cross-sectional area is m.
Using the Equation, we obtain m.
A pipe is 3 m long and has inner and outer radii of 5 mm and 7 mm respectively. It is made from steel ha ving conductivity
. What is the DC resistance of this pipe?
Solution
We can use Equation if we can determine the cross-sectio nal area through which the current flows.
This area is simply the area defined by the outer radius,, minus the area defined by the inner radius.
Thus, m.
From the problem statement, we also determine that and m.
Using Equation we obtain m.
Copper wires use routinely used for extension cords a nd house wiring for several reasons. Copper has the hi ghest electrical
conductivity rating, and therefore the lowest resisti vity rating, of all nonprecious metals. Also important is the tensile strength,
where the tensile strength is a measure of the force required to pull an object to the point where it bre aks. The tensile strength
of a material is the maximum amount of tensile stre ss it can take before breaking. Copper has a high tens ile strength,
. A third important characteristic is ductility. Ductil ity is a measure of a material’s ability to be drawn i nto wires and a
measure of the flexibility of the material, and copp er has a high ductility. Summarizing, for a conductor to be a suitable
candidate for making wire, there are at least three i mportant characteristics: low resistivity, high tensi le strength, and high
ductility. What other materials are used for wiring and what are the advantages and disadvantages?
Answer
Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wir es. All four materials have a high conductivity, silve r having the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silv er and gold wires are used for special applications, such as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a la rger diameter is needed to match the resistance per le ngth of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the duc tility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum a nd care must be used when making connections. Aluminum has a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which can lead to loose connections and a possible fire haz ard. The oxidationExample:Resistance of 22 AWG hookup wire
Example: Resistance of steel pipe
Exercise

4.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Spe cial techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
Although caution must be used in applying and for temperature changes greater than,
for tungsten, the equations work reasonably well for ve ry large temperature changes. A tungsten filament a t has a
resistance of. What would the resistance be if the tempe rature is increased to?
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of Equation, s ince the original resistance of the filament is given as
and the temperature change is.
Solution
The resistance of the hotter filament is obtained by en tering known values into the above equation:
Significance
Notice that the resistance changes by more than a fac tor of 10 as the filament warms to the high temperatu re and the
current through the filament depends on the resista nce of the filament and the voltage applied. If the filament is used in
an incandescent light bulb, the initial current throu gh the filament when the bulb is first energized will be higher than
the current after the filament reaches the operating tem perature.
A strain gauge is an electrical device to measure st rain, as shown below. It consists of a flexible, insulating backing that
supports a conduction foil pattern. The resistance of the foil changes as the backing is stretched. How doe s the strain gauge
resistance change? Is the strain gauge affected by temp erature changes?
Answer
The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, and the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature changes, so does theExample: Calculating Resistance
Exercise

4.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, one used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature
Long cables can sometimes act like antennas, picking up electronic noise, which are signals from other equi pment and
appliances. Coaxial cables are used for many applicat ions that require this noise to be eliminated. For exa mple, they can be
found in the home in cable TV connections or other a udiovisual connections. Coaxial cables consist of an i nner conductor of
radius surrounded by a second, outer concentric cond uctor with radius (Figure). The space between the two i s
normally filled with an insulator such as polyethylene plastic. A small amount of radial leakage current o ccurs between the two
conductors. Determine the resistance of a coaxial cable of length L.
Figure: Coaxial cables consist of two concentric condu ctors separated by insulation. They are often used in c able TV or
other audiovisual connections.
Strategy
We cannot use the equation directly. Instead, we lo ok at concentric cylindrical shells, with thickness dr, and
integrate.
Solution
We first find an expression for and then integrate from to,
Integrating both sides
Significance
The resistance of a coaxial cable depends on its len gth, the inner and outer radii, and the resistivity o f the material
separating the two conductors. Since this resistance is n ot infinite, a small leakage current occurs between th e two
conductors. This leakage current leads to the attenuati on (or weakening) of the signal being sent through the cabl e.Example: The Resistance of Coaxial Cable

4.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76559The resistance between the two conductors of a coaxial cable depends on the resistivity of the material se parating the two
conductors, the length of the cable and the inner a nd outer radius of the two conductor. If you are design ing a coaxial cable,
how does the resistance between the two conductors depend on these variables?
Answer
The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. T he greater the resistivity, the higher the resistanc e. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner rad ius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, th e greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
This page titled 4.3: Resistivity and Resistance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.4: Resistivity and Resistance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
20.3: Resistance and Resistivity by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
6.4: Resistance by Steven W. Ellingson is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: https://doi.org/10.21061/electromagnetics-vol-1.Exercise

4.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765604.4: Ohm's Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe Ohm’s law
Recognize when Ohm’s law applies and when it does not
We have been discussing three electrical properties so far in this chapter: current, voltage, and resista nce. It turns out that many
materials exhibit a simple relationship among the v alues for these properties, known as Ohm’s law. Many othe r materials do not
show this relationship, so despite being called Ohm’s l aw, it is not considered a law of nature, like Newton’s l aws or the laws of
thermodynamics. But it is very useful for calculations invol ving materials that do obey Ohm’s law.
Description of Ohm’s Law
The current that flows through most substances is dir ectly proportional to the voltage V applied to it. The German physicist Georg
Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experiment ally that the current in a metal wire is directly proportional to
the voltage applied:
This important relationship is the basis for Ohm’s law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with voltage the cause
and current the effect. This is an empirical law, whi ch is to say that it is an experimentally observed phenomenon, like friction.
Such a linear relationship doesn’t always occur. Any ma terial, component, or device that obeys Ohm’s law, wher e the current
through the device is proportional to the voltage a pplied, is known as an ohmic material or ohmic component. Any material or
component that does not obey Ohm’s law is known as a nonohmic material or nonohmic component.
Ohm’s Experiment
In a paper published in 1827, Georg Ohm described an e xperiment in which he measured voltage across and curr ent through
various simple electrical circuits containing variou s lengths of wire. A similar experiment is shown in Figu re. This experiment
is used to observe the current through a resistor th at results from an applied voltage. In this simple c ircuit, a resistor is connected in
series with a battery. The voltage is measured with a vo ltmeter, which must be placed across the resistor (in parallel with the
resistor). The current is measured with an ammeter, which m ust be in line with the resistor (in series with the resistor).
Figure: The experimental set-up used to determine if a resistor is an ohmic or nonohmic device. (a) When th e battery is
attached, the current flows in the clockwise directio n and the voltmeter and ammeter have positive readin gs. (b) When the leads of
the battery are switched, the current flows in the co unterclockwise direction and the voltmeter and ammet er have negative readings.
In this updated version of Ohm’s original experiment, several measurements of the current were made for sev eral different
voltages. When the battery was hooked up as in Figure, the current flowed in the clockwise direction and th e readings of the
voltmeter and ammeter were positive. Does the behavior of the current change if the current flowed in the opposite direction? To
get the current to flow in the opposite direction, t he leads of the battery can be switched. When the lead s of the battery were
switched, the readings of the voltmeter and ammeter readings were negative because the current flowed in t he opposite direction, in
this case, counterclockwise. Results of a similar experiment are shown in Figure.Learning Objectives

4.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76560
Figure: A resistor is placed in a circuit with a batte ry. The voltage applied varies from −10.00 V to +10. 00 V, increased by
1.00-V increments. A plot shows values of the voltage v ersus the current typical of what a casual experimente r might find.
In this experiment, the voltage applied across the r esistor varies from −10.00 to +10.00 V, by increments of 1.00 V. The current
through the resistor and the voltage across the resistor are measured. A plot is made of the voltage versus the current, and the result
is approximately linear. The slope of the line is th e resistance, or the voltage divided by the current. This result is known as Ohm’s
law:
where V is the voltage measured in volts across the object in question, I is the current measured through the object in amps, and R
is the resistance in units of ohms. As stated previou sly, any device that shows a linear relationship betwe en the voltage and the
current is known as an ohmic device. A resistor is therefo re an ohmic device.
A carbon resistor at room temperature is attached to a 9.00-V battery and the current measured through the resistor is
3.00 mA. (a) What is the resistance of the resistor mea sured in ohms? (b) If the temperature of the resist or is increased to
by heating the resistor, what is the current through the resistor?
Strategy
(a) The resistance can be found using Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law st ates that, so the resistance can be found using.
(b) First, the resistance is temperature dependent so the new resistance after the resistor has been heat ed can be found using
. The current can be found using Ohm’s law in the form.
Solution
1. Using Ohm’s law and solving for the resistance yields the resistance at room temperature:
2. The resistance at can be found using where the temper ature coefficient for carbon is.
The current through the heated resistor is
Significance
A change in temperature of resulted in a 2.00% cha nge in current. This may not seem like a very great change, but
changing electrical characteristics can have a strong effect on the circuits. For this reason, many electro nic appliances, such asExample: Measuring Resistance

4.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76560computers, contain fans to remove the heat dissipated by c omponents in the electric circuits.
The voltage supplied to your house varies as. If a r esistor is connected across this voltage, will Ohm’s
law still be valid?
Answer
Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time the current is equal to, so the current is also a function of
time,.
Nonohmic devices do not exhibit a linear relationship between the voltage and the current. One such device is the semiconducting
circuit element known as a diode. A diode is a circuit device that allows current fl ow in only one direction. A diagram of a simple
circuit consisting of a battery, a diode, and a resi stor is shown in Figure. Although we do not cover the th eory of the diode in
this section, the diode can be tested to see if it is an ohmi c or a nonohmic device.
Figure: A diode is a semiconducting device that allow s current flow only if the diode is forward biased, wh ich means that the
anode is positive and the cathode is negative.
A plot of current versus voltage is shown in Figure. Not e that the behavior of the diode is shown as current ve rsus voltage,
whereas the resistor operation was shown as voltage vers us current. A diode consists of an anode and a cath ode. When the anode is
at a negative potential and the cathode is at a posi tive potential, as shown in part (a), the diode is s aid to have reverse bias. With
reverse bias, the diode has an extremely large resista nce and there is very little current flow—essentially zero current—through the
diode and the resistor. As the voltage applied to the circuit increases, the current remains essentially z ero, until the voltage reaches
the breakdown voltage and the diode conducts current. When the battery and the potential across the diod e are reversed, making the
anode positive and the cathode negative, the diode conducts and current flows through the diode if the vo ltage is greater than 0.7 V.
The resistance of the diode is close to zero. (This i s the reason for the resistor in the circuit; if it wer e not there, the current would
become very large.) You can see from the graph in Fig ure that the voltage and the current do not have a linear relationship.
Thus, the diode is an example of a nonohmic device.
Figure: When the voltage across the diode is negative and small, there is very little current flow through the diode. As the
voltage reaches the breakdown voltage, the diode con ducts. When the voltage across the diode is positive and greater than 0.7 V
(the actual voltage value depends on the diode), the diode conducts. As the voltage applied increases, the current through the diode
increases, but the voltage across the diode remains appr oximately 0.7 V.
Ohm’s law is commonly stated as, but originally it was s tated as a microscopic view, in terms of the curren t density, the
conductivity, and the electrical field. This microsco pic view suggests the proportionality comes from th e drift velocity of the
free electrons in the metal that results from an ap plied electrical field. As stated earlier, the current density is proportional to theExercise

4.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76560applied electrical field. The reformulation of Ohm’s l aw is credited to Gustav Kirchhoff, whose name we will see again in the next
chapter.
This page titled 4.4: Ohm's Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
9.5: Ohm's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

4.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765614.5: Electrical Energy and Power
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Express electrical power in terms of the voltage and the cu rrent
Describe the power dissipated by a resistor in an electric circuit
Calculate the energy efficiency and cost effectiveness of appliances and equipment
In an electric circuit, electrical energy is continu ously converted into other forms of energy. For exampl e, when a current flows in a
conductor, electrical energy is converted into therma l energy within the conductor. The electrical field, supplied by the voltage
source, accelerates the free electrons, increasing the ir kinetic energy for a short time. This increased kin etic energy is converted into
thermal energy through collisions with the ions of the lattice structure of the conductor. Previously, we defined power as the rate at
which work is done by a force measured in watts. Power c an also be defined as the rate at which energy is tr ansferred. In this
section, we discuss the time rate of energy transfer, or po wer, in an electric circuit.
Power in Electric Circuits
Power is associated by many people with electricity. Powe r transmission lines might come to mind. We also think of light bulbs in
terms of their power ratings in watts. What is the expressio n for electric power?
Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb (Figure). The 60-W bulb glows brighter than the 25-W bulb. Altho ugh it is
not shown, a 60-W light bulb is also warmer than the 25 -W bulb. The heat and light is produced by from the c onversion of
electrical energy. The kinetic energy lost by the el ectrons in collisions is converted into the internal energy of the conductor and
radiation. How are voltage, current, and resistance relate d to electric power?
Figure: (a) Pictured above are two incandescent bulbs: a 25-W bulb (left) and a 60-W bulb (right). The 60 -W bulb provides a
higher intensity light than the 25-W bulb. The elect rical energy supplied to the light bulbs is converted into heat and light. (b) This
compact fluorescent light (CFL) bulb puts out the same intensity of light as the 60-W bulb, but at 1/4 to 1 /10 the input power.
(credit a: modification of works by “Dickbauch”/Wiki media Commons and Greg Westfall; credit b: modificati on of work by
“dbgg1979”/Flickr)
To calculate electric power, consider a voltage diffe rence existing across a material (Figure). The electr ic potential is higher
than the electric potential at, and the voltage di fference is negative. As discussed in Electric Potential, an electrical
field exists between the two potentials, which points from the higher potential to the lower potential. Rec all that the electrical
potential is defined as the potential energy per ch arge,, and the charge loses potential energy movin g through the
potential difference.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

4.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76561
Figure: When there is a potential difference across a conductor, an electrical field is present that points in the direction from
the higher potential to the lower potential.
If the charge is positive, the charge experiences a fo rce due to the electrical field. This force is nece ssary to keep
the charge moving. This force does not act to accele rate the charge through the entire distance becaus e of the interactions of the
charge with atoms and free electrons in the material. The speed, and therefore the kinetic energy, of the charge do not increase
during the entire trip across, and charge passing through area has the same drift velocity as the charg e that passes through
area. However, work is done on the charge, by the elect rical field, which changes the potential energy. Sinc e the change in the
electrical potential difference is negative, the elect rical field is found to be
The work done on the charge is equal to the electric forc e times the length at which the force is applied,
The charge moves at a drift velocity so the work do ne on the charge results in a loss of potential ener gy, but the average kinetic
energy remains constant. The lost electrical potent ial energy appears as thermal energy in the materia l. On a microscopic scale, the
energy transfer is due to collisions between the char ge and the molecules of the material, which leads to a n increase in temperature
in the material. The loss of potential energy results in an increase in the temperature of the material, which is dissipated as
radiation. In a resistor, it is dissipated as heat, and i n a light bulb, it is dissipated as heat and light.
The power dissipated by the material as heat and light is eq ual to the time rate of change of the work:
or
If a resistor is connected to a battery, the power dissipated as radiant energy by the wires and the resistor is equal to
The power supplied from the battery is equal to current tim es the voltage,.
The electric power gained or lost by any device has the fo rm
The power dissipated by a resistor has the form
Different insights can be gained from the three diff erent expressions for electric power. For example, imp lies that the
lower the resistance connected to a given voltage sou rce, the greater the power delivered. Furthermore, si nce voltage is squared in
, the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhap s greater than expected. Thus, when the voltage is doub led to a 25-WDefinition: Electric Power

4.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76561bulb, its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W, burn ing it out. If the bulb’s resistance remained constant, its power would be
exactly 100 W, but at the higher temperature, its resista nce is higher, too.
A DC winch motor is rated at 20.00 A with a voltage of 1 15 V. When the motor is running at its maximum power, it can lift an
object with a weight of 4900.00 N a distance of 10.00 m, in 30.00 s, at a constant speed.
a. What is the power consumed by the motor?
b. What is the power used in lifting the object? Ignore air resistance. (c) Assuming that the difference in the p ower consumed
by the motor and the power used lifting the object are dissi pated as heat by the resistance of the motor, estimate th e
resistance of the motor?
Strategy
a. The power consumed by the motor can be found using.
b. The power used in lifting the object at a constant spee d can be found using, where the speed is the distance
divided by the time. The upward force supplied by the mot or is equal to the weight of the object because the
acceleration is zero. (c) The resistance of the motor can be found using.
Solution
1. The power consumed by the motor is equal to and the cur rent is given as 20.00 A and the voltage is 115.00
V:
2. The power used lifting the object is equal to where th e force is equal to the weight of the object (1960 N)
and the magnitude of the velocity is
3. The difference in the power equals and the resista nce can be found using
Significance The resistance of the motor is quite sma ll. The resistance of the motor is due to many windi ngs of copper
wire. The power dissipated by the motor can be signific ant since the thermal power dissipated by the motor i s
proportional to the square of the current.
Electric motors have a reasonably high efficiency. A 1 00-hp motor can have an efficiency of 90% and a 1-h p motor can have an
efficiency of 80%. Why is it important to use high-perform ance motors?
Answer
Even though electric motors are highly efficient 10 –20% of the power consumed is wasted, not being used fo r doing useful
work. Most of the 10–20% of the power lost is transferre d into heat dissipated by the copper wires used to ma ke the coils of
the motor. This heat adds to the heat of the enviro nment and adds to the demand on power plants providi ng the power. The
demand on the power plant can lead to increased greenhouse gases, particularly if the power plant uses coal or gas as fuel.Example: Calculating Power in Electric Devices
Exercise

4.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76561A fuse (Figure) is a device that protects a circuit f rom currents that are too high. A fuse is basically a s hort piece of wire
between two contacts. As we have seen, when a current is ru nning through a conductor, the kinetic energy of the charge carriers is
converted into thermal energy in the conductor. The piece of wire in the fuse is under tension and has a l ow melting point. The wire
is designed to heat up and break at the rated curren t. The fuse is destroyed and must be replaced, but it protects the rest of the
circuit. Fuses act quickly, but there is a small time dela y while the wire heats up and breaks.
Figure: A fuse consists of a piece of wire between two contacts. When a current passes through the wire that i s greater than the
rated current, the wire melts, breaking the connecti on. Pictured is a “blown” fuse where the wire broke pr otecting a circuit (credit:
modification of work by “Shardayyy”/Flickr).
Circuit breakers are also rated for a maximum curren t, and open to protect the circuit, but can be reset. Circuit breakers react much
faster. The operation of circuit breakers is not with in the scope of this chapter and will be discussed in l ater chapters. Another
method of protecting equipment and people is the gr ound fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), which is common in bathrooms and
kitchens. The GFCI outlets respond very quickly to chan ges in current. These outlets open when there is a c hange in magnetic field
produced by current-carrying conductors, which is also beyond the scope of this chapter and is covered in a la ter chapter.
The Cost of Electricity
The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on, the higher your electric bill. T his familiar fact is based on the
relationship between energy and power. You pay for the ene rgy used. Since, we see that
is the energy used by a device using power P for a time interval t. If power is delivered at a constant rate, then the n the energy can
be found by. For example, the more light bulbs burning, the greater P used; the longer they are on, the greater t is.
The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hou r, consistent with the relationship. It is easy to est imate the cost
of operating electrical appliances if you have some i dea of their power consumption rate in watts or kilowatt s, the time they are on
in hours, and the cost per kilowatt-hour for your ele ctric utility. Kilowatt-hours, like all other specialize d energy units such as food
calories, can be converted into joules. You can prove to yo urself that.
The electrical energy (E) used can be reduced either by reducing the time o f use or by reducing the power consumption of that
appliance or fixture. This not only reduces the cost but also results in a reduced impact on the environme nt. Improvements to
lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the e lectrical energy used in a home or business. About 20 % of a home’s use of
energy goes to lighting, and the number for commercia l establishments is closer to 40%. Fluorescent lights a re about four times
more efficient than incandescent lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact fluorescent lights (CFLs), e.g., Figure
. Thus, a 60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same brightness and color. CFL s have a bent
tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube, all connec ted to a standard screw-in base that fits standard in candescent light sockets.
(Original problems with color, flicker, shape, and high initia l investment for CFLs have been addressed in recent years.)
The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they la st up to 10 times longer than incandescent bulbs. The si gnificance of an
investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next exa mple. New white LED lights (which are clusters of small LED bulbs) are even
more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last five times lo nger than CFLs.
The typical replacement for a 100-W incandescent bu lb is a 20-W LED bulb. The 20-W LED bulb can provide the same
amount of light output as the 100-W incandescent li ght bulb. What is the cost savings for using the LED bulb in place of theExample: Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of LED Bulb

4.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76561incandescent bulb for one year, assuming $0.10 per ki lowatt-hour is the average energy rate charged by the power company?
Assume that the bulb is turned on for three hours a day.
Strategy
a. Calculate the energy used during the year for each bul b, using.
b. Multiply the energy by the cost.
Solution
a. Calculate the power for each bulb.
b. Calculate the cost for each.
Significance
A LED bulb uses 80% less energy than the incandescent bulb, saving $8.76 over the incandescent bulb for on e year. The
LED bulb can cost $20.00 and the 100-W incandescent bu lb can cost $0.75, which should be calculated into th e
computation. A typical lifespan of an incandescent b ulb is 1200 hours and is 50,000 hours for the LED bul b. The
incandescent bulb would last 1.08 years at 3 hours a day and the LED bulb would last 45.66 years. The initia l cost of the
LED bulb is high, but the cost to the home owner will be $0.69 for the incandescent bulbs versus $0.44 for th e LED
bulbs per year. (Note that the LED bulbs are coming do wn in price.) The cost savings per year is approximate ly $8.50,
and that is just for one bulb.
Is the efficiency of the various light bulbs the only con sideration when comparing the various light bulbs?
Answer
No, the efficiency is a very important consideration of the light bulbs, but there are many other consid erations. As
mentioned above, the cost of the bulbs and the life span of the bulbs are important considerations. For e xample, CFL bulbs
contain mercury, a neurotoxin, and must be disposed of as hazardous waste. When replacing incandescent bulb s that are
being controlled by a dimmer switch with LED, the dimme r switch may need to be replaced. The dimmer switches for LED
lights are comparably priced to the incandescent li ght switches, but this is an initial cost which should be considered. The
spectrum of light should also be considered, but the re is a broad range of color temperatures available, so you should be
able to find one that fits your needs. None of these c onsiderations mentioned are meant to discourage the u se of LED or
CFL light bulbs, but they are considerations.
Changing light bulbs from incandescent bulbs to CFL or LED bulbs is a simple way to reduce energy consumption in homes and
commercial sites. CFL bulbs operate with a much differen t mechanism than do incandescent lights. The mechanism is complex and
beyond the scope of this chapter, but here is a very general description of the mechanism. CFL bulbs contai n argon and mercury
vapor housed within a spiral-shaped tube. The CFL bul bs use a “ballast” that increases the voltage used by the CFL bulb. The
ballast produce an electrical current, which passes thr ough the gas mixture and excites the gas molecules. The excited gas
molecules produce ultraviolet (UV) light, which in turn stimulates the fluorescent coating on the inside o f the tube. This coating
fluoresces in the visible spectrum, emitting visible li ght. Traditional fluorescent tubes and CFL bulbs had a short time delay of up toExercise

4.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76561a few seconds while the mixture was being “warmed up” and the molecules reached an excited state. It should b e noted that these
bulbs do contain mercury, which is poisonous, but if the bulb is broken, the mercury is never released. Eve n if the bulb is broken,
the mercury tends to remain in the fluorescent coatin g. The amount is also quite small and the advantage of the energy saving may
outweigh the disadvantage of using mercury.
The CFL light bulbs are being replaced with LED light b ulbs, where LED stands for “light-emitting diode.” The diode was briefly
discussed as a nonohmic device, made of semiconducti ng material, which essentially permits current flow in one direction. LEDs
are a special type of diode made of semiconducting materials infused with impurities in combinations and concentrations that
enable the extra energy from the movement of the el ectrons during electrical excitation to be converted into visible light.
Semiconducting devices will be explained in greater det ail in Condensed Matter Physics.
Commercial LEDs are quickly becoming the standard fo r commercial and residential lighting, replacing inca ndescent and CFL
bulbs. They are designed for the visible spectrum an d are constructed from gallium doped with arsenic and phosphorous atoms. The
color emitted from an LED depends on the materials u sed in the semiconductor and the current. In the earl y years of LED
development, small LEDs found on circuit boards were r ed, green, and yellow, but LED light bulbs can now be programmed to
produce millions of colors of light as well as many diffe rent hues of white light.
Comparison of Incandescent, CFL, and LED Light Bulbs
The energy savings can be significant when replacing an incandescent light bulb or a CFL light bulb with a n LED light. Light bulbs
are rated by the amount of power that the bulb consu mes, and the amount of light output is measured in lu mens. The lumen (lm) is
the SI -derived unit of luminous flux and is a measure of the total quantity of visible light emitted by a source. A 60-W
incandescent light bulb can be replaced with a 13- t o 15-W CFL bulb or a 6- to 8-W LED bulb, all three of which have a light
output of approximately 800 lm. A table of light output for some commonly used light bulbs appears in Table.
The life spans of the three types of bulbs are signif icantly different. An LED bulb has a life span of 50,0 00 hours, whereas the CFL
has a lifespan of 8000 hours and the incandescent l asts a mere 1200 hours. The LED bulb is the most durable, easily withstanding
rough treatment such as jarring and bumping. The in candescent light bulb has little tolerance to the s ame treatment since the
filament and glass can easily break. The CFL bulb is also less durable than the LED bulb because of its g lass construction. The
amount of heat emitted is 3.4 btu/h for the 8-W LED bulb, 85 btu/h for the 60-W incandescent bulb, and 30 btu/h for the CFL bulb.
As mentioned earlier, a major drawback of the CFL bulb i s that it contains mercury, a neurotoxin, and must b e disposed of as
hazardous waste. From these data, it is easy to understan d why the LED light bulb is quickly becoming the standard in lighting.
Table: Light Output of LED, Incandescent, and CFL Li ght Bulbs
Light Output (lumens) LED Light Bulbs (watts)Incandescent Light Bulbs
(watts)CFL Light Bulbs (watts)
450 4-5 40 9-13
800 6-8 60 13-15
1100 9-13 75 18-25
1600 16-20 100 23-30
2600 25-28 150 30-55
This page titled 4.5: Electrical Energy and Power is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.6: Electrical Energy and Power by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

4.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765624.6: Superconductors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the phenomenon of superconductivity
List applications of superconductivity
Touch the power supply of your laptop computer or so me other device. It probably feels slightly warm. Tha t heat is an unwanted
byproduct of the process of converting household ele ctric power into a current that can be used by your device. Although electric
power is reasonably efficient, other losses are associate d with it. As discussed in the section on power and energy, transmission of
electric power produces line losses. These line losses exist whether the power is generated from conventiona l power plants
(using coal, oil, or gas), nuclear plants, solar plant s, hydroelectric plants, or wind farms. These losses can be reduced, but not
eliminated, by transmitting using a higher voltage. It would be wonderful if these line losses could be el iminated, but that would
require transmission lines that have zero resistance. In a world that has a global interest in not wasting energy, the reduction or
elimination of this unwanted thermal energy would be a signi ficant achievement. Is this possible?
The Resistance of Mercury
In 1911, Heike Kamerlingh Onnes of Leiden University, a Dutch physicist, was looking a t the temperature dependence of the
resistance of the element mercury. He cooled the sampl e of mercury and noticed the familiar behavior of a linear dependence of
resistance on temperature; as the temperature decre ased, the resistance decreased. Kamerlingh Onnes continue d to cool the sample
of mercury, using liquid helium. As the temperature appr oached, the resistance abruptly went to zero (Figure
). This temperature is known as the critical temperature for mercury. The sample of mercury entered into a phase where
the resistance was absolutely zero. This phenomenon is k nown as superconductivity. (Note: If you connect the leads of a threedigit ohmmeter across a conductor, the reading commo nly shows up as. The resistance of the conductor is not actually zero,
it is less than.) There are various methods to measu re very small resistances, such as the four-point meth od, but an ohmmeter
is not an acceptable method to use for testing resistance in superconductivity.
Figure: The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero a t very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to t he temperature
of about 4.2 K. Above that critical temperature, it s resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly linearly with
temperature.
Other Superconducting Materials
As research continued, several other materials were fou nd to enter a superconducting phase, when the tempera ture reached near
absolute zero. In 1941, an alloy of niobium-nitride was found that could become superconducting at and i n
1953, vanadium-silicon was found to become supercondu ctive at. The temperatures for the transition into
superconductivity were slowly creeping higher. Strangely, many materials that make good conductors, such as copper, silver, and
gold, do not exhibit superconductivity. Imagine the e nergy savings if transmission lines for electric po wer-generating stations could
be made to be superconducting at temperatures near room temperature! A resistance of zero ohms means no losses and a great
boost to reducing energy consumption. The problem is that is still very cold and in the range of liqui d helium
temperatures. At this temperature, it is not cost effective to transmit electrical energy because of the cooling req uirements.
A large jump was seen in 1986, when a team of researche rs, headed by Dr. Ching Wu Chu of Houston University, f abricated a
brittle, ceramic compound with a transition temperat ure of. The ceramic material, composed of yttrium ba riumLEARNING OBJECTIVES

4.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76562copper oxide (YBCO), was an insulator at room temperatu re. Although this temperature still seems quite cold, it is near the boiling
point of liquid nitrogen, a liquid commonly used in r efrigeration. You may have noticed refrigerated truc ks traveling down the
highway labeled as “Liquid Nitrogen Cooled.”
YBCO ceramic is a material that could be useful for tr ansmitting electrical energy because the cost saving of reducing the
losses are larger than the cost of cooling the super conducting cable, making it financially feasible. Ther e were and are many
engineering problems to overcome. For example, unlike traditional electrical cables, which are flexible an d have a decent tensile
strength, ceramics are brittle and would break rathe r than stretch under pressure. Processes that are rather simple with traditional
cables, such as making connections, become difficult whe n working with ceramics. The problems are difficult and complex, and
material scientists and engineers are coming up with in novative solutions.
An interesting consequence of the resistance going to zero is that once a current is established in a su perconductor, it persists
without an applied voltage source. Current loops in a superconductor have been set up and the current lo ops have been observed to
persist for years without decaying.
Zero resistance is not the only interesting phenomeno n that occurs as the materials reach their transitio n temperatures. A second
effect is the exclusion of magnetic fields. This is k nown as the Meissner effect (Figure). A light, permanent magnet placed
over a superconducting sample will levitate in a stab le position above the superconductor. High-speed train s have been developed
that levitate on strong superconducting magnets, el iminating the friction normally experienced between the train and the tracks. In
Japan, the Yamanashi Maglev test line opened on April 3, 1997. In April 2015, the MLX01 test vehicle attained a speed of 374 mph
(603 km/h).
Figure: A small, strong magnet levitates over a superco nductor cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. The magnet levitates
because the superconductor excludes magnetic fields.
Table shows a select list of elements, compounds, and high-temperature superconductors, along with the cr itical temperatures
for which they become superconducting. Each section is sorted from the highest critical temperature to t he lowest. Also listed is the
critical magnetic field for some of the materials. T his is the strength of the magnetic field that destro ys superconductivity. Finally,
the type of the superconductor is listed.
There are two types of superconductors. There are 30 pu re metals that exhibit zero resistivity below their critical temperature and
exhibit the Meissner effect, the property of excluding magnetic fields from the interior of the supercondu ctor while the
superconductor is at a temperature below the critical temperature. These metals are called Type I superco nductors. The
superconductivity exists only below their critical tem peratures and below a critical magnetic field streng th. Type I superconductors
are well described by the BCS theory (described next). Type I superconductors have limited practical appl ications because the
strength of the critical magnetic field needed to destro y the superconductivity is quite low.
Type II superconductors are found to have much high er critical magnetic fields and therefore can carry much higher current
densities while remaining in the superconducting stat e. A collection of various ceramics containing barium- copper-oxide have
much higher critical temperatures for the transition into a superconducting state. Superconducting materia ls that belong to this
subcategory of the Type II superconductors are often c ategorized as high-temperature superconductors.
Introduction to BCS Theory
Type I superconductors, along with some Type II super conductors can be modeled using the BCS theory, proposed by John
Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. Although the theory is beyond the scope of this chap ter, a short summary of the
theory is provided here. (More detail is provided in Condensed Matter Physics.) The theory considers pairs of electrons and how
they are coupled together through lattice-vibration interactions. Through the interactions with the crysta lline lattice, electrons near
the Fermi energy level feel a small attractive force and form pairs (Cooper pairs), and the coupling is known as a phonon

4.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76562interaction. Single electrons are fermions, which are par ticles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The Pauli exclusion principle
in quantum mechanics states that two identical fermion s (particles with half-integer spin) cannot occupy th e same quantum state
simultaneously. Each electron has four quantum number s. The principal quantum number () describes the ene rgy of
the electron, the orbital angular momentum quantum number () indicates the most probable distance from the nucleus, the
magnetic quantum number describes the energy levels in the subshell, and the electron spin quantum numb er describes the
orientation of the spin of the electron, either up o r down. As the material enters a superconducting stat e, pairs of electrons act more
like bosons, which can condense into the same energy le vel and need not obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The electron pairs
have a slightly lower energy and leave an energy gap above them on the order of 0.001 eV. This energy ga p inhibits collision
interactions that lead to ordinary resistivity. When the material is below the critical temperature, the thermal energy is less than the
band gap and the material exhibits zero resistivity.
Table: Superconductor Critical Temperatures
Material Symbol or FormulaCritical Temperature Critical Magnetic FieldType
Elements
Lead Pb 7.19 0.08 I
Lanthanum La 4.90 - 6.30 I
Tantalum Ta 4.48 0.09 I
Mercury Hg 4.15 - 3.95 0.04 I
Tin Sn 3.72 0.03 I
Indium In 3.40 0.03 I
Thallium Tl 2.39 0.03 I
Rhenium Re 2.40 0.03 I
Thorium Th 1.37 0.013 I
Protactinium Pa 1.40 I
Aluminum Al 1.20 0.01 I
Gallium Ga 1.10 0.005 I
Zinc Zn 0.86 0.014 I
Titanium Ti 0.39 0.01 I
Uranium U 0.68 - 1.80 I
Cadmium Cd 11.4 4.00 I

4.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76562Material Symbol or FormulaCritical Temperature Critical Magnetic FieldType
Compounds
Niobium-germanium 23.20 37.00 II
Niobium-tin 18.30 30.00 II
Niobium-nitrite NbN 16.00 II
Niobium-titanium NbTi 10.00 15.00 II
High-Temperature
Oxides
134.00 II
125.00 II
92.00 120.00 II
Applications of Superconductors
Superconductors can be used to make superconducting m agnets. These magnets are 10 times stronger than the strongest
electromagnets. These magnets are currently in use i n magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which produces hig h-quality images of
the body interior without dangerous radiation. For more infor mation about other applications, you can consult this page.
This page titled 4.6: Superconductors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.7: Superconductors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

4.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765644.7: Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electrical Current
1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that is, hav e a total charge of zero? Explain.
2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours (A⋅h). To what physical quantity do ampere-hours correspon d (voltage, current,
charge, energy, power,…)?
3. When working with high-power electric circuits, it is a dvised that whenever possible, you work “one-handed” or “keep
one hand in your pocket.” Why is this a sensible suggestion?
Model of Conduction in Metals
4. Incandescent light bulbs are being replaced with more efficient LED and CFL light bulbs. Is there any obvi ous evidence
that incandescent light bulbs might not be that energy efficient? Is energy converted into anything but visibl e light?
5. It was stated that the motion of an electron appears nearly random when an electrical field is applied to the conductor.
What makes the motion nearly random and differentiates it from the random motion of molecules in a gas?
6. Electric circuits are sometimes explained using a c onceptual model of water flowing through a pipe. In t his conceptual
model, the voltage source is represented as a pump that pumps water through pipes and the pipes connect comp onents in the
circuit. Is a conceptual model of water flowing throu gh a pipe an adequate representation of the circuit? How are electrons
and wires similar to water molecules and pipes? How are they d ifferent?
7. An incandescent light bulb is partially evacuated. Why do you suppose that is?
Resistivity and Resistance
8. The IR drop across a resistor means that there is a c hange in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is there any change in
current as it passes through a resistor? Explain.
9. Do impurities in semiconducting materials listed in T able 9.1 supply free charges? (Hint: Examine the rang e of resistivity
for each and determine whether the pure semiconductor has the higher or lower conductivity.)
10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path cu rrent takes through it? Consider, for example, a rect angular bar—is
its resistance the same along its length as across its width?
11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length have the same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?
Ohm's Law
12. In Determining Field from Potential, resistance was defi ned as. In this section, we presented Ohm’s law, which i s
commonly expressed as V=IR. The equations look exactly alike. What is the diffe rence between Ohm’s law and the
definition of resistance?
13. Shown below are the results of an experiment where four devices were connected across a variable voltage sourc e. The
voltage is increased and the current is measured. Whic h device, if any, is an ohmic device?

4.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564
14. The current I is measured through a sample of an ohm ic material as a voltage V is applied. (a) What is th e current when
the voltage is doubled to 2V (assume the change in t emperature of the material is negligible)? (b) What is the voltage applied
is the current measured is 0.2I (assume the change in temperature of the material is negligible)? What wil l happen to the
current if the material if the voltage remains constant, but the temperature of the material increases signific antly?
Electrical Energy and Power
15. Common household appliances are rated at 110 V, but p ower companies deliver voltage in the kilovolt range and then
step the voltage down using transformers to 110 V to b e used in homes. You will learn in later chapters that transformers
consist of many turns of wire, which warm up as current flows through them, wasting some of the energy that is given off as
heat. This sounds inefficient. Why do the power companies tr ansport electric power using this method?
16. Your electric bill gives your consumption in units of kilowatt-hour (kW ⋅· h). Does this unit represent the amount of
charge, current, voltage, power, or energy you buy?
17. Resistors are commonly rated at, 1 W and 2 W for u se in electrical circuits. If a current of I=2.00A is
accidentally passed through a R=1.00Ω resistor rated at 1 W, what would be the most probable outcome? Is there anything
that can be done to prevent such an accident?
18. An immersion heater is a small appliance used to heat a cup of water for tea by passing current through a resistor. If the
voltage applied to the appliance is doubled, will the time required to heat the water change? By how much? Is this a good
idea?
Superconductors
19. What requirement for superconductivity makes current s uperconducting devices expensive to operate?
20. Name two applications for superconductivity listed in th is section and explain how superconductivity is used in the
application. Can you think of a use for superconductivi ty that is not listed?
Problems
Electrical Current
21. A Van de Graaff generator is one of the original part icle accelerators and can be used to accelerate cha rged particles like
protons or electrons. You may have seen it used to make human hair stand on end or produce large sparks. On e application of
the Van de Graaff generator is to create X-rays by bom barding a hard metal target with the beam. Consider a beam of protons
at 1.00 keV and a current of 5.00 mA produced by the gener ator.
(a) What is the speed of the protons?
(b) How many protons are produced each second?
22. A cathode ray tube (CRT) is a device that produces a focused beam of electrons in a vacuum. The electron s strike a
phosphor-coated glass screen at the end of the tube, which produces a bright spot of light. The position of the bright spot of
light on the screen can be adjusted by deflecting th e electrons with electrical fields, magnetic fields, or both. Although the
CRT tube was once commonly found in televisions, com puter displays, and oscilloscopes, newer appliances u se a liquid

4.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564crystal display (LCD) or plasma screen. You still may co me across a CRT in your study of science. Consider a CRT with an
electron beam average current of 25.00μA25.00μA. How many elect rons strike the screen every minute?
23. How many electrons flow through a point in a wire in 3.00 s if th ere is a constant current of I=4.00A?
24. A conductor carries a current that is decreasing exp onentially with time. The current is modeled as, wher e
is the current at time t=0.00s and τ=0.50s is the time constant. How much charge flows through the conductor
between t=0.00s and t=3τ?
25. The quantity of charge through a conductor is mode led as. What is the current at time
t=3.00s?
26. The current through a conductor is modeled as. Wri te an equation for the charge as a function of
time.
27. The charge on a capacitor in a circuit is modeled as. What is the current through the circuit as a
function of time?
Model of Conduction in Metals
28. An aluminum wire 1.628 mm in diameter (14-gauge) carrie s a current of 3.00 amps.
(a) What is the absolute value of the charge density in the wire?
(b) What is the drift velocity of the electrons?
(c) What would be the drift velocity if the same gau ge copper were used instead of aluminum? The density of copper is
and the density of aluminum is. The molar mass of a luminum is 26.98 g/mol and the molar mass
of copper is 63.5 g/mol. Assume each atom of metal contrib utes one free electron.
29. The current of an electron beam has a measured curr ent of I=50.00μA with a radius of mm. What is the magnitude
of the current density of the beam?
30. A high-energy proton accelerator produces a proton beam with a radius of r=0.90mm. The beam current is I=9.00μA and
is constant. The charge density of the beam is protons p er cubic meter.
(a) What is the current density of the beam?
(b) What is the drift velocity of the beam?
(c) How much time does it take for protons to be emitted by t he accelerator?
31. Consider a wire of a circular cross-section with a rad ius of R=3.00mm. The magnitude of the current density is modeled
as. What is the current through the inner section of th e wire from the center to r=0.5R?
32. A cylindrical wire has a current density from the cent er of the wire’s cross section as where is in meters, is
in amps per square meter, and A/m. This current density continues to the end of the wire at a radius of 1.0 mm.
Calculate the current just outside of this wire.
33. The current supplied to an air conditioner unit is 4.0 0 amps. The air conditioner is wired using a 10-gauge (diameter
2.588 mm) wire. The charge density is. Find the magnitude o f
(a) current density and
(b) the drift velocity.
Resistivity and Resistance
34. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V flashli ght when its hot resistance is 3.60Ω?
35. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket calculat or that has a 1.35-V battery and through which 0.200 mA flo ws.
36. How many volts are supplied to operate an indicator lig ht on a DVD player that has a resistance of 140Ω, given that 25.0
mA passes through it?
37. What is the resistance of a 20.0-m-long piece of 12-gauge copper wire having a 2.053-mm diameter?4

4.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7656438. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252 mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of such wire used for power
transmission.
39. If the 0.100-mm-diameter tungsten filament in a lig ht bulb is to have a resistance of 0.200Ω at 20.0°C, how long should
it be?
40. A lead rod has a length of 30.00 cm and a resistance of 5.00μΩ. What is the radius of the rod?
41. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to copper wire, if they have the same resistance per unit len gth (as they might
in household wiring).
42. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter rod of pure silicon that is 20.0 cm long, when is applied to it?
(Such a rod may be used to make nuclear-particle detector s, for example.)
43. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper wire, originally at 20.0°C, to double its resistance, neglecting any
changes in dimensions? (b) Does this happen in househ old wiring under ordinary circumstances?
44. A resistor made of nichrome wire is used in an applic ation where its resistance cannot change more than 1. 00% from its
value at 20.0°C. Over what temperature range can it be used?
45. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance is 40.0 % greater at 100.0°C than at 20.0°C?
46. An electronic device designed to operate at any temp erature in the range from −10.0°C to 55.0°C contains pure carbon
resistors. By what factor does their resistance increas e over this range? 47.
(a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is 25.0 m lo ng with a diameter of 0.100 mm and has a resistance o f 77.7Ω at
20.0°C? (b) What is its resistance at 150.0°C?
48. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of resisti vity, what is the maximum percent decrease in the resi stance of a
constantan wire starting at 20.0°C?
49. A copper wire has a resistance of 0.500Ω at 20.0°C, and an iron wire has a resistance of 0.525Ω at the same temperature.
At what temperature are their resistances equal?
Ohm's Law
50. A 2.2-kΩ resistor is connected across a D cell battery (1.5 V). What is the current through the resistor?
51. A resistor rated at 250kΩ is connected across two D cell batteries (each 1.50 V) in series, with a total voltage of 3.00 V.
The manufacturer advertises that their resistors ar e within 5% of the rated value. What are the possible minimum current and
maximum current through the resistor?
52. A resistor is connected in series with a power supply of 20.00 V. The current measure is 0.50 A. What is the resistance of
the resistor?
53. A resistor is placed in a circuit with an adjustable voltage source. The voltage across and the current thr ough the resistor
and the measurements are shown below. Estimate the resist ance of the resistor.
54. The following table show the measurements of a current through and the voltage across a sample of material. Plot the
data, and assuming the object is an ohmic device, estimate t he resistance.

4.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564Table: Measurements of current through and the voltag e across a sample of material
I(A) V(V)
0 3
2 23
4 39
6 58
8 77
10 100
12 119
14 142
16 162
Electrical Energy and Power
55. A 20.00-V battery is used to supply current to a 10-kΩ resistor. Assume the voltage drop across any wires used for
connections is negligible.
(a) What is the current through the resistor?
(b) What is the power dissipated by the resistor?
(c) What is the power input from the battery, assuming all th e electrical power is dissipated by the resistor?
(d) What happens to the energy dissipated by the resistor?
56. What is the maximum voltage that can be applied to a 20-kΩ resistor rated at?
57. A heater is being designed that uses a coil of 14-gau ge nichrome wire to generate 300 W using a voltage o f V=110V.
How long should the engineer make the wire?
58. An alternative to CFL bulbs and incandescent bulbs are light-emitting diode (LED) bulbs. A 100-W incandesce nt bulb
can be replaced by a 16-W LED bulb. Both produce 160 0 lumens of light. Assuming the cost of electricity i s $0.10 per
kilowatt-hour, how much does it cost to run the bulb for one year if it runs for four hours a day?
59. The power dissipated by a resistor with a resistance of R=100Ω is P=2.0W. What are the current through and the voltage
drop across the resistor?
60. Running late to catch a plane, a driver accidentall y leaves the headlights on after parking the car in the airport parking lot.
During takeoff, the driver realizes the mistake. Havi ng just replaced the battery, the driver knows that th e battery is a 12-V
automobile battery, rated at 100 A⋅h. The driver, knowing there is nothing that can be d one, estimates how long the lights
will shine, assuming there are two 12-V headlights, each rat ed at 40 W. What did the driver conclude?
61. A physics student has a single-occupancy dorm room. T he student has a small refrigerator that runs with a current of 3.00
A and a voltage of 110 V, a lamp that contains a 10 0-W bulb, an overhead light with a 60-W bulb, and var ious other small
devices adding up to 3.00 W.
(a) Assuming the power plant that supplies 110 V electri city to the dorm is 10 km away and the two aluminum
transmission cables use 0-gauge wire with a diameter of 8.252 mm, estimate the percentage of the total power supplied
by the power company that is lost in the transmission.
(b) What would be the result is the power company delivere d the electric power at 110 kV?
62. A 0.50-W, 220-Ω resistor carries the maximum current possible without damaging the resistor. If the current were
reduced to half the value, what would be the power consumed?

4.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564Superconductors
63. Consider a power plant is located 60 km away from a re sidential area uses 0-gauge wire of copper to
transmit power at a current of I=100.00A. How much more power is dissipated in the copper wires th an it would be in
superconducting wires?
64. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four times it s original length. By what factor does its resistance increase?
65. Digital medical thermometers determine temperature b y measuring the resistance of a semiconductor devic e called a
thermistor (which has α=−0.06/°C) when it is at the same temperature as the patient. W hat is a patient’s temperature if the
thermistor’s resistance at that temperature is 82.0% of i ts value at 37°C (normal body temperature)?
66. Electrical power generators are sometimes “load test ed” by passing current through a large vat of water. A similar method
can be used to test the heat output of a resistor. A R=30Ω resistor is connected to a 9.0-V battery and the resist or leads are
waterproofed and the resistor is placed in 1.0 kg of room temperature water (T=20°C). Current runs through the resistor for
20 minutes. Assuming all the electrical energy dissip ated by the resistor is converted to heat, what is th e final temperature of
the water?
67. A 12-guage gold wire has a length of 1 meter.
(a) What would be the length of a silver 12-gauge wire with the same resistance?
(b) What are their respective resistances at the tempera ture of boiling water?
68. What is the change in temperature required to decrease t he resistance for a carbon resistor by 10%?
Additional Problems
69. A coaxial cable consists of an inner conductor with radius and an outer radius of and has a length
of 10 meters. Plastic, with a resistivity of, separa tes the two conductors. What is the resistance of th e
cable?
70. A 10.00-meter long wire cable that is made of copper has a resistance of 0.051 ohms.
(a) What is the weight if the wire was made of copper?
(b) What is the weight of a 10.00-meter-long wire of the same gauge made of aluminum?
(c)What is the resistance of the aluminum wire? The density of copper is and the density of aluminum i s
71. A nichrome rod that is 3.00 mm long with a cross-sectional area of is used for a digital thermometer.
(a) What is the resistance at room temperature?
(b) What is the resistance at body temperature?
72. The temperature in Philadelphia, PA can vary between 68.00°F and 100.00°F in one summer day. By what percentage
will an aluminum wire’s resistance change during the day?
73. When 100.0 V is applied across a 5-gauge (diameter 4. 621 mm) wire that is 10 m long, the magnitude of the current
density is. What is the resistivity of the wire?
74. A wire with a resistance of 5.0Ω is drawn out through a die so that its new length is t wice times its original length. Find
the resistance of the longer wire. You may assume that the r esistivity and density of the material are unchanged.
75. What is the resistivity of a wire of 5-gauge wire (), 5.00 m l ength, and 5.10mΩ resistance?
76. Coils are often used in electrical and electronic ci rcuits. Consider a coil which is formed by winding 1000 turns of
insulated 20-gauge copper wire (area in a single la yer on a cylindrical non-conducting core of radius 2.0 mm. What
is the resistance of the coil? Neglect the thickness of t he insulation.
77. Currents of approximately 0.06 A can be potentially fatal. Currents in that range can make the heart fi brillate (beat in an
uncontrolled manner). The resistance of a dry human bod y can be approximately 100kΩ.

4.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564(a) What voltage can cause 0.2 A through a dry human bo dy?
(b) When a human body is wet, the resistance can fall to 100Ω. What voltage can cause harm to a wet body?
78. A 20.00-ohm, 5.00-watt resistor is placed in series with a power supply.
(a) What is the maximum voltage that can be applied to th e resistor without harming the resistor?
(b) What would be the current through the resistor?
79. A battery with an emf of 24.00 V delivers a constant cu rrent of 2.00 mA to an appliance. How much work does the
battery do in three minutes?
80. A 12.00-V battery has an internal resistance of a tenth of an ohm.
(a) What is the current if the battery terminals are moment arily shorted together?
(b) What is the terminal voltage if the battery deliv ers 0.25 amps to a circuit?
Challenge Problems
81. A 10-gauge copper wire has a cross-sectional area an d carries a current of I=5.00A. The density of copper
is. One mole of copper atoms () has a mass of approx imately 63.50 g. What is the magnitude
of the drift velocity of the electrons, assuming that each copper atom contributes one free electron to the curre nt?
82. The current through a 12-gauge wire is given as I(t)=(5.00A)sin(2π60Hzt). What is the current density at time 15.00 ms?
83. A particle accelerator produces a beam with a radius of 1.25 mm with a current of 2.00 mA. Each proton has a kinetic
energy of 10.00 MeV.
(a) What is the velocity of the protons?
(b) What is the number (n) of protons per unit volume?
(c) How many electrons pass a cross sectional area each seco nd?
84. In this chapter, most examples and problems involved direct current (DC). DC circuits have the current flowin g in one
direction, from positive to negative. When the curren t was changing, it was changed linearly from to
and the voltage changed linearly from to, where. Suppose a voltage source is placed in
series with a resistor of R=10Ω that supplied a current that alternated as a sine wa ve, for example,.
(a) What would a graph of the voltage drop across the resistor V(t) versus time look like? (b) What would a plot of V(t)
versus I(t) for one period look like? (Hint: If you are not sure, try p lotting V(t) versus I(t) using a spreadsheet.)
85. A current of I=25A is drawn from a 100-V battery for 30 seconds. By how muc h is the chemical energy reduced?
86. Consider a square rod of material with sides of length L=3.00cm with a current density of
as shown below. Find the current that passes through the face of

4.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564
87. A resistor of an unknown resistance is placed in an in sulated container filled with 0.75 kg of water. A volt age source is
connected in series with the resistor and a current o f 1.2 amps flows through the resistor for 10 minutes. During this time, the
temperature of the water is measured and the temperature c hange during this time is ΔT=10.00°C.
(a) What is the resistance of the resistor?
(b) What is the voltage supplied by the power supply?
88. The charge that flows through a point in a wire as a func tion of time is modeled as.
(a) What is the initial current through the wire at tim e t=0.00s?
(b) Find the current at time.
(c) At what time t will the current be reduced by one-half?
89. Consider a resistor made from a hollow cylinder of c arbon as shown below. The inner radius of the cylinder is
Ri=0.20mmRi=0.20mm and the outer radius is. The len gth of the resistor is L=0.90mm. The resistivity of the
carbon is. (a) Prove that the resistance perpendicu lar from the axis is. (b) What is the
resistance?
90. What is the current through a cylindrical wire of radius R=0.1mm if the current density is, where?
91. A student uses a 100.00-W, 115.00-V radiant heater to heat the student’s dorm room, during the hours betwee n sunset and
sunrise, 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(a) What current does the heater operate at?
(b) How many electrons move through the heater?
(c) What is the resistance of the heater?
(d) How much heat was added to the dorm room?

4.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7656492. A 12-V car battery is used to power a 20.00-W, 12.00-V lamp during the physics club camping trip/star party. The cable
to the lamp is 2.00 meters long, 14-gauge copper wire with a charge density of.
(a) What is the current draw by the lamp?
(b) How long would it take an electron to get from the batter y to the lamp?
93. A physics student uses a 115.00-V immersion heater to heat 400.00 grams (almost two cups) of water for her bal tea.
During the two minutes it takes the water to heat, the p hysics student becomes bored and decides to figure out the resistance
of the heater. The student starts with the assumption that the water is initially at the temperature of the room and
reaches. The specific heat of the water is. What is the resistance of the heater?
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Practice Answers
Check Your Understanding
1. The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be, slightly less than an hour.
This is quite different from the 5.55 ms for the truc k battery. The calculator takes a very small amount of energy to operate,
unlike the truck’s starter motor. There are several r easons that vehicles use batteries and not solar cells. Aside from the
obvious fact that a light source to run the solar ce lls for a car or truck is not always available, the la rge amount of current
needed to start the engine cannot easily be supplie d by present-day solar cells. Solar cells can possibl y be used to charge the
batteries. Charging the battery requires a small am ount of energy when compared to the energy required to run the engine
and the other accessories such as the heater and air conditioner. Present day solar-powered cars are powered by solar panels,
which may power an electric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
2. The total current needed by all the appliances in th e living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
3. The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than th e diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloc ity is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12-gauge
wire carrying the same current. The number of electrons per cubic meter will remain constant.
4. The current density in a conducting wire increases d ue to an increase in current. The drift velocity is i nversely proportional
to the current (), so the drift velocity would decrease.
5. Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wire s. All four materials have a high conductivity, silver having the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silve r and gold wires are used for special applications, suc h as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a larger diameter is needed to match the resistance per length of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the du ctility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum and care must be used when making connections. Aluminum ha s a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which ca n lead to loose connections and a possible fire hazard. The oxidation
of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Special techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
6. The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, and the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature change s, so does the
resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, o ne used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature

4.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765647. The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. T he greater the resistivity, the higher the resistanc e. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner ra dius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, t he greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
8. Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time t he current is equal to I(t)=V(t)/RI(t)=V(t)/R, so the c urrent is also a
function of time,.
9. Even though electric motors are highly efficient 10 –20% of the power consumed is wasted, not being used for doing useful
work. Most of the 10–20% of the power lost is transferre d into heat dissipated by the copper wires used to ma ke the coils of
the motor. This heat adds to the heat of the enviro nment and adds to the demand on power plants providi ng the power. The
demand on the power plant can lead to increased greenhouse gases, particularly if the power plant uses coal or gas as fuel.
10. No, the efficiency is a very important consideration of the light bulbs, but there are many other consider ations. As
mentioned above, the cost of the bulbs and the life span of the bulbs are important considerations. For example, CFL bulbs
contain mercury, a neurotoxin, and must be disposed of as hazardous waste. When replacing incandescent bulb s that are
being controlled by a dimmer switch with LED, the dimme r switch may need to be replaced. The dimmer switches for LED
lights are comparably priced to the incandescent li ght switches, but this is an initial cost which should be considered. The
spectrum of light should also be considered, but th ere is a broad range of color temperatures availabl e, so you should be able
to find one that fits your needs. None of these consi derations mentioned are meant to discourage the use of LED or CFL light
bulbs, but they are considerations.
Conceptual Questions
1. If a wire is carrying a current, charges enter the wir e from the voltage source’s positive terminal and le ave at the negative
terminal, so the total charge remains zero while the curr ent flows through it.
3. Using one hand will reduce the possibility of “completi ng the circuit” and having current run through your body,
especially current running through your heart.
5. Even though the electrons collide with atoms and other electrons in the wire, they travel from the negative terminal to the
positive terminal, so they drift in one direction. Gas molec ules travel in completely random directions.
7. In the early years of light bulbs, the bulbs are par tially evacuated to reduce the amount of heat condu cted through the air to
the glass envelope. Dissipating the heat would cool t he filament, increasing the amount of energy needed to produce light
from the filament. It also protects the glass from th e heat produced from the hot filament. If the glass heats, it expands, and as
it cools, it contacts. This expansion and contraction could cause the glass to become brittle and crack, reducing the life of the
bulbs. Many bulbs are now partially filled with an ine rt gas. It is also useful to remove the oxygen to red uce the possibility of
the filament actually burning. When the original fil aments were replaced with more efficient tungsten fil aments, atoms from
the tungsten would evaporate off the filament at such high temperatures. The atoms collide with the atoms of the inert gas
and land back on the filament.
9. In carbon, resistivity increases with the amount of i mpurities, meaning fewer free charges. In silicon and germanium,
impurities decrease resistivity, meaning more free electro ns.
11. Copper has a lower resistivity than aluminum, so if length i s the same, copper must have the smaller diameter.
13. Device B shows a linear relationship and the device is ohmi c.
15. Although the conductors have a low resistance, the lin es from the power company can be kilometers long. Using a high
voltage reduces the current that is required to supply th e power demand and that reduces line losses.
17. The resistor would overheat, possibly to the point o f causing the resistor to burn. Fuses are commonly add ed to circuits to
prevent such accidents.
19. Very low temperatures necessitate refrigeration. Some materials require liquid nitrogen to cool them bel ow their critical
temperatures. Other materials may need liquid helium, whic h is even more costly.

4.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564Problems
21. a.;
b.,no. of protons=
23., no. of electrons=
25.
27.
29.
31.
33. a.;
b.
35.
37.
39.;
41.
43. a.;
b. Under normal conditions, no it should not occur.
45., iron
47. a., gold;
b.
49.
51.
53.
55. a.;
b.;
c.;
d. It is converted into heat.
57.
59.
61. a.

4.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564b.
63.
65.
67. a.;
b.
Additional Problems
69.
71. a.;
b.
73.
75.
77.;
b.
79.
Challenge Problems
81.
83. a.;
b.;
c. 1.25
85.
87. a.;
b.
89. a.;
b.
91. a.;
b. #electrons

4.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76564c.;
d.
93.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 4.7: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
9.9: Current and Resistance (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
9.10: Current and Resistance (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

4.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765634.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
9.1. The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be, slightly less than an hour.
This is quite different from the 5.55 ms for the truc k battery. The calculator takes a very small amount of energy to operate,
unlike the truck’s starter motor. There are several r easons that vehicles use batteries and not solar cells. Aside from the
obvious fact that a light source to run the solar ce lls for a car or truck is not always available, the la rge amount of current
needed to start the engine cannot easily be supplie d by present-day solar cells. Solar cells can possibl y be used to charge the
batteries. Charging the battery requires a small am ount of energy when compared to the energy required to run the engine
and the other accessories such as the heater and air conditioner. Present day solar-powered cars are powered by solar panels,
which may power an electric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
9.2. The total current needed by all the appliances in t he living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
9.3. The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than the diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloci ty is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12-gauge
wire carrying the same current. The number of electrons per cubic meter will remain constant.
9.4. The current density in a conducting wire increases due to an increase in current. The drift velocity is in versely
proportional to the current (), so the drift velocity woul d decrease.
9.5. Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wir es. All four materials have a high conductivity, silver h aving the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silve r and gold wires are used for special applications, suc h as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a larger diameter is needed to match the resistance per length of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the du ctility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum and care must be used when making connections. Aluminum ha s a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which ca n lead to loose connections and a possible fire hazard. The oxidation
of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Special techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
9.6. The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, a nd the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature change s, so does the
resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, o ne used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature
9.7. The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. The greater the resistivity, the higher the resistance. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner ra dius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, t he greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
9.8. Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time t he current is equal to I(t)=V(t)/RI(t)=V(t)/R, so the current is also a
function of time,.
9.9. Even though electric motors are highly efficient 10– 20% of the power consumed is wasted, not being used for doing
useful work. Most of the 10–20% of the power lost is tr ansferred into heat dissipated by the copper wires use d to make the
coils of the motor. This heat adds to the heat of th e environment and adds to the demand on power plants providing the
power. The demand on the power plant can lead to incre ased greenhouse gases, particularly if the power plant u ses coal or
gas as fuel.

4.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765639.10. No, the efficiency is a very important consideration o f the light bulbs, but there are many other considerat ions. As
mentioned above, the cost of the bulbs and the life span of the bulbs are important considerations. For example, CFL bulbs
contain mercury, a neurotoxin, and must be disposed of as hazardous waste. When replacing incandescent bulb s that are
being controlled by a dimmer switch with LED, the dimme r switch may need to be replaced. The dimmer switches for LED
lights are comparably priced to the incandescent li ght switches, but this is an initial cost which should be considered. The
spectrum of light should also be considered, but th ere is a broad range of color temperatures availabl e, so you should be able
to find one that fits your needs. None of these consi derations mentioned are meant to discourage the use of LED or CFL light
bulbs, but they are considerations.
Conceptual Questions
1. If a wire is carrying a current, charges enter the wir e from the voltage source’s positive terminal and le ave at the negative
terminal, so the total charge remains zero while the curr ent flows through it.
3. Using one hand will reduce the possibility of “completi ng the circuit” and having current run through your body,
especially current running through your heart.
5. Even though the electrons collide with atoms and other electrons in the wire, they travel from the negative terminal to the
positive terminal, so they drift in one direction. Gas molec ules travel in completely random directions.
7. In the early years of light bulbs, the bulbs are par tially evacuated to reduce the amount of heat condu cted through the air to
the glass envelope. Dissipating the heat would cool t he filament, increasing the amount of energy needed to produce light
from the filament. It also protects the glass from th e heat produced from the hot filament. If the glass heats, it expands, and as
it cools, it contacts. This expansion and contraction could cause the glass to become brittle and crack, reducing the life of the
bulbs. Many bulbs are now partially filled with an ine rt gas. It is also useful to remove the oxygen to red uce the possibility of
the filament actually burning. When the original fil aments were replaced with more efficient tungsten fil aments, atoms from
the tungsten would evaporate off the filament at such high temperatures. The atoms collide with the atoms of the inert gas
and land back on the filament.
9. In carbon, resistivity increases with the amount of i mpurities, meaning fewer free charges. In silicon and germanium,
impurities decrease resistivity, meaning more free electro ns.
11. Copper has a lower resistivity than aluminum, so if length i s the same, copper must have the smaller diameter.
13. Device B shows a linear relationship and the device is ohmi c.
15. Although the conductors have a low resistance, the lin es from the power company can be kilometers long. Using a high
voltage reduces the current that is required to supply th e power demand and that reduces line losses.
17. The resistor would overheat, possibly to the point o f causing the resistor to burn. Fuses are commonly add ed to circuits to
prevent such accidents.
19. Very low temperatures necessitate refrigeration. Some materials require liquid nitrogen to cool them bel ow their critical
temperatures. Other materials may need liquid helium, whic h is even more costly.
Problems
21. a.;
b.,no. of protons=
23., no. of electrons=
25.
27.
29.
31.

4.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7656333. a.;
b.
35.
37.
39.;
41.
43. a.;
b. Under normal conditions, no it should not occur.
45., iron
47. a., gold;
b.
49.
51.
53.
55. a.;
b.;
c.;
d. It is converted into heat.
57.
59.
61. a.
b.
63.
65.

4.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7656367. a.;
b.
Additional Problems
69.
71. a.;
b.
73.
75.
77.;
b.
79.
Challenge Problems
81.
83. a.;
b.;
c. 1.25
85.
87. a.;
b.
89. a.;
b.
91. a.;
b. #electrons
c.;
d.
93.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 4.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765639.10: Current and Resistance (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

4.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765654.S: Summary

4.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76565Key Terms
ampere (amp) SI unit for current;
circuit complete path that an electrical current travels alo ng
conventional currentcurrent that flows through a circuit from the positiv e terminal of a
battery through the circuit to the negative termina l of the battery
critical temperature temperature at which a material reaches superconducti vity
current density flow of charge through a cross-sectional area divided by the area
diodenonohmic circuit device that allows current flow in o nly one
direction
drift velocityvelocity of a charge as it moves nearly randomly thro ugh a
conductor, experiencing multiple collisions, averaged over a length
of a conductor, whose magnitude is the length of cond uctor
traveled divided by the time it takes for the charge s to travel the
length
electrical conductivity measure of a material’s ability to conduct or transmit electricity
electrical current rate at which charge flows,
electrical power time rate of change of energy in an electric circui t
Josephson junctionjunction of two pieces of superconducting material sepa rated by a
thin layer of insulating material, which can carry a supercurrent
Meissner effectphenomenon that occurs in a superconducting material where all
magnetic fields are expelled
nonohmic type of a material for which Ohm’s law is not valid
ohm () unit of electrical resistance,
ohmictype of a material for which Ohm’s law is valid, that is, the voltage
drop across the device is equal to the current times th e resistance
Ohm’s lawempirical relation stating that the current I is prop ortional to the
potential difference V; it is often written as, where R is the
resistance
resistanceelectric property that impedes current; for ohmic ma terials, it is the
ratio of voltage to current,
resistivityintrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size,
directly proportional to the resistance, denoted by
schematicgraphical representation of a circuit using standardiz ed symbols
for components and solid lines for the wire connecting the
components
SQUID(Superconducting Quantum Interference Device) device that is a
very sensitive magnetometer, used to measure extremely subtle
magnetic fields
superconductivityphenomenon that occurs in some materials where the resist ance
goes to exactly zero and all magnetic fields are expe lled, which
occurs dramatically at some low critical temperature

4.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76565Key Equations
Average electrical current
Definition of an ampere
Electrical current
Drift velocity
Current density
Resistivity
Common expression of Ohm’s law
Resistivity as a function of temperature
Definition of resistance
Resistance of a cylinder of material
Temperature dependence of resistance
Electric power
Power dissipated by a resistor
Summary
Electrical Current
The average electrical current is the rate at which cha rge flows, given by, where is the amount of charge
passing through an area in time.
The instantaneous electrical current, or simply the curr ent I, is the rate at which charge flows. Taking the limit a s the change in
time approaches zero, we have, where is the time deriva tive of the charge.
The direction of conventional current is taken as the dir ection in which positive charge moves. In a simple direct-cur rent (DC)
circuit, this will be from the positive terminal of the batte ry to the negative terminal.
The SI unit for current is the ampere, or simply the amp (A), where.
Current consists of the flow of free charges, such as electro ns, protons, and ions.
Model of Conduction in Metals
The current through a conductor depends mainly on the mot ion of free electrons.
When an electrical field is applied to a conductor, the fr ee electrons in a conductor do not move through a conduct or at a
constant speed and direction; instead, the motion is alm ost random due to collisions with atoms and other free el ectrons.
Even though the electrons move in a nearly random fas hion, when an electrical field is applied to the conducto r, the overall
velocity of the electrons can be defined in terms of a dri ft velocity.
The current density is a vector quantity defined as the cu rrent through an infinitesimal area divided by the area.
The current can be found from the current density,.
An incandescent light bulb is a filament of wire enclosed in a glass bulb that is partially evacuated. Current runs thro ugh the
filament, where the electrical energy is converted to li ght and heat.
Resistivity and Resistance
Resistance has units of ohms (), related to volts and amp eres by.
The resistance R of a cylinder of length L and cross-sectional area A is, where is the resistivi ty of the material.
Values of in Table 9.1 show that materials fall into thr ee groups—conductors, semiconductors, and insulators.

4.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76565Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small t emperature changes, resistivity is, where is the
original resistivity and is the temperature coeffici ent of resistivity.
The resistance R of an object also varies with temperature:, where is the o riginal resistance, and R is the
resistance after the temperature change.
Ohm's Law
Ohm’s law is an empirical relationship for current, volt age, and resistance for some common types of circuit ele ments,
including resistors. It does not apply to other device s, such as diodes.
One statement of Ohm’s law gives the relationship among current I, voltage V, and resistance R in a simple circuit as.
Another statement of Ohm’s law, on a microscopic level, is.
Electrical Energy and Power
Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is supp lied to a circuit or consumed by a load.
Power dissipated by a resistor depends on the square of the cu rrent through the resistor and is equal to.
The SI unit for electric power is the watt and the SI unit fo r electric energy is the joule. Another common unit for electric
energy, used by power companies, is the kilowatt-hour (kW ⋅· h).
The total energy used over a time interval can be found b y.
Superconductors
Superconductivity is a phenomenon that occurs in some mate rials when cooled to very low critical temperatures, result ing in a
resistance of exactly zero and the expulsion of all magnet ic fields.
Materials that are normally good conductors (such as coppe r, gold, and silver) do not experience superconductivit y.
Superconductivity was first observed in mercury by Heike Kamerl ingh Onnes in 1911. In 1986, Dr. Ching Wu Chu of Houston
University fabricated a brittle, ceramic compound with a critical temperature close to the temperature of liquid nitrogen.
Superconductivity can be used in the manufacture of super conducting magnets for use in MRIs and high-speed, levitat ed trains.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 4.S: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
9.8: Current and Resistance (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Resistive Networks
In the preceding few chapters, we discussed electric components, including capacitors, resistors, and diodes. In this chapter, we use
these electric components in circuits. A circuit is a collection of electrical components connected to accomplish a specific task. The
second section of this chapter covers the analysis of series and parallel circuits that consist of resi stors. Later in this chapter, we
introduce the basic equations and techniques to anal yze any circuit, including those that are not reducib le through simplifying
parallel and series elements. But first, we need to unders tand how to power a circuit.
5.1: Electromotive Force
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
5.6: RC Circuits
5.7: Practice
5.S: Summary
This page titled 5: Resistive Networks is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765685.1: Electromotive Force
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe the electromotive force (emf) and the interna l resistance of a battery
Explain the basic operation of a battery
If you forget to turn off your car lights, they slowl y dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they sudden ly blink off when the
battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming impl ies that the battery output voltage decreases as the b attery is depleted. The
reason for the decrease in output voltage for deplet ed batteries is that all voltage sources have two fund amental parts—a source of
electrical energy and an internal resistance. In this sectio n, we examine the energy source and the internal resistance.
Introduction to Electromotive Force
V oltage has many sources, a few of which are shown in Fi gure. All such devices create a potential difference and can supply
current if connected to a circuit. A special type of potential difference is known as electromotive force (emf). The emf is not a
force at all, but the term ‘electromotive force’ is u sed for historical reasons. It was coined by Alessandro V olta in the 1800s, when
he invented the first battery, also known as the voltaic pile. Because the electromotive force is not a force, it is common to refer to
these sources simply as sources of emf (pronounced as the let ters “ee-em-eff”), instead of sources of electromotive forc e.
Figure: A variety of voltage sources. (a) The Brazos W ind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas; (b) the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia; (c) a
solar farm; (d) a group of nickel metal hydride batt eries. The voltage output of each device depends on i ts construction and load.
The voltage output equals emf only if there is no loa d. (credit a: modification of work by “Leaflet”/Wik imedia Commons; credit b:
modification of work by Alex Polezhaev; credit c: m odification of work by US Department of Energy; cred it d: modification of
work by Tiaa Monto)
If the electromotive force is not a force at all, t hen what is the emf and what is a source of emf? To a nswer these questions, consider
a simple circuit of a 12-V lamp attached to a 12-V b attery, as shown in Figure. The battery can be modeled as a two-terminal
device that keeps one terminal at a higher electric potential than the second terminal. The higher elect ric potential is sometimes
called the positive terminal and is labeled with a pl us sign. The lower-potential terminal is sometimes cal led the negative terminal
and labeled with a minus sign. This is the source of the emf.Learning Objectives

5.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: A source of emf maintains one terminal at a h igher electric potential than the other terminal, a cting as a source of
current in a circuit.
When the emf source is not connected to the lamp, th ere is no net flow of charge within the emf source. Onc e the battery is
connected to the lamp, charges flow from one terminal of the battery, through the lamp (causing the lamp t o light), and back to the
other terminal of the battery. If we consider positiv e (conventional) current flow, positive charges leav e the positive terminal, travel
through the lamp, and enter the negative terminal.
Positive current flow is useful for most of the circui t analysis in this chapter, but in metallic wires and re sistors, electrons contribute
the most to current, flowing in the opposite directio n of positive current flow. Therefore, it is more rea listic to consider the
movement of electrons for the analysis of the circu it in Figure. The electrons leave the negative term inal, travel through the
lamp, and return to the positive terminal. In order fo r the emf source to maintain the potential differen ce between the two terminals,
negative charges (electrons) must be moved from the positive terminal to the negative terminal. The emf source acts as a charge
pump, moving negative charges from the positive term inal to the negative terminal to maintain the poten tial difference. This
increases the potential energy of the charges and, there fore, the electric potential of the charges.
The force on the negative charge from the electric field is in the opposite direction of the electric field, as shown in Figure. In
order for the negative charges to be moved to the n egative terminal, work must be done on the negative c harges. This requires
energy, which comes from chemical reactions in the b attery. The potential is kept high on the positive te rminal and low on the
negative terminal to maintain the potential differe nce between the two terminals. The emf is equal to the work done on the charge
per unit charge when there is no current flowing. Sin ce the unit for work is the joule and the unit for c harge is the
coulomb, the unit for emf is the volt.
The terminal voltage of a battery is voltage measured across the termin als of the battery when there is no load connected
to the terminal. An ideal battery is an emf source th at maintains a constant terminal voltage, independen t of the current between the
two terminals. An ideal battery has no internal resis tance, and the terminal voltage is equal to the emf of the battery. In the next
section, we will show that a real battery does have int ernal resistance and the terminal voltage is always less than the emf of the
battery.
The Origin of Battery Potential
The combination of chemicals and the makeup of the t erminals in a battery determine its emf. The lead acid battery used in cars
and other vehicles is one of the most common combina tions of chemicals. Figure shows a single cell (one of si x) of this
battery. The cathode (positive) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide plate, whereas the anod e (negative) terminal is
connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid, the electrolyte for the system.

5.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: Chemical reactions in a lead-acid cell separa te charge, sending negative charge to the anode, whi ch is connected to the
lead plates. The lead oxide plates are connected to t he positive or cathode terminal of the cell. Sulfuric acid conducts the charge, as
well as participates in the chemical reaction.
Knowing a little about how the chemicals in a lead-acid battery interact helps in understanding the potenti al created by the battery.
Figure shows the result of a single chemical reaction. Two electrons are placed on the anode, making it negative, provided
that the cathode supplies two electrons. This leaves the cathode posi tively charged, because it has lost two electrons. In short, a
separation of charge has been driven by a chemical react ion.
Note that the reaction does not take place unless th ere is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied to the cathode.
Under many circumstances, these electrons come from the anode, flow through a resistance, and return to th e cathode. Note also
that since the chemical reactions involve substance s with resistance, it is not possible to create the emf without an internal
resistance.
Figure: In a lead-acid battery, two electrons are fo rced onto the anode of a cell, and two electrons are removed from the
cathode of the cell. The chemical reaction in a lea d-acid battery places two electrons on the anode and removes two from the
cathode. It requires a closed circuit to proceed, sinc e the two electrons must be supplied to the cathode.
Internal Resistance and Terminal Voltage
The amount of resistance to the flow of current withi n the voltage source is called the internal resistance. The internal resistance r
of a battery can behave in complex ways. It generally increases as a battery is depleted, due to the oxidat ion of the plates or the
reduction of the acidity of the electrolyte. However, internal resistance may also depend on the magnitu de and direction of the
current through a voltage source, its temperature, an d even its history. The internal resistance of recha rgeable nickel-cadmium cells,
for example, depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted. A simple model for a batt ery consists of an
idealized emf source and an internal resistance r (Figure).

5.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: A battery can be modeled as an idealized emf with an internal resistance (r). The terminal voltage of the battery is
Suppose an external resistor, known as the load resistance R, is connected to a voltage source such as a battery, as in Figure.
The figure shows a model of a battery with an emf, a n internal resistance r, and a load resistor R connected across its terminals.
Using conventional current flow, positive charges leave the positive terminal of the battery, travel through the resistor, and return to
the negative terminal of the battery. The terminal v oltage of the battery depends on the emf, the intern al resistance, and the current,
and is equal to
For a given emf and internal resistance, the terminal voltage decreases as the current increases due to the potential drop Ir of the
internal resistance.
Figure: Schematic of a voltage source and its load resi stor R. Since the internal resistance r is in series with the load, it can
significantly affect the terminal voltage and the cu rrent delivered to the load.
A graph of the potential difference across each elem ent the circuit is shown in Figure. A current I runs through the circuit, and
the potential drop across the internal resistor is equ al to Ir. The terminal voltage is equal to, which is equal to the potential
drop across the load resistor. As with potential energy, it is the change in voltage that is important. When the term
“voltage” is used, we assume that it is actually the change in the potential, or. However, is often omitted for con venience.Note

5.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: A graph of the voltage through the circuit of a battery and a load resistance. The electric pote ntial increases the emf of
the battery due to the chemical reactions doing work on the charges. There is a decrease in the electric p otential in the battery due
to the internal resistance. The potential decreases due to the internal resistance, making the terminal vol tage of the battery
equal to. The voltage then decreases by (IR). The current is equal to.
The current through the load resistor is. We see fro m this expression that the smaller the internal resi stance r, the greater
the current the voltage source supplies to its load R. As batteries are depleted, r increases. If r becomes a significant fraction of the
load resistance, then the current is significantly reduced, as the following example illustrates.
A given battery has a 12.00-V emf and an internal r esistance of. (a) Calculate its terminal voltage wh en connected to a
load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connecte d to a load? (c) What power does the load
dissipate? (d) If the internal resistance grows to, find the current, terminal voltage, and power dissipat ed by a
load.
Strategy
The analysis above gave an expression for current whe n internal resistance is taken into account. Once the current is found,
the terminal voltage can be calculated by using the equation. Once current is found, we can also find the
power dissipated by the resistor.
Solution
1. Entering the given values for the emf, load resistan ce, and internal resistance into the expression above yie lds
Enter the known values into the equation to get the termin al voltage:
The terminal voltage here is only slightly lower than the emf, implying that the current drawn by this light load i s
not significant.
2. Similarly, with, the current is
The terminal voltage is now
The terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduc tion compared with emf, implying is a heavy load for
this battery. A “heavy load” signifies a larger draw of curren t from the source but not a larger resistance.
3. The power dissipated by the load can be found using the f ormula. Entering the known values givesExample: Analyzing a Circuit with a Battery and a Load

5.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568Note that this power can also be obtained using the expressio n or, where V is the terminal voltage (10.0 V in
this case).
4. Here, the internal resistance has increased, perhaps due to the depletion of the battery, to the point where it i s as
great as the load resistance. As before, we first find the c urrent by entering the known values into the expression,
yielding
Now the terminal voltage is
and the power dissipated by the load is
We see that the increased internal resistance has signi ficantly decreased the terminal voltage, current, and power
delivered to a load.
Significance
The internal resistance of a battery can increase for many reasons. For example, the internal resistance o f a rechargeable
battery increases as the number of times the battery is recharged increases. The increased internal resistan ce may have
two effects on the battery. First, the terminal voltage will decrease. Second, the battery may overheat due to the
increased power dissipated by the internal resistance.
If you place a wire directly across the two terminal o f a battery, effectively shorting out the terminals, th e battery will begin to
get hot. Why do you suppose this happens?
Solution
If a wire is connected across the terminals, the load resistance is close to zero, or at least considerably l ess than the internal
resistance of the battery. Since the internal resistan ce is small, the current through the circuit will be large,
. The large current causes a high power to be dissipa ted by the internal resistance. The power is dissip ated as
heat.
Battery Testers
Battery testers, such as those in Figure, use small load resistors to intentionally draw current to determi ne whether the terminal
potential drops below an acceptable level. Although i t is difficult to measure the internal resistance of a battery, battery testers can
provide a measurement of the internal resistance of the battery. If internal resistance is high, the batte ry is weak, as evidenced by its
low terminal voltage.Exercise

5.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: Battery testers measure terminal voltage under a load to determine the condition of a battery. (a) A US Navy
electronics technician uses a battery tester to test lar ge batteries aboard the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz. The battery tester she uses
has a small resistance that can dissipate large amounts of power. (b) The small device shown is used on small batt eries and has a
digital display to indicate the acceptability of the terminal voltage. (credit a: modification of work by Jason A. Johnston; credit b:
modification of work by Keith Williamson)
Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the curre nt they supply to an
appliance. This is done routinely in cars and in batte ries for small electrical appliances and electronic devices (Figure). The
voltage output of the battery charger must be great er than the emf of the battery to reverse the curren t through it. This causes the
terminal voltage of the battery to be greater than the em f, since and I is now negative.
Figure: A car battery charger reverses the normal dir ection of current through a battery, reversing its ch emical reaction and
replenishing its chemical potential.
It is important to understand the consequences of t he internal resistance of emf sources, such as batter ies and solar cells, but often,
the analysis of circuits is done with the terminal v oltage of the battery, as we have done in the previo us sections. The terminal
voltage is referred to as simply as V, dropping the subscript “terminal.” This is because the internal resistance of the battery is
difficult to measure directly and can change over time.

Multiple Voltage Sources
Many devices require more than one battery. Multiple v oltage sources, such as batteries, can be connected in series configurations,
parallel configurations, or a combination of the two.
In series, the positive terminal of one battery is con nected to the negative terminal of another battery. Any number of voltage
sources, including batteries, can be connected in se ries. Two batteries connected in series are shown in Fig ure. Using
Kirchhoff’s loop rule for the circuit in part (b) gives th e result

5.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: (a) Two batteries connected in series with a l oad resistor. (b) The circuit diagram of the two batt eries and the load
resistor, with each battery modeled as an idealized em f source and an internal resistance.
When voltage sources are in series, their internal re sistances can be added together and their emfs can be added together to get the
total values. Series connections of voltage sources a re common—for example, in flashlights, toys, and othe r appliances. Usually,
the cells are in series in order to produce a larger total e mf. In Figure, the terminal voltage is
Note that the same current I is found in each battery because they are connected in series. The disadvantage of series connections
of cells is that their internal resistances are additive.
Batteries are connected in series to increase the vol tage supplied to the circuit. For instance, an LED flash light may have two AAA
cell batteries, each with a terminal voltage of 1.5 V, to provide 3.0 V to the flashlight.
Any number of batteries can be connected in series. For N batteries in series, the terminal voltage is equal to
where the equivalent resistance is
When a load is placed across voltage sources in series, as in Figure, we can find the current:
As expected, the internal resistances increase the equivalen t resistance.Note

5.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568
Figure: Two batteries connect in series to an LED bulb, as found in a flashlight.
V oltage sources, such as batteries, can also be connecte d in parallel. Figure shows two batteries with identical emfs in
parallel and connected to a load resistance. When the batteries are connect in parallel, the positive termi nals are connected together
and the negative terminals are connected together, a nd the load resistance is connected to the positive an d negative terminals.
Normally, voltage sources in parallel have identical e mfs. In this simple case, since the voltage sources ar e in parallel, the total emf
is the same as the individual emfs of each battery.
Figure: (a) Two batteries connect in parallel to a l oad resistor. (b) The circuit diagram shows the shows bat tery as an emf
source and an internal resistor. The two emf sources hav e identical emfs (each labeled by) connected in par allel that produce the
same emf.
Consider the Kirchhoff analysis of the circuit in Figure. There are two loops and a node at point b and.
Node b:.
Loop abcfa:.
Loop fcdef:
Solving for the current through the load resistor resu lts in, where. The terminal voltage is equal to th e
potential drop across the load resistor.
The parallel connection reduces the internal resistan ce and thus can produce a larger current.
Any number of batteries can be connected in parallel. For N batteries in parallel, the terminal voltage is equal to
where the equivalent resistance isNote

5.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76568As an example, some diesel trucks use two 12-V batterie s in parallel; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the larger
current needed to start a diesel engine.
In summary, the terminal voltage of batteries in ser ies is equal to the sum of the individual emfs minu s the sum of the internal
resistances times the current. When batteries are con nected in parallel, they usually have equal emfs an d the terminal voltage is
equal to the emf minus the equivalent internal resi stance times the current, where the equivalent interna l resistance is smaller than
the individual internal resistances. Batteries are connected in series to increase the terminal voltag e to the load. Batteries are
connected in parallel to increase the current to the l oad.
Solar Cell Arrays
Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells - wired in both series and parallel
combinations to yield a desired voltage and current. Photovoltaic generation, which is the conversion of sunlight directly into
electricity, is based upon the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect is beyond the scope of thi s chapter and is covered in
Photons and Matter Waves, but in general, photons hitting the surface of a solar cel l create an electric current in the cell.
Most solar cells are made from pure silicon. Most singl e cells have a voltage output of about 0.5 V, while t he current output is a
function of the amount of sunlight falling on the ce ll (the incident solar radiation known as the insolat ion). Under bright noon
sunlight, a current per unit area of about of cell surfa ce area is produced by typical single-crystal cells.
Individual solar cells are connected electrically i n modules to meet electrical energy needs. They can be wired together in series or
in parallel - connected like the batteries discussed earlier. A solar-cell array or module usually consist s of between 36 and 72 cells,
with a power output of 50 W to 140 W.
Solar cells, like batteries, provide a direct current (dc) voltage. Current from a dc voltage source is un idirectional. Most household
appliances need an alternating current (ac) voltage.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.1: Electromotive Force is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.2: Electromotive Force by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
10.4: Kirchhoff's Rules by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me2.

5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765695.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Define the term equivalent resistance
Calculate the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in series
Calculate the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in parallel
In Current and Resistance, we described the term ‘resistance’ and explained t he basic design of a resistor. Basically, a resistor limits
the flow of charge in a circuit and is an ohmic devi ce where. Most circuits have more than one resistor. I f several resistors
are connected together and connected to a battery, t he current supplied by the battery depends on the equivalent resistance of the
circuit.
The equivalent resistance of a combination of resistor s depends on both their individual values and how the y are connected. The
simplest combinations of resistors are series and parall el connections (Figure). In a series circuit, the output current of the
first resistor flows into the input of the second re sistor; therefore, the current is the same in each res istor. In a parallel circuit, all of
the resistor leads on one side of the resistors are co nnected together and all the leads on the other sid e are connected together. In the
case of a parallel configuration, each resistor has the same potential drop across it, and the currents thr ough each resistor may be
different, depending on the resistor. The sum of the ind ividual currents equals the current that flows into the p arallel connections.
Figure: (a) For a series connection of resistors, the cur rent is the same in each resistor. (b) For a parallel c onnection of
resistors, the voltage is the same across each resistor.
Resistors in Series
Resistors are said to be in series whenever the curre nt flows through the resistors sequentially. Consider Figure, which shows
three resistors in series with an applied voltage equal to. Since there is only one path for the charges to flow through, the current
is the same through each resistor. The equivalent re sistance of a set of resistors in a series connecti on is equal to the algebraic sum
of the individual resistances.
Figure: (a) Three resistors connected in series to a vol tage source. (b) The original circuit is reduced to a n equivalent
resistance and a voltage source.
In Figure, the current coming from the voltage sour ce flows through each resistor, so the current throug h each resistor is the
same. The current through the circuit depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage source and the resi stance of the resistors. For
each resistor, a potential drop occurs that is equal to the loss of electric potential energy as a curre nt travels through each resistor.
According to Ohm’s law, the potential drop across a resistor when a current flows through it is calculated using the equation Learning Objectives

5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569, where is the current in amps () and is the resista nce in ohms. Since energy is conserved, and the volt age is equal to
the potential energy per charge, the sum of the vol tage applied to the circuit by the source and the p otential drops across the
individual resistors around a loop should be equal to zero:
This equation is often referred to as Kirchhoff’s loo p law, which we will look at in more detail later in th is chapter. For Figure,
the sum of the potential drop of each resistor and the voltage supplied by the voltage source should equal z ero:
Solving for
Since the current through each component is the same, the equality can be simplified to an equivalent resi stance (), which is just
the sum of the resistances of the individual resistors.
Any number of resistors can be connected in series. If resi stors are connected in series, the equivalent resistance is
One result of components connected in a series circui t is that if something happens to one component, it a ffects all the other
components. For example, if several lamps are connected i n series and one bulb burns out, all the other lamps go dark.
A battery with a terminal voltage of 9 V is connecte d to a circuit consisting of four and one resistors all in series
(Figure). Assume the battery has negligible internal resi stance.
a. Calculate the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
b. Calculate the current through each resistor.
c. Calculate the potential drop across each resistor.
d. Determine the total power dissipated by the resistors and the power supplied by the battery.
Figure: A simple series circuit with five resistors.
Strategy
In a series circuit, the equivalent resistance is th e algebraic sum of the resistances. The current thr ough the circuit can be
found from Ohm’s law and is equal to the voltage divi ded by the equivalent resistance. The potential drop across each
resistor can be found using Ohm’s law. The power dissip ated by each resistor can be found using, and the t otal
power dissipated by the resistors is equal to the sum o f the power dissipated by each resistor. The power suppl ied by the
battery can be found using.Equivalent Resistance in Series Circuits
Example: Equivalent Resistance, Current, and Power in a Series Circuit

5.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569Solution
1. The equivalent resistance is the algebraic sum of th e resistances (Equation):
2. The current through the circuit is the same for each resi stor in a series circuit and is equal to the applied voltage
divided by the equivalent resistance:
Note that the sum of the potential drops across each resist or is equal to the voltage supplied by the battery.
3. The power dissipated by a resistor is equal to, and the p ower supplied by the battery is equal to.
Significance
There are several reasons why we would use multiple resis tors instead of just one resistor with a resistance eq ual to the
equivalent resistance of the circuit. Perhaps a resis tor of the required size is not available, or we nee d to dissipate the
heat generated, or we want to minimize the cost of re sistors. Each resistor may cost a few cents to a few dol lars, but
when multiplied by thousands of units, the cost saving may be appreciable.
Some strings of miniature holiday lights are made to short out when a bulb burns out. The device that causes the short is called
a shunt, which allows current to flow around the open c ircuit. A “short” is like putting a piece of wire acr oss the component.
The bulbs are usually grouped in series of nine bul bs. If too many bulbs burn out, the shunts eventually open. What causes
this?
Answer
The equivalent resistance of nine bulbs connected in series is 9 R. The current is. If one bulb burns out, the
equivalent resistance is 8 R, and the voltage does not change, but the current i ncreases. As more bulbs burn out,
the current becomes even higher. Eventually, the curren t becomes too high, burning out the shunt.
Let’s briefly summarize the major features of resistors in series:
1. Series resistances add together to get the equivalent resistance (Equation):
2. The same current flows through each resistor in serie s.
3. Individual resistors in series do not get the total sou rce voltage, but divide it. The total potential drop acros s a series
configuration of resistors is equal to the sum of the po tential drops across each resistor.
Resistors in Parallel
Figure shows resistors in parallel, wired to a voltag e source. Resistors are in parallel when one end of all the resistors are
connected by a continuous wire of negligible resista nce and the other end of all the resistors are also connected to one another
through a continuous wire of negligible resistance. T he potential drop across each resistor is the same. Cu rrent through eachExercise

5.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569resistor can be found using Ohm’s law, where the volt age is constant across each resistor. For example, an au tomobile’s
headlights, radio, and other systems are wired in parall el, so that each subsystem utilizes the full voltage o f the source and can
operate completely independently. The same is true of th e wiring in your house or any building.
Figure: Two resistors connected in parallel to a volta ge source. (b) The original circuit is reduced to an equivalent resistance
and a voltage source.
The current flowing from the voltage source in Figure depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage sou rce and the
equivalent resistance of the circuit. In this case, t he current flows from the voltage source and enters a junction, or node, where the
circuit splits flowing through resistors and. As the cha rges flow from the battery, some go through resistor and some flow
through resistor. The sum of the currents flowing int o a junction must be equal to the sum of the curren ts flowing out of the
junction:
This equation is referred to as Kirchhoff’s junction rule and will be discussed in detail in the next section. In Figure, the
junction rule gives. There are two loops in this circ uit, which leads to the equations and. Note the
voltage across the resistors in parallel are the same () and the current is additive:
Solving for the
Generalizing to any number of resistors, the equiva lent resistance of a parallel connection is related to the individual
resistances by
This relationship results in an equivalent resistance that is less than the smallest of the individual resi stances. When resistors are
connected in parallel, more current flows from the so urce than would flow for any of them individually, so the total resistance is
lower.Equivalent Resistance in Parallel Circuits

5.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569Three resistors,, and, are connected in parallel. The parallel connection is attached to a
voltage source.
a. What is the equivalent resistance?
b. Find the current supplied by the source to the paralle l circuit.
c. Calculate the currents in each resistor and show that th ese add together to equal the current output of the sour ce.
d. Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor.
e. Find the power output of the source and show that it equal s the total power dissipated by the resistors.
Strategy
(a) The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using Equation. (Note that in these calculations,
each intermediate answer is shown with an extra digit.)
(b) The current supplied by the source can be found fr om Ohm’s law, substituting for the total resistance.
(c) The individual currents are easily calculated f rom Ohm’s law, since each resistor gets the full volt age. The
total current is the sum of the individual currents:
(d) The power dissipated by each resistor can be foun d using any of the equations relating power to curren t, voltage, and
resistance, since all three are known. Let us use, since each resistor gets full voltage.
(e) The total power can also be calculated in several ways, use.
Solution
1. The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using Equation. Entering known values
gives
The total resistance with the correct number of signifi cant digits is. As predicted, is less than the
smallest individual resistance.
2. The total current can be found from Ohm’s law, substitu ting for the total resistance. This gives
Current I for each device is much larger than for the same devices co nnected in series (see the previous example). A
circuit with parallel connections has a smaller total res istance than the resistors connected in series.
3. The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm’ s law, since each resistor gets the full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
The total current is the sum of the individual currents:Example: Analysis of a parallel circuit

5.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765694. The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using any of the equations relating power to current, voltage, and
resistance, since all three are known. Let us use, since each resistor gets full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
5. The total power can also be calculated in several ways. Choo sing and entering the total current yields
Significance
Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 18.00 W:
Notice that the total power dissipated by the resistors eq uals the power supplied by the source.
Consider the same potential difference applied to the same three resistors connected in series. Would th e
equivalent resistance of the series circuit be high er, lower, or equal to the three resistor in parallel? Would the current through
the series circuit be higher, lower, or equal to the cu rrent provided by the same voltage applied to the p arallel circuit? How
would the power dissipated by the resistor in series compa re to the power dissipated by the resistors in parallel?
Solution
The equivalent of the series circuit would be, which is higher than the equivalent
resistance of the parallel circuit. The equivalent resistor of any number of resistors is always higher than the
equivalent resistance of the same resistors connected i n parallel. The current through for the series circ uit would be
, which is lower than the sum of the currents through each resistor in the parallel circuit,. This is
not surprising since the equivalent resistance of the series circuit is higher. The current through a serie s connection of any
number of resistors will always be lower than the curr ent into a parallel connection of the same resistor s, since the
equivalent resistance of the series circuit will be hig her than the parallel circuit. The power dissipated b y the resistors in
series would be, which is lower than the power dissipated in th e parallel circuit.
How would you use a river and two waterfalls to model a parallel configuration of two resistors? How does this an alogy break
down?
Solution
A river, flowing horizontally at a constant rate, spli ts in two and flows over two waterfalls. The water molec ules are
analogous to the electrons in the parallel circuits. The number of water molecules that flow in the river a nd falls must be
equal to the number of molecules that flow over each waterfall, just like sum of the current through each resistor must be
equal to the current flowing into the parallel circu it. The water molecules in the river have energy due to their motion andExercise
Exercise

5.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569height. The potential energy of the water molecules i n the river is constant due to their equal heights. Thi s is analogous to
the constant change in voltage across a parallel circui t. V oltage is the potential energy across each resistor.
The analogy quickly breaks down when considering the en ergy. In the waterfall, the potential energy is conver ted into
kinetic energy of the water molecules. In the case of electrons flowing through a resistor, the potential dr op is converted
into heat and light, not into the kinetic energy of the e lectrons.
Let us summarize the major features of resistors in paral lel:
1. Equivalent resistance is found from Equation and is s maller than any individual resistance in the combinati on.
2. The potential drop across each resistor in parallel is the same.
3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; th ey divide it. The current entering a parallel combinatio n of resistors is equal
to the sum of the current through each resistor in parall el.
In this chapter, we introduced the equivalent resista nce of resistors connect in series and resistors connec ted in parallel. You may
recall from the Section on Capacitance, we introduced the equivalent capacitance of capaci tors connected in series and parallel.
Circuits often contain both capacitors and resistor s. Table summarizes the equations used for the equ ivalent resistance and
equivalent capacitance for series and parallel connectio ns.
Table: Summary for Equivalent Resistance and Capacita nce in Series and Parallel Combinations
Series combination Parallel combination
Equivalent capacitance
Equivalent resistance
Combinations of Series and Parallel
More complex connections of resistors are often just com binations of series and parallel connections. Such com binations are
common, especially when wire resistance is considered. In that case, wire resistance is in series with other resistances that are in
parallel.
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique i llustrated in Figure.
Various parts can be identified as either series or p arallel connections, reduced to their equivalent resi stances, and then further
reduced until a single equivalent resistance is lef t. The process is more time consuming than difficult. Here, we note the equivalent
resistance as.

5.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569
Figure: (a) The original circuit of four resistors. (b) Step 1: The resistors and are in series and the equi valent resistance
is (c) Step 2: The reduced circuit shows resistors and are in parallel, with an equivalent resistance of.
(d) Step 3: The reduced circuit shows that and are i n series with an equivalent resistance of which is the
equivalent resistance. (e) The reduced circuit with a voltage source of with an equivalent resistance of.
This results in a current of from the voltage source.
Notice that resistors and are in series. They can be combined into a single equivalent resistance. One me thod of keeping
track of the process is to include the resistors as subscr ipts. Here the equivalent resistance of and is
The circuit now reduces to three resistors, shown in Fig ure. Redrawing, we now see that resistors and consti tute a
parallel circuit. Those two resistors can be reduced to an e quivalent resistance:
This step of the process reduces the circuit to two r esistors, shown in in Figure. Here, the circuit reduc es to two resistors,
which in this case are in series. These two resistors can be reduced to an equivalent resistance, which is the equivalent resistance of
the circuit:
The main goal of this circuit analysis is reached, and the c ircuit is now reduced to a single resistor and single vo ltage source.
Now we can analyze the circuit. The current provided b y the voltage source is. This current runs through
resistor and is designated as. The potential drop acr oss can be found using Ohm’s law:
Looking at Figure, this leaves to be dropped across the parallel combination of and. The current
through can be found using Ohm’s law:

5.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569The resistors and are in series so the currents and are equal to
Using Ohm’s law, we can find the potential drop across t he last two resistors. The potential drops are and
. The final analysis is to look at the power supplied b y the voltage source and the power dissipated by the resistors.
The power dissipated by the resistors is
The total energy is constant in any process. Therefore, the power supplied by the voltage source is
Analyzing the power supplied to the circuit and the p ower dissipated by the resistors is a good check for t he validity of the analysis;
they should be equal.
Figure shows resistors wired in a combination of series a nd parallel. We can consider to be the resistance of wires
leading to and.
a. Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
b. What is the potential drop across resistor?
c. Find the current through resistor.
d. What power is dissipated by?
Figure: These three resistors are connected to a voltag e source so that and are in parallel with one anoth er and that
combination is in series with.
Strategy
(a) To find the equivalent resistance, first find th e equivalent resistance of the parallel connection of and. Then use
this result to find the equivalent resistance of the serie s connection with.
(b) The current through can be found using Ohm’s la w and the voltage applied. The current through is e qual to the
current from the battery. The potential drop across the resistor (which represents the resistance in the connecting
wires) can be found using Ohm’s law.
(c) The current through can be found using Ohm’s law. The voltage across can be found using.
(d) Using Ohm’s law, the power dissipated by the resistor can also be found using.
SolutionExample: Combining Series and parallel circuits

5.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765691. To find the equivalent resistance of the circuit, noti ce that the parallel connection of and is in series wit h,
so the equivalent resistance is
The total resistance of this combination is intermedia te between the pure series and pure parallel values (and
, respectively).
2. The current through is equal to the current supplie d by the battery:
The voltage across is
The voltage applied to and is less than the voltage sup plied by the battery by an amount. When wire
resistance is large, it can significantly affect the oper ation of the devices represented by and.
3. To find the current through, we must first find the vol tage applied to it. The voltage across the two resistors in
parallel is the same:
Now we can find the current through resistance using Ohm’s law:
The current is less than the 2.00 A that flowed through wh en it was connected in parallel to the battery in the
previous parallel circuit example.
4. The power dissipated by is given by
Significance
The analysis of complex circuits can often be simpli fied by reducing the circuit to a voltage source an d an equivalent
resistance. Even if the entire circuit cannot be red uced to a single voltage source and a single equivale nt resistance,
portions of the circuit may be reduced, greatly simplifying the analysis.
Consider the electrical circuits in your home. Give a t least two examples of circuits that must use a comb ination of series and
parallel circuits to operate efficiently.
Solution
All the overhead lighting circuits are in parallel and connected to the main supply line, so when one bulb burns out, all the
overhead lighting does not go dark. Each overhead li ght will have at least one switch in series with the lig ht, so you can
turn it on and off.
A refrigerator has a compressor and a light that goe s on when the door opens. There is usually only one cord for the
refrigerator to plug into the wall. The circuit conta ining the compressor and the circuit containing the lighting circuit are in
parallel, but there is a switch in series with the lig ht. A thermostat controls a switch that is in series wit h the compressor to
control the temperature of the refrigerator.Exercise

5.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569Practical Implications
One implication of this last example is that resista nce in wires reduces the current and power delivered t o a resistor. If wire
resistance is relatively large, as in a worn (or a ve ry long) extension cord, then this loss can be signi ficant. If a large current is
drawn, the IR drop in the wires can also be significant and may become appar ent from the heat generated in the cord.
For example, when you are rummaging in the refrigerator and the motor comes on, the refrigerator light dims momentarily.
Similarly, you can see the passenger compartment ligh t dim when you start the engine of your car (althoug h this may be due to
resistance inside the battery itself).
What is happening in these high-current situations i s illustrated in Figure. The device represented by ha s a very low
resistance, so when it is switched on, a large current fl ows. This increased current causes a larger IR drop in the wires represented
by, reducing the voltage across the light bulb (which is), which then dims noticeably.
Figure: Why do lights dim when a large appliance is sw itched on? The answer is that the large current the a ppliance motor
draws causes a significant IR drop in the wires and reduces the voltage across the l ight.
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram, labeling all resistors and voltage sources. This step includes a list of the known value s for the
problem, since they are labeled in your circuit diagram.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
3. Determine whether resistors are in series, parallel, o r a combination of both series and parallel. Examine the circuit diagram
to make this assessment. Resistors are in series if the same current must pass sequentially through them.
4. Use the appropriate list of major features for series or p arallel connections to solve for the unknowns. There is one list for
series and another for parallel.
5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consis tent.
Two resistors connected in series are connected to two resistors that are connected in parallel. The s eriesparallel combination is connected to a battery. Each resistor has a resistance of 10.00 Ohms. The wires connec ting the resistors
and battery have negligible resistance. A current o f 2.00 Amps runs through resistor. What is the voltage supplied by the
voltage source?
Strategy
Use the steps in the preceding problem-solving strategy to find the solution for this example.
SolutionProblem-Solving Strategy: Series and Parallel Resistors
Example: Combining Series and Parallel circuits

5.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76569
Figure: To find the unknown voltage, we must first fi nd the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram (Figure).
2. The unknown is the voltage of the battery. In order to fi nd the voltage supplied by the battery, the equivalent
resistance must be found.
3. In this circuit, we already know that the resistors an d are in series and the resistors and are in parallel.
The equivalent resistance of the parallel configurati on of the resistors and is in series with the series
configuration of resistors and.
4. The voltage supplied by the battery can be found by m ultiplying the current from the battery and the equiv alent
resistance of the circuit. The current from the battery is equal to the current through and is equal to 2.00 A. We
need to find the equivalent resistance by reducing the c ircuit. To reduce the circuit, first consider the two r esistors in
parallel. The equivalent resistance is
This parallel combination is in series with the other two resistors, so the equivalent resistance of the circuit is
. The voltage supplied by the battery is therefore.
5. One way to check the consistency of your results is to cal culate the power supplied by the battery and the power
dissipated by the resistors. The power supplied by the batt ery is.
Since they are in series, the current through equals the current through. Since, the current through ea ch
will be 1.00 Amps. The power dissipated by the resistors is eq ual to the sum of the power dissipated by each resistor:
Since the power dissipated by the resistors equals the power supplied by the battery, our solution seems consistent.
Significance
If a problem has a combination of series and parall el, as in this example, it can be reduced in steps by u sing the
preceding problem-solving strategy and by considerin g individual groups of series or parallel connections. When
finding for a parallel connection, the reciprocal must be taken with care. In addition, units and numer ical results
must be reasonable. Equivalent series resistance sho uld be greater, whereas equivalent parallel resistan ce should be
smaller, for example. Power should be greater for the same devices in parallel compared with series, and so on.
This page titled 5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.3: Resistors in Series and Parallel by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

5.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765815.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
State Kirchhoff’s junction rule
State Kirchhoff’s loop rule
Analyze complex circuits using Kirchhoff’s rules
We have just seen that some circuits may be analyze d by reducing a circuit to a single voltage source a nd an equivalent resistance.
Many complex circuits cannot be analyzed with the ser ies-parallel techniques developed in the preceding sections. In this section,
we elaborate on the use of Kirchhoff’s rules to analyze more complex circuits. For example, the circuit in Fi gure is known as a
multi-loop circuit, which consists of junctions. A junction, also known a s a node, is a connection of three or more wires. In t his
circuit, the previous methods cannot be used, because not all the resistors are in clear series or paralle l configurations that can be
reduced. Give it a try. The resistors and are in seri es and can be reduced to an equivalent resistance. T he same is true of
resistors and. But what do you do then?
Even though this circuit cannot be analyzed using th e methods already learned, two circuit analysis rules c an be used to analyze
any circuit, simple or complex. The rules are known as Kirchhoff’s rules, after their inventor Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887).
Figure: This circuit cannot be reduced to a combinat ion of series and parallel connections. However, we ca n use Kirchhoff’s
rules to analyze it.
Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule. The sum of a ll currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all cu rrents
leaving the junction:
Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule. The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit path (loop)
must be zero:
We now provide explanations of these two rules, follo wed by problem-solving hints for applying them and a worked example that
uses them.
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
Kirchhoff’s first rule (the junction rule) applies to the charge entering and leaving a junc tion (Figure). As stated earlier, a
junction, or node, is a connection of three or more wires. Current is the flow of charge, and charge is co nserved; thus, whatever
charge flows into the junction must flow out.Learning Objectives
Kirchhoff’s Rules

5.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581
Figure: Charge must be conserved, so the sum of current s into a junction must be equal to the sum of currents out of the
junction.
Although it is an over-simplification, an analogy can be made with water pipes connected in a plumbing junc tion. If the wires in
Figure were replaced by water pipes, and the water was assumed to be incompressible, the volume of water flo wing into the
junction must equal the volume of water flowing out of the j unction.
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule) applies to potential differences. The loop rule i s stated in terms of potential V rather than
potential energy, but the two are related since. In a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by a vol tage source, the energy
must be transferred into other forms by the devices in the loop, since there are no other ways in which en ergy can be transferred
into or out of the circuit. Kirchhoff’s loop rule sta tes that the algebraic sum of potential differences, i ncluding voltage supplied by
the voltage sources and resistive elements, in any l oop must be equal to zero. For example, consider a si mple loop with no
junctions, as in Figure.
Figure: A simple loop with no junctions. Kirchhoff’s l oop rule states that the algebraic sum of the voltage differences is equal
to zero.
The circuit consists of a voltage source and three ex ternal load resistors. The labels a, b, c, and d serve as references, and have no
other significance. The usefulness of these labels wil l become apparent soon. The loop is designated as Loo p abcda, and the labels
help keep track of the voltage differences as we tra vel around the circuit. Start at point a and travel to point b. The voltage of the
voltage source is added to the equation and the poten tial drop of the resistor is subtracted. From point b to c, the potential drop
across is subtracted. From c to d, the potential drop across is subtracted. From points d to a, nothing is done because there
are no components.
Figure shows a graph of the voltage as we travel aroun d the loop. V oltage increases as we cross the battery, wh ereas voltage
decreases as we travel across a resistor. The potential drop, or change in the electric potential, is equal to t he current through the
resistor times the resistance of the resistor. Since the wires have negligible resistance, the voltage remains constant as we cross the
wires connecting the components.
Figure: A voltage graph as we travel around the circ uit. The voltage increases as we cross the battery and d ecreases as we
cross each resistor. Since the resistance of the wire is qu ite small, we assume that the voltage remains constant a s we cross the
wires connecting the components.

5.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581Then Kirchhoff’s loop rule states
The loop equation can be used to find the current throu gh the loop:
This loop could have been analyzed using the previous methods, but we will demonstrate the power of Kirchhoff’s method in the
next section.
Applying Kirchhoff’s Rules
By applying Kirchhoff’s rules, we generate a set of li near equations that allow us to find the unknown valu es in circuits. These may
be currents, voltages, or resistances. Each time a rule is applied, it produces an equation. If there are as many independent equations
as unknowns, then the problem can be solved.
Using Kirchhoff’s method of analysis requires several step s, as listed in the following procedure.
1. Label points in the circuit diagram using lowercase lette rs a, b, c, …. These labels simply help with orientation.
2. Locate the junctions in the circuit. The junctions are points where three or more wires connect. Label each junc tion with the
currents and directions into and out of it. Make sure a t least one current points into the junction and at least on e current
points out of the junction.
3. Choose the loops in the circuit. Every component mus t be contained in at least one loop, but a component may be c ontained
in more than one loop.
4. Apply the junction rule. Again, some junctions should not be included in the analysis. You need only use enough no des to
include every current.
5. Apply the loop rule. Use the map in Figure.
Figure: Each of these resistors and voltage sources is tra versed from a to b. (a) When moving across a resistor in the same
direction as the current flow, subtract the potential drop. (b) When moving across a resistor in the opposite direction as the current
flow, add the potential drop. (c) When moving across a voltage source from the negative terminal to the p ositive terminal, add the
potential drop. (d) When moving across a voltage sourc e from the positive terminal to the negative termina l, subtract the potential
drop.
Let’s examine some steps in this procedure more closel y. When locating the junctions in the circuit, do no t be concerned about the
direction of the currents. If the direction of curren t flow is not obvious, choosing any direction is sufficie nt as long as at least one
current points into the junction and at least one cu rrent points out of the junction. If the arrow is in the opposite direction of the
conventional current flow, the result for the current in question will be negative but the answer will still be corr ect.
The number of nodes depends on the circuit. Each curre nt should be included in a node and thus included i n at least one junction
equation. Do not include nodes that are not linearly indep endent, meaning nodes that contain the same information.Problem-Solving Strategy: Kirchhoff’s Rules

5.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581Consider Figure. There are two junctions in this circ uit: Junction b and Junction e. Points a, c, d, and f are not junctions,
because a junction must have three or more connectio ns. The equation for Junction b is, and the equation for Junction e
is. These are equivalent equations, so it is necessary to keep only one of them.
Figure: At first glance, this circuit contains two jun ctions, Junction b and Junction e, but only one should be considered
because their junction equations are equivalent.
When choosing the loops in the circuit, you need en ough loops so that each component is covered once, with out repeating loops.
Figure shows four choices for loops to solve a sample c ircuit; choices (a), (b), and (c) have a sufficient am ount of loops to
solve the circuit completely. Option (d) reflects more loops than necessary to solve the circuit.
Figure: Panels (a)–(c) are sufficient for the analysis of the circuit. In each case, the two loops shown cont ain all the circuit
elements necessary to solve the circuit completely. Pane l (d) shows three loops used, which is more than necessary. Any two loops
in the system will contain all information needed to solve the circuit. Adding the third loop provides red undant information.
Consider the circuit in Figure. Let us analyze this circuit to find the current through each resistor. Fi rst, label the circuit as
shown in part (b).
Figure: (a) A multi-loop circuit. (b) Label the cir cuit to help with orientation.

5.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581Next, determine the junctions. In this circuit, points b and e each have three wires connected, making them junctio ns. Start to apply
Kirchhoff’s junction rule by drawing arrows represent ing the currents and labeling each arrow, as shown i n Figure
. Junction b shows that and Junction e shows that. Since Junction e gives the same information of
Junction b, it can be disregarded. This circuit has three unknowns, so we need three linearly independent equations to analyze it.
Figure: (a) This circuit has two junctions, labeled b and e, but only node b is used in the analysis. (b) Lab eled arrows represent
the currents into and out of the junctions.
Next we need to choose the loops. In Figure, Loop abefa includes the voltage source and resistors and. The loop
starts at point a, then travels through points b, e, and f, and then back to point a. The second loop, Loop ebcde, starts at point e and
includes resistors and, and the voltage source.
Figure: Choose the loops in the circuit.
Now we can apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule, using the map in Figure. Starting at point a and moving to point b, the resistor is
crossed in the same direction as the current flow, so the potential drop is subtracted. Moving from point b to point e, the
resistor is crossed in the same direction as the cu rrent flow so the potential drop is subtracted. Movi ng from point e to
point f, the voltage source is crossed from the negative t erminal to the positive terminal, so is added. The re are no
components between points f and a. The sum of the voltage differences must equal zero:
Finally, we check loop ebcde. We start at point e and move to point b, crossing in the opposite direction as the current f low.
The potential drop is added. Next, we cross and in the same direction as the current flow and subtrac t the potential
drops and. Note that the current is the same throu gh resistors and,because they are connected in seri es. Finally, the
voltage source is crossed from the positive terminal to the negative terminal, and the voltage source i s subtracted. The sum of
these voltage differences equals zero and yields the l oop equation
We now have three equations, which we can solve for the thre e unknowns.

5.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581To solve the three equations for the three unknown c urrents, start by eliminating current. First add Equat ion times to
Equation. The result is Equation:
Next, subtract Equation from Equation. The result is Eq uation:
We can solve Equations and for current. Adding seve n times Equation and three times Equation results
in, or. Using Equation results in. Finally, Equati on yields.
One way to check that the solutions are consistent is to check the power supplied by the voltage sources and the power dissipated
by the resistors:
Note that the solution for the current is negative. This is the correct answer, but suggests that the arr ow originally drawn in the
junction analysis is the direction opposite of conve ntional current flow. The power supplied by the seco nd voltage source is 58 W
and not -58 W.
Examples
Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure.
Figure: This circuit is combination of series and paral lel configurations of resistors and voltage sources. This circuit
cannot be analyzed using the techniques discussed in Electromotive Force but can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s rules.
Strategy
This circuit is sufficiently complex that the current s cannot be found using Ohm’s law and the series-paralle l techniques—it
is necessary to use Kirchhoff’s rules. Currents have been labeled, and in the figure, and assumptions have b een
made about their directions. Locations on the diagram have been labeled with letters a through h. In the solution, we apply
the junction and loop rules, seeking three independent equations to allow us to solve for the three unknown current s.
Solution
Applying the junction and loop rules yields the follo wing three equations. We have three unknowns, so three equations
are required.Example: Calculating Current by Using Kirchhoff’s Rules

5.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side o f the equations.
Simplify the equations. The first loop equation can b e simplified by dividing both sides by 3.00. The seco nd loop
equation can be simplified by dividing both sides by 6.00.
The results are
Significance
A method to check the calculations is to compute the power dissipated by the resistors and the power supplied by the
voltage sources:
The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resi stors.
In considering the following schematic and the power su pplied and consumed by a circuit, will a voltage sourc e always provide
power to the circuit, or can a voltage source consume power?
AnswerExercise

5.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581The circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s loop ru le. The first voltage source supplies power:. The
second voltage source consumes power:
Find the current flowing in the circuit in Figure.
Figure: This circuit consists of three resistors and two b atteries connected in series. Note that the batteries a re connected
with opposite polarities.
Strategy
This circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s rules. T here is only one loop and no nodes. Choose the direct ion of current
flow. For this example, we will use the clockwise directi on from point a to point b. Consider Loop abcda and use Figure
to write the loop equation. Note that according to Fi gure, battery will be added and battery will be
subtracted.
Solution
Applying the junction rule yields the following three equ ations. We have one unknown, so one equation is required:
Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side o f the equations. Use the values given in the figure.
Significance
The power dissipated or consumed by the circuit equal s the power supplied to the circuit, but notice that the current in
the battery is flowing through the battery from the posi tive terminal to the negative terminal and consumes powe r.
The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resi stors and consumed by the battery.Example: Calculating Current by Using Kirchhoff’s Rules

5.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76581When using Kirchhoff’s laws, you need to decide which loops to use and the direction of current flow through each loop. In
analyzing the circuit in Example, the direction of current flow was chosen to be clockwise, from point a to point b. How
would the results change if the direction of the current was chosen to be counterclockwise, from point b to point a?
Answer
The current calculated would be equal to instead of. The sum of the power dissipated and the power
consumed would still equal the power supplied.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.4: Kirchhoff's Rules by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me2.Exercise

5.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765845.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
List the basic concepts involved in house wiring
Define the terms thermal hazard and shock hazard
Describe the effects of electrical shock on human phys iology and their relationship to the amount of current t hrough the
body
Explain the function of fuses and circuit breakers
Electricity presents two known hazards: thermal and sho ck. A thermal hazard is one in which an excessive electric current causes
undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire in the wall of a house. A shock hazard occurs when an electric current passes
through a person. Shocks range in severity from painful, but otherwise harmless, to heart-stopping lethality. In this section, we
consider these hazards and the various factors affec ting them in a quantitative manner. We also examine systems and devices for
preventing electrical hazards.
Thermal Hazards
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenev er electric energy is converted into thermal energy at a rate faster than it can
be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is the short circuit, a low-resistance path between terminals of a voltage source. An
example of a short circuit is shown in Figure. A toas ter is plugged into a common household electrical out let. Insulation on
wires leading to an appliance has worn through, allowi ng the two wires to come into contact, or “short.” As a result, thermal energy
can quickly raise the temperature of surrounding materi als, melting the insulation and perhaps causing a fire.
The circuit diagram shows a symbol that consists of a si ne wave enclosed in a circle. This symbol represents an alternating current
(ac) voltage source. In an ac voltage source, the vol tage oscillates between a positive and negative maxim um amplitude. Up to now,
we have been considering direct current (dc) voltage sources, but many of the same concepts are applicable to ac circuits.
Figure: A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance p ath across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wires of a toaster
allow them to come into contact with a low resistance r. Since, thermal power is created so rapidly that th e cord melts or
burns. (b) A schematic of the short circuit.
Another serious thermal hazard occurs when wires supply ing power to an appliance are overloaded. Electrical wires and appliances
are often rated for the maximum current they can sa fely handle. The term “overloaded” refers to a condi tion where the current
exceeds the rated maximum current. As current flows th rough a wire, the power dissipated in the supply wires i s, where
is the resistance of the wires and I is the current flowing through the wires. If either I or is too large, the wires overheat.
Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit excessive curren ts.
Shock Hazards
Electric shock is the physiological reaction or inj ury caused by an external electric current passing t hrough the body. The effect of
an electric shock can be negative or positive. When a current with a magnitude above 300 mA passes throug h the heart, death may
occur. Most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current causes ventricular fibrillation, a massiv ely irregular and often fatal,
beating of the heart. On the other hand, a heart attack victim, whose heart is in fibrillation, can be saved by an electric shock from a
defibrillator.Learning Objectives

5.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76584The effects of an undesirable electric shock can va ry in severity: a slight sensation at the point of c ontact, pain, loss of voluntary
muscle control, difficulty breathing, heart fibrilla tion, and possibly death. The loss of voluntary musc le control can cause the victim
to not be able to let go of the source of the current.
The major factors upon which the severity of the effects of electrical shock depend are
1. The amount of current I
2. The path taken by the current
3. The duration of the shock
4. The frequency f of the current for dc)
Our bodies are relatively good electric conductors du e to the body’s water content. A dangerous condition occurs when the body is
in contact with a voltage source and “ground.” The te rm “ground” refers to a large sink or source of elec trons, for example, the
earth (thus, the name). When there is a direct path to ground, large currents will pass through the part s of the body with the lowest
resistance and a direct path to ground. A safety prec aution used by many professions is the wearing of in sulated shoes. Insulated
shoes prohibit a pathway to ground for electrons thr ough the feet by providing a large resistance. Whenev er working with highpower tools, or any electric circuit, ensure that you d o not provide a pathway for current flow (especially a cross the heart). A
common safety precaution is to work with one hand, reducing the possibility of providing a current path through t he heart.
Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt throug h the body. This happens to you regularly without yo ur knowledge. The
threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and, although unple asant, shocks are apparently harmless for currents less than 5 mA. A great
number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the maximum allowed shock. At 5–30 mA and above, the curr ent can stimulate
sustained muscular contractions, much as regular nerv e impulses do. Very large currents (above 300 mA) cau se the heart and
diaphragm of the lung to contract for the duration of the shock. Both the heart and respiration stop. Bo th often return to normal
following the shock.
Current is the major factor determining shock severi ty. A larger voltage is more hazardous, but since, the severity of the
shock depends on the combination of voltage and resi stance. For example, a person with dry skin has a resista nce of about.
If he comes into contact with 120-V ac, a current
passes harmlessly through him. The same person soaking wet may have a resistance of and the same 120 V will produce a
current of 12 mA—above the “can’t let go” threshold and p otentially dangerous.
Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
Figure shows the schematic for a simple ac circuit wi th no safety features. This is not how power is distribut ed in practice.
Modern household and industrial wiring requires the three-wire system, shown schematically in part (b), which has several s afety
features, with live, neutral, and ground wires. First is the familiar circuit breaker (or fuse) to prevent ther mal overload. Second is a
protective case around the appliance, such as a toaste r or refrigerator. The case’s safety feature is that it prevents a person from
touching exposed wires and coming into electrical contact with the circuit, helping prevent shocks.

5.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76584
Figure: (a) Schematic of a simple ac circuit with a voltage source and a single appliance represented by t he resistance R.
There are no safety features in this circuit. (b) The three-wire system connects the neutral wire to ground at the voltage source and
user location, forcing it to be at zero volts and supp lying an alternative return path for the current th rough ground. Also grounded to
zero volts is the case of the appliance. A circuit bre aker or fuse protects against thermal overload and is i n series on the active
(live/hot) wire.
There are three connections to ground shown in. Reca ll that a ground connection is a low-resistance path directly to ground.
The two ground connections on the neutral wire force i t to be at zero volts relative to ground, giving the wire its name. This wire is
therefore safe to touch even if its insulation, usu ally white, is missing. The neutral wire is the return path for the current to follow to
complete the circuit. Furthermore, the two ground conn ections supply an alternative path through ground (a good conductor) to
complete the circuit. The ground connection closest t o the power source could be at the generating plant, wh ereas the other is at the
user’s location. The third ground is to the case of the appliance, through the green ground wire, forci ng the case, too, to be at zero
volts. The live or hot wire (hereafter referred to as “live/hot”) supplies voltage and current to operate the appliance. Figure
shows a more pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connected through a three-prong plug to an appliance.
Figure: The standard three-prong plug can only be in serted in one way, to ensure proper function of the t hree-wire system.
Insulating plastic is color-coded to identify live/ hot, neutral, and ground wires, but these codes vary aro und the world. It is essential
to determine the color code in your region. Striped coati ngs are sometimes used for the benefit of those who are co lorblind.
Grounding the case solves more than one problem. The simplest problem is worn insulation on the live/hot wi re that allows it to
contact the case, as shown in Figure. Lacking a ground connection, a severe shock is possible. This is parti cularly dangerous
in the kitchen, where a good connection to ground is available through water on the floor or a water fauc et. With the ground
connection intact, the circuit breaker will trip, forci ng repair of the appliance.

5.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76584
Figure: Worn insulation allows the live/hot wire to c ome into direct contact with the metal case of this a ppliance. (a) The
ground connection being broken, the person is severely shocked. The appliance may operate normally in this situation. (b) With a
proper ground, the circuit breaker trips, forcing re pair of the appliance.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) is a safety device found in updated kitchen and bathroom wiring that works based on
electromagnetic induction. GFCIs compare the currents i n the live/hot and neutral wires. When live/hot and ne utral currents are not
equal, it is almost always because current in the neutr al is less than in the live/hot wire. Then some of the current, called a leakage
current, is returning to the voltage source by a path other than through the neutral wire. It is assumed th at this path presents a
hazard. GFCIs are usually set to interrupt the circuit i f the leakage current is greater than 5 mA, the accep ted maximum harmless
shock. Even if the leakage current goes safely to gr ound through an intact ground wire, the GFCI will trip, forcing repair of the
leakage.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.7: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

5.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765825.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe how to connect a voltmeter in a circuit to mea sure voltage
Describe how to connect an ammeter in a circuit to meas ure current
Describe the use of an ohmmeter
Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s method are useful to analyze and design electrical circuits, providing you with t he voltages across, the
current through, and the resistance of the component s that compose the circuit. To measure these parameter s require instruments,
and these instruments are described in this section.
DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
Whereas voltmeter s measure voltage, ammeter s measure current. Some of the meters in automobile dash boards, digital cameras,
cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are actually volt meters or ammeters (Figure). The internal constructi on of the simplest of
these meters and how they are connected to the system t hey monitor give further insight into applications o f series and parallel
connections.
Figure: The fuel and temperature gauges (far right a nd far left, respectively) in this 1996 V olkswagen are voltmeters that
register the voltage output of “sender” units. These un its are proportional to the amount of gasoline in the tank and to the engine
temperature. (credit: Christian Giersing)
Measuring Current with an Ammeter
To measure the current through a device or componen t, the ammeter is placed in series with the device or component. A series
connection is used because objects in series have th e same current passing through them. (See Figure, wher e the ammeter is
represented by the symbol A.)
Figure: (a) When an ammeter is used to measure the cur rent through two resistors connected in series to a batt ery, a single
ammeter is placed in series with the two resistors because the current is the same through the two resistors in ser ies. (b) When two
resistors are connected in parallel with a battery, th ree meters, or three separate ammeter readings, are ne cessary to measure the
current from the battery and through each resistor. T he ammeter is connected in series with the component i n question.Learning Objectives

5.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76582Ammeters need to have a very low resistance, a fractio n of a milliohm. If the resistance is not negligibl e, placing the ammeter in
the circuit would change the equivalent resistance o f the circuit and modify the current that is being measured. Since the current in
the circuit travels through the meter, ammeters norma lly contain a fuse to protect the meter from damage from currents which are
too high.
Measuring Voltage with a Voltmeter
A voltmeter is connected in parallel with whatever de vice it is measuring. A parallel connection is used b ecause objects in parallel
experience the same potential difference. (See Figure, wher e the voltmeter is represented by the symbol V.)
Figure: To measure potential differences in this series circuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel wit h the voltage source or
either of the resistors. Note that terminal voltage is measured between the positive terminal and the negati ve terminal of the battery
or voltage source. It is not possible to connect a volt meter directly across the emf without including the i nternal resistance r of the
battery.
Since voltmeters are connected in parallel, the voltm eter must have a very large resistance. Digital voltme ters convert the analog
voltage into a digital value to display on a digita l readout (Figure). Inexpensive voltmeters have resi stances on the order of
, whereas high-precision voltmeters have resistances on the order of. The value of the resistance may vary,
depending on which scale is used on the meter.
Figure: (a) An analog voltmeter uses a galvanometer t o measure the voltage. (b) Digital meters use an analo g-to-digital
converter to measure the voltage. (credit a and cred it b: Joseph J. Trout)
Analog and Digital Meters
You may encounter two types of meters in the physics l ab: analog and digital. The term ‘analog’ refers to signals or information
represented by a continuously variable physical quant ity, such as voltage or current. An analog meter uses a galvanometer, which is
essentially a coil of wire with a small resistance, in a magnetic field, with a pointer attached that poin ts to a scale. Current flows
through the coil, causing the coil to rotate. To use the galvanometer as an ammeter, a small resistance is placed in parallel with the
coil. For a voltmeter, a large resistance is placed i n series with the coil. A digital meter uses a compon ent called an analog-to-digital
(A to D) converter and expresses the current or voltag e as a series of the digits 0 and 1, which are used to run a digital display. Most
analog meters have been replaced by digital meters.
Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents tha n analog meters employing galvanometers. How does this e xplain their
ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters?Check Your Understanding

5.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76582
[Hide Solution]
Since digital meters require less current than analo g meters, they alter the circuit less than analog me ters. Their resistance as a
voltmeter can be far greater than an analog meter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far less tha n an analog meter. Consult
Figure and Figure and their discussion in the text
Ohmmeters
An ohmmeter is an instrument used to measure the res istance of a component or device. The operation of t he ohmmeter is based on
Ohm’s law. Traditional ohmmeters contained an intern al voltage source (such as a battery) that would be c onnected across the
component to be tested, producing a current through the component. A galvanometer was then used to measu re the current and the
resistance was deduced using Ohm’s law. Modern digital meters use a constant current source to pass curren t through the
component, and the voltage difference across the comp onent is measured. In either case, the resistance is m easured using Ohm’s
law where the voltage is known and the current is measured, or the current is known and the voltage is measured.
The component of interest should be isolated from the circuit; otherwise, you will be measuring the equiva lent resistance of the
circuit. An ohmmeter should never be connected to a “ live” circuit, one with a voltage source connected to it and current running
through it. Doing so can damage the meter.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

5.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765835.6: RC Circuits
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe the charging process of a capacitor
Describe the discharging process of a capacitor
List some applications of RC circuits
When you use a flash camera, it takes a few seconds t o charge the capacitor that powers the flash. The ligh t flash discharges the
capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second. Why does ch arging take longer than discharging? This question a nd several other
phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacito rs are discussed in this module.
Circuits with Resistance and Capacitance
An RC circuit is a circuit containing resistance and capacitance. As presented in Capacitance, the capacitor is an electri cal
component that stores electric charge, storing energy in a n electric field.
Figure shows a simple RC circuit that employs a dc (direct current) voltage source, a resistor, a capacitor, and a twoposition switch. The circuit allows the capacitor to b e charged or discharged, depending on the position o f the switch. When the
switch is moved to position \(A\), the capacitor charges, resulting in the circuit in Figure. When the switch is moved to
position B, the capacitor discharges through the resistor.
Figure: (a) An RC circuit with a two-pole switch that can be used to c harge and discharge a capacitor. (b) When the switch is
moved to position A, the circuit reduces to a simple series connection of the voltage source, the resistor, the capacitor, and t he
switch. (c) When the switch is moved to position B, the circuit reduces to a simple series connection of the resistor, the capacitor,
and the switch. The voltage source is removed from the circuit.
Charging a Capacitor
We can use Kirchhoff’s loop rule to understand the ch arging of the capacitor. This results in the equatio n. This
equation can be used to model the charge as a funct ion of time as the capacitor charges. Capacitance is defined as, so the
voltage across the capacitor is. Using Ohm’s law, the potential drop across the resistor is, and the curre nt is
defined as.
This differential equation can be integrated to find an eq uation for the charge on the capacitor as a function of tim e.Learning Objectives

5.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583Let, then. The result is
Simplifying results in an equation for the charge on the ch arging capacitor as a function of time:
A graph of the charge on the capacitor versus time is shown in Figure. First note that as time approache s infinity, the
exponential goes to zero, so the charge approaches t he maximum charge and has units of coulombs. The u nits of RC are
seconds, units of time. This quantity is known as the time constant:
At time, the charge equal to of the maximum charge. Notice that the time rate
change of the charge is the slope at a point of the charge versus time plot. The slope of the graph is la rge at time and
approaches zero as time increases.
As the charge on the capacitor increases, the current through the resistor decreases, as shown in Figure. T he current through
the resistor can be found by taking the time derivative o f the charge.
At time, the current through the resistor is. As tim e approaches infinity, the current approaches zero. At time,
the current through the resistor is.

5.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583
Figure: (a) Charge on the capacitor versus time as the capacitor charges. (b) Current through the resistor v ersus time. (c)
V oltage difference across the capacitor. (d) V oltage difference across the resistor.
Figures and Figure show the voltage differences acro ss the capacitor and the resistor, respectively. As the charge on the
capacitor increases, the current decreases, as does the vo ltage difference across the resistor. The voltage
difference across the capacitor increases as.
Discharging a Capacitor
When the switch in Figure is moved to position B, the circuit reduces to the circuit in part (c), a nd the charged capacitor is
allowed to discharge through the resistor. A graph of t he charge on the capacitor as a function of time is shown in Figure.
Using Kirchhoff’s loop rule to analyze the circuit as t he capacitor discharges results in the equation, whic h simplifies
to. Using the definition of current and integrating the loop equation yields an equation for the charge on the
capacitor as a function of time:
Here, Q is the initial charge on the capacitor and is the time constant of the circuit. As shown in the graph, the charge
decreases exponentially from the initial charge, approa ching zero as time approaches infinity.
The current as a function of time can be found by taki ng the time derivative of the charge:
The negative sign shows that the current flows in the op posite direction of the current found when the capac itor is charging. Figure
shows an example of a plot of charge versus time and current versus time. A plot of the voltage difference across the
capacitor and the voltage difference across the resist or as a function of time are shown in Figures and. Note that the
magnitudes of the charge, current, and voltage all decrea se exponentially, approaching zero as time increases.

5.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583
Figure: (a) Charge on the capacitor versus time as the capacitor discharges. (b) Current through the resistor versus time. (c)
V oltage difference across the capacitor. (d) V oltage difference across the resistor.
Now we can explain why the flash camera mentioned at the beginning of this section takes so much longer to charge than
discharge: The resistance while charging is signific antly greater than while discharging. The internal r esistance of the battery
accounts for most of the resistance while charging. As t he battery ages, the increasing internal resistance makes the charging
process even slower.
Examples
High-speed flash photography was pioneered by Doc Edger ton in the 1930s, while he was a professor of electrical engineering
at MIT. You might have seen examples of his work in the amazing shots of hummingbirds in motion, a drop of milk splattering
on a table, or a bullet penetrating an apple (see Figure). To stop the motion and capture these pictures, one n eeds a highintensity, very short pulsed flash, as mentioned earlier in this module.
Suppose one wished to capture the picture of a bullet (moving at) that was passing through an apple. The du ration
of the flash is related to the time constant. Wha t size capacitor would one need in the circuit to s ucceed, if the
resistance of the flash tube was? Assume the apple is a sph ere with a diameter of.
Strategy
We begin by identifying the physical principles invo lved. This example deals with the strobe light, as d iscussed above.
Figure shows the circuit for this probe. The characteristic ti me of the strobe is given as.
Solution
We wish to find, but we don’t know. We want the flash to be on only while the bullet traverses the apple. So we
need to use the kinematic equations that describe the re lationship between distance, velocity, and time:
The bullet’s velocity is given as, and the distance is. The traverse time, then, isExample 5.6.1: Integrated Concept Problem: Calculating Capacitor Size—Strobe Lights

5.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583We set this value for the crossing time equal to. Ther efore,
(Note: Capacitance is typically measured in farads,, defined as Coulombs per volt. From the equation, we s ee that
can also be stated in units of seconds per ohm.)
Discussion
The flash interval of (the traverse time of the bul let) is relatively easy to obtain today. Strobe light s have opened
up new worlds from science to entertainment. The info rmation from the picture of the apple and bullet was used in the
Warren Commission Report on the assassination of Pres ident John F. Kennedy in 1963 to confirm that only o ne bullet
was fired.
A heart defibrillator is used to resuscitate an acci dent victim by discharging a capacitor through the trunk of her body. A
simplified version of the circuit is seen in Figure. (a) What is the time constant if an capacitor is used and the path
resistance through her body is? (b) If the initial voltag e is 10.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to?
Strategy
Since the resistance and capacitance are given, it is straightforward to multiply them to give the time co nstant asked for in
part (a). To find the time for the voltage to declin e to, we repeatedly multiply the initial voltage by 0.368 until a
voltage less than or equal to is obtained. Each multipli cation corresponds to a time of seconds.
Solution
The time constant is given by the equation. Enter ing the given values for resistance and capacitance (and
remembering that units for a farad can be expressed as) g ives
Solution for (b)
In the first 8.00 ms, the voltage (10.0 kV) declines to 0.368 of its initial value. That is:
(Notice that we carry an extra digit for each interme diate calculation.) After another 8.00 ms, we multiply b y 0.368
again, and the voltage is
Similarly, after another 8.00 ms, the voltage is
Discussion
So after only 24.0 ms, the voltage is down to 498 V, o r 4.98% of its original value.Such brief times are use ful in heart
defibrillation, because the brief but intense curren t causes a brief but effective contraction of the he art. The actual circuitExample 5.6.2: Calculating Time: RC Circuit in a Heart Defibrillator

5.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583in a heart defibrillator is slightly more complex th an the one in Figure, to compensate for magnetic and AC effects that
will be covered in Magnetism.
One application of an RC circuit is the relaxation oscillator, as shown below. The relaxation oscillator consists of a voltage
source, a resistor, a capacitor, and a neon lamp. The neon lamp acts like an open circuit (infinite resist ance) until the potential
difference across the neon lamp reaches a specific voltage. At that voltage, the lamp acts like a short ci rcuit (zero resistance),
and the capacitor discharges through the neon lamp a nd produces light. In the relaxation oscillator shown, the voltage source
charges the capacitor until the voltage across the capacitor is 80 V. When this happens, the neon in th e lamp breaks down and
allows the capacitor to discharge through the lamp, pr oducing a bright flash. After the capacitor fully disc harges through the
neon lamp, it begins to charge again, and the proce ss repeats. Assuming that the time it takes the capacito r to discharge is
negligible, what is the time interval between flashes?
Strategy
The time period can be found from considering the equ ation. where
Solution
The neon lamp flashes when the voltage across the ca pacitor reaches 80 V. The RC time constant is equal to
. We can solve the voltage equation for the time it ta kes the capacitor to reach 80 V:
Significance
One application of the relaxation oscillator is for c ontrolling indicator lights that flash at a frequenc y determined by the
values for R and C. In this example, the neon lamp will flash every 8.13 seconds, a frequency of
. The relaxation oscillator has many other practica l uses. It is often used in electronic circuits, whe re the neon lamp is
replaced by a transistor or a device known as a tunn el diode. The description of the transistor and tun nel diode is beyond
the scope of this chapter, but you can think of them as voltage controlled switches. They are normally ope n switches,
but when the right voltage is applied, the switch clo ses and conducts. The “switch” can be used to turn on ano ther
circuit, turn on a light, or run a small motor. A re laxation oscillator can be used to make the turn sign als of your car
blink or your cell phone to vibrate.
RC circuits have many applications. They can be used effectively as timers for applications such as interm ittent windshield wipers,
pace makers, and strobe lights. Some models of intermit tent windshield wipers use a variable resistor to adju st the interval betweenExample 5.6.3: The Relaxation Oscillator

5.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583sweeps of the wiper. Increasing the resistance increas es the RC time constant, which increases the time between the operation of
the wipers.
Another application is the pacemaker. The heart rate is normally controlled by electrica l signals, which cause the muscles of the
heart to contract and pump blood. When the heart rh ythm is abnormal (the heartbeat is too high or too low), pace makers can be
used to correct this abnormality. Pacemakers have sensor s that detect body motion and breathing to increase the heart rate during
physical activities, thus meeting the increased need for blood and oxygen, and an RC timing circuit can be used to control the time
between voltage signals to the heart.
Looking ahead to the study of ac circuits (Alternating-Current Circuits), ac voltages vary as sine functions with specific
frequencies. Periodic variations in voltage, or electri c signals, are often recorded by scientists. These v oltage signals could come
from music recorded by a microphone or atmospheric data collected by radar. Occasionally, these signals ca n contain unwanted
frequencies known as “noise.” RC filters can be used to filter out the unwanted freque ncies.
In the study of electronics, a popular device known as a 555 timer provides timed voltage pulses. The time between pulses is
controlled by an RC circuit. These are just a few of the countless application s of RC circuits.
A relaxation oscillator is used to control a pair o f windshield wipers. The relaxation oscillator consists of a 10.00-mF capacitor
and a variable resistor known as a rheostat. A knob c onnected to the variable resistor allows the resistance to be
adjusted from to. The output of the capacitor is u sed to control a voltage-controlled switch. The switch i s
normally open, but when the output voltage reaches 10.00 V, the switch closes, energizing an electric motor and discharging
the capacitor. The motor causes the windshield wipers to sweep once across the windshield and the capacitor begins to charge
again. To what resistance should the rheostat be adjusted fo r the period of the wiper blades be 10.00 seconds?
Strategy
The resistance considers the equation, where. The cap acitance, output voltage, and voltage of
the battery are given. We need to solve this equation for the resistance.
Solution
The output voltage will be 10.00 V and the voltage o f the battery is 12.00 V. The capacitance is given a s 10.00 mF.
Solving for the resistance yieldsExample 5.6.4: Intermittent Windshield Wipers

5.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583Significance
Increasing the resistance increases the time delay between operations of the windshield wipers. When the resistance is
zero, the windshield wipers run continuously. At the maximum resistance, the period of the operation of the wipers is:
Given the circuit of Figure 5.6.3, assume the switch is closed at time. Determine the charging time constant, the amount
of time after the switch is closed before the circuit reaches steady-state, and the capacitor voltage at, milliseconds
and second. Assume the capacitor is initially uncharg ed.
Figure 5.6.3: Circuit for Example 5.6.1.
First, the time constant:
Steady-state will be reached in five time constants, o r 500 milliseconds. Therefore we know that volts and
volts. To find we simply solve Equation.
This value can also be determined graphically from Fi gure 5.6.2. The time of 50 milliseconds represents one -half time
constant. Find this value on the horizontal axis and t hen track straight up to the solid red curve that re presents the charging
capacitor voltage. The point of intersection is at ap proximately 40% of the maximum value on the vertica l axis. The maximum
value here is the source voltage of 100 volts. There fore the capacitor will have reached approximately 4 0% of 100 volts, or just
about 40 volts.
For the circuit of Figure 5.6.6, assume the capacitor is initially uncharged. At time the switch contacts p osition 1. The
switch is thrown to position 2 at time milliseconds.
Figure 5.6.6: Circuit for Example 5.6.2.
Determine the charging time constant, the amount of time after the switch is closed before the circuit re aches steady-state, the
maximum charging and discharging currents, and the capacitor voltage at, milliseconds, milliseconds, a nd Example 5.6.5
Example 5.6.6

5.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583 second.
We begin with the charge time constant:
Steady-state will be reached in 5 times 4.4 millisecond s, or 22 milliseconds. The capacitor is initially uncha rged, so
volts. As the capacitor will have reached steady-state in 22 milliseconds, volts. The maximum charging current
will occur at when all of the 12 volt source drops across the 20 k resistor, or 600 amps, flowing left to right.
At 50 milliseconds the switch is thrown to position 2. Th e 12 volt source and 20 k resistor are no longer eng aged. At this
point the capacitor has 12 volts across it, positive t o negative, top to bottom. As the capacitor voltage c annot change
instantaneously, the capacitor now acts as a voltage source and discharges through the 120 k resistor. Note that the discharge
current is flowing counterclockwise, the opposite of the charging current. The discharge time constant is:
The capacitor will fully discharge down to 0 volts in 5 time constants, or some 132 milliseconds after the s witch is thrown to
position 2. Thus steady-state occurs at milliseconds. The maximum discharge current occurs the instant th e switch is
thrown to position 2 when all of the capacitor's 12 v olts drops across the 120 k resistor, yielding 100 amp s, flowing top to
bottom.
Clearly, at milliseconds the capacitor is in the di scharge phase. The capacitor's voltage and current d uring the discharge
phase follow the solid blue curve of Figure 5.6.2. The elapsed time for discharge is 90 milliseconds minus 5 0 milliseconds, or
40 milliseconds net. We can use a slight variation on Equa tion to find the capacitor voltage at this time.
The shape of the capacitor's voltage will appear some what like a rounded pulse, rising with a curve and the n falling back to
zero with a complementary curve (the red and then blue c urves of Figure 5.6.2).
For this example we shall revisit the circuit of Exam ple 8.3.1. The circuit is redrawn in Figure 5.6.7 for c onvenience. Assume
the capacitor is initially uncharged.
Figure 5.6.7: Circuit for Example 5.6.3.
Determine the charging time constant, the amount of ti me after the switch is closed before the circuit rea ches steady-state, and
the capacitor voltage at, 100 milliseconds, and 200 milliseconds. At 200 milliseconds, the switch is opene d. Determine
how long it takes for the capacitor to fully dischar ge and the voltage across the 6 k resistor at millise conds (i.e., 75
milliseconds after the switch is opened).Example 5.6.7

5.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583The first step is to determine the Thévenin equivale nt driving the capacitor. If we remove the capacitor and determine the open
circuit voltage at those points, we see that it is ju st a voltage divider between the 24 volt source, the 6 k resistor and the 1 k
resistor (the 3 k resistor has no current through it and thus produces no voltage drop). This works out to 2 0.57 volts. The
Thévenin resistance will be 3 k in series with 1 k 6 k, or roughly 3.857 k. The equivalent charging circuit is drawn in
Figure 5.6.8.
Figure 5.6.8: Thévenin equivalent for the circuit of Fig ure 5.6.7 driving the capacitor.
We can now determine the charging time constant:
Steady-state will be reached in 5 time constants, or 192.8 ms. Thus, we know that volts and volts.
For the capacitor voltage at 100 milliseconds, we simply us e the charge equation.
For the discharge phase, we need to determine the time constant. With the voltage source removed, the capaci tor will discharge
through the now series combination of the 3 k resistor a nd 6 k resistor.
Steady-state will be reached 450 milliseconds later at milliseconds. To find at milliseconds, we can find the
voltage across the capacitor and then perform a vol tage divider between the 6 k and 3 k resistors. Remem bering that
milliseconds is 75 milliseconds into the discharge phase, we have:
Finally, this voltage splits between the 6 k and 3 k resistors. Using the voltage divider rule, we find:

5.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583The parallel-plate capacitor is charged and then the s witch is closed. At the instant the switch is closed, th e current measured
through the ammeter is. After a time of elapses, the current through the ammeter is measured to be, and the
switch is opened. A substance with a dielectric const ant of 1.5 is then inserted between the plates of t he capacitor, and the
switch is once again closed and not reopened until the amme ter reads zero current.
a. Find the period of time that elapses between when the switch is closed the second time and when the ammeter reads a
current of.
b. At the end, all of the electrical potential energy is gone f rom the capacitor. Find the fraction of this energy tha t was
converted into thermal energy by the resistor.
Solution
a. We can calculate the time constant from the period of ti me that the current takes to drop to 0.6 of its original value:
When the dielectric is inserted, the time constant c hanges. The time constant is proportional to the capac itance, so since
inserting the dielectric increases the capacitance by a factor of 1.5, that is the factor by which the time constant changes as
well, giving a new time constant of:
The current is driven by the potential difference ac ross the capacitor, and this is proportional to the ch arge on the
capacitor, so when the current gets down to 60% of it s initial value, that means that the charge on the c apacitor has
dropped by the same factor. To find the time for the cu rrent to drop to, we need to know not only the new time
constant, but also the new starting current. We can get this from the new starting voltage, which comes f rom the new
starting charge and capacitance:
With the new starting current equal to, we are looki ng for the time it takes to get down to, so:
b. We already determined that in the first stage of th is process, the charge on the capacitor went down to 6 0% of its initial
amount. This allows us to calculate the energy lost by the capacitor, which is what is converted to thermal:
So 64% of the energy on the capacitor is converted to thermal energy in the first stage. In the second stage, all of the
internal energy in the capacitor is converted, but this amo unt of energy must be calculated in terms of the new capac itance:Example: Changing the time constant

5.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583So of the original energy stored in the capacitor, 8 8% of the energy is converted to thermal. Where is the r emaining 12%, if
all of it is now gone from the capacitor? The field of t he capacitor did work drawing the dielectric into it.
The RC circuit has thousands of uses and is a very important circuit to study. Not only can it be used to time ci rcuits, it can also be
used to filter out unwanted frequencies in a circuit and used in power supplies, like the one for your comp uter, to help turn ac
voltage to dc voltage.
A simple RC circuit as shown in Figure contains a cha rged capacitor of unknown capacitance,, in series wit h a resistor,
. When charged, the potential difference across the te rminals of the capacitor is.
At time, the switch,, is closed, allowing the capacitor to discharge through the resistor. The current is the n measured to
be at after opening the switch.
a. What is the capacitance of the capacitor?
b. What charge did the capacitor hold at?
Figure: A simple circuit with a resistor and a capacit or.
Answer
a. In this case, the capacitor is discharging as a func tion of time. At time, the voltage across the capacit or is.
We can model this discharging circuit in a similar way as we modeled the charging circuit.
We start with Kirchhoff’s junction rule, which leads to a differential equation for the charge stored on th e capacitor,, as
function of time:
This differential equation is straightforward to solve, since it says that the derivative of is equal to a c onstant
multiplied by. Thus,, must be an exponential function:
where,, is the (unknown) charge on the capacitor at. You can easily verify that taking the derivative of this equation
will result in the differential equation being satisfie d.
The current,, as a function of time is given by:
where is the current at.
We also know that the current through the resistor at i s given by Ohm’s Law, since, at that time, the voltage,:Exercise

5.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583We then know that the current, at time, is equal to, all owing us to determine the capacitance:
b. To find the charge stored in the capacitor at, we can u se the function that we determined before:
where we can determine,, now that we know the capacitanc e. is the charge on the capacitor at time, when the
voltage across the capacitor is:
At, the charge on the capacitor is thus:
A voltmeter with a resistance of is attached to a cir cuit with a battery of unknown voltage and two resistors with a
resistance of as shown in Figure. The voltmeter rea ds that the voltage drop over one of the resistors i s
. What is the voltage drop,, over each resistor when the voltmeter is removed from the circuit?
Figure: A circuit with a battery of unknown voltage.
Answer
In order to know the voltage across one of the resist ors, we need to determine the voltage that is across the battery. Once we
have determined the voltage across the battery, the voltage across one of the resistors will just be half of that across the
battery, since the two resistors have the same resistance.
We can model the circuit with the voltmeter in place, since we know the voltage across the parallel combin ation of the
voltmeter and resistor (that voltage which is readou t by the voltmeter). We can combine the voltmeter a nd one of the
resistors into a an equivalent resistor,:
Now that we have the effective resistance as well as the voltage drop across that effective resistor, we can so lve for current
through the circuit:Exercise

5.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583Now that we have the current through the circuit, we ca n determine the voltage drop across the second resis tor. By adding
that voltage drop to the known voltage across the effective resistor, we can determine the battery voltage:
Thus, with no voltmeter present, the voltage across each re sistor is.
Given the circuit shown, find the voltage across the 6 resistor for both the initial and steady-state condi tions assuming the
capacitor is initially uncharged.
Circuit for Example.
For the initial state the capacitor is treated as a sh ort. The initial state equivalent circuit is drawn b elow. Immediately apparent
is the parallel connection between the 6 and 3 res istors. This combination is equivalent to 2. Therefo re, we can
perform a voltage divider to find the potential acro ss the 6 (i.e., the 2 combo).
Circuit, initial state.
For the steady-state condition the capacitor will be f ully charged, its current will be zero, and we treat i t as an open. The
steady-state equivalent circuit is drawn below.
Circuit, steady-state.
The 3 resistor is now out of the picture, leaving us with the 6 in series with the 1 resistor. Once again, a voltage
divider may be used to determine the voltage across the 6.
Example 5.6.9:

5.6.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76583This page titled 5.6: RC Circuits is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
10.6: RC Circuits by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
21.6: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
8.4: Transient Response of RC Circuits by James M. Fiore is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.dissidents.com/resources/DCElectricalCircuitA nalysis.pdf.
3.5: RC Circuits by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.
20.8: Sample problems and solutions by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0.
Original source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.
8.3: Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RC Circuits by James M. Fiore is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.dissidents.com/resources/DCElectricalCircuitA nalysis.pdf.

5.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765755.7: Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electromotive Force
1. What effect will the internal resistance of a rechargeabl e battery have on the energy being used to recharge the b attery?
2. A battery with an internal resistance of r and an em f of 10.00 V is connected to a load resistor R=r. As the battery ages, the
internal resistance triples. How much is the current through the load resistor reduced?
3. Show that the power dissipated by the load resistor is maximum when the resistance of the load resistor is equa l to the
internal resistance of the battery.
Resistors in Series and Parallel
4. A voltage occurs across an open switch. What is the power di ssipated by the open switch?
5. The severity of a shock depends on the magnitude of the current through your body. Would you prefer to be in series or in
parallel with a resistance, such as the heating element of a to aster, if you were shocked by it? Explain.
6. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks you to p ut a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors sup plied have a larger
resistance than the requested value. How would you con nect the available resistances to attempt to get th e smaller value
asked for?
7. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not inclu ding zero), obtained from multiple filaments that ar e individually
switched and wired in parallel. What is the minimum num ber of filaments needed for three power settings?
Kirchhoff's Rules
8. Can all of the currents going into the junction shown b elow be positive? Explain.
9. Consider the circuit shown below. Does the analysis of t he circuit require Kirchhoff’s method, or can it be r edrawn to
simplify the circuit? If it is a circuit of series and pa rallel connections, what is the equivalent resistance?
10. Do batteries in a circuit always supply power to a circ uit, or can they absorb power in a circuit? Give an example.
11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of connecting bat teries in series? In parallel?
12. Semi-tractor trucks use four large 12-V batteries. Th e starter system requires 24 V, while normal operation of the truck’s
other electrical components utilizes 12 V. How could t he four batteries be connected to produce 24 V? To pr oduce 12 V?

5.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575Why is 24 V better than 12 V for starting the truck’s en gine (a very heavy load)?
Electrical Measuring Instruments
13. What would happen if you placed a voltmeter in series with a c omponent to be tested?
14. What is the basic operation of an ohmmeter as it measures a re sistor?
15. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly across a vo ltage source as shown below?
RC Circuits
16. A battery, switch, capacitor, and lamp are connected i n series. Describe what happens to the lamp when the swit ch is
closed.
17. When making an ECG measurement, it is important to me asure voltage variations over small time intervals. The time is
limited by the RC constant of the circuit—it is not possible to measure time variations shorter than R C. How would you
manipulate R and C in the circuit to allow the necessary m easurements?
10.6 Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
18. Why isn’t a short circuit necessarily a shock hazard?
19. We are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also advised to never throw
water on an electric fire. Why?
Problems
Electromotive Force
20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal resistan ce of 0.050Ω is being charged with a current of 60 A. Note that in
this process, the battery is being charged.
(a) What is the potential difference across its terminals?
(b) At what rate is thermal energy being dissipated in the battery?
(c) At what rate is electric energy being converted into chemical energy?
21. The label on a battery-powered radio recommends the use of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells (nicads), a lthough they
have a 1.25-V emf, whereas alkaline cells have a 1.58-V emf. The radio has a 3.20Ω resistance.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio and its batteries. Now, c alculate the power delivered to the radio
(b) when using nicad cells, each having an internal resista nce of 0.0400Ω, and
(c) when using alkaline cells, each having an internal resistance of 0.200Ω.
(d) Does this difference seem significant, consideri ng that the radio’s effective resistance is lowered when its volume is
turned up?
22. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent resista nce of 0.0500Ω and is supplied by a 12.0-V battery with a 0.0100-Ω
internal resistance.

5.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(a) What is the current to the motor?
(b) What voltage is applied to it?
(c) What power is supplied to the motor?
(d) Repeat these calculations for when the battery c onnections are corroded and add 0.0900Ω to the circuit.
(Significant problems are caused by even small amoun ts of unwanted resistance in low-voltage, high-current
applications.)
23. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage source if its terminal potential drops by 2.00 V when the c urrent supplied
increases by 5.00 A?
(b) Can the emf of the voltage source be found with the i nformation supplied?
24. A person with body resistance between his hands of 10.0kΩ accidentally grasps the terminals of a 20.0-kV power supply.
(Do NOT do this!)
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to represent the situation.
(b) If the internal resistance of the power supply is 2000Ω, what is the current through his body?
(c) What is the power dissipated in his body?
(d) If the power supply is to be made safe by increasi ng its internal resistance, what should the internal r esistance be
for the maximum current in this situation to be 1.00 mA o r less?
(e) Will this modification compromise the effective ness of the power supply for driving low-resistance devi ces?
Explain your reasoning.
25. A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal voltage o f 16.0 V when being charged by a current of 10.0 A.
(a) What is the battery’s internal resistance?
(b) What power is dissipated inside the battery?
(c) At what rate (in °C/min) will its temperature increase if its mass is 20.0 kg and it has a specific heat of
0.300kcal/kg ⋅°C, assuming no heat escapes?
Resistors in Series and Parallel
26. (a) What is the resistance of a a and a resistor conn ected in series?
(b) In parallel?
27. What are the largest and smallest resistances you can obtain by connecting a 36.0-Ω, a 50.0-Ω, and a 700-Ω resistor
together?
28. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W speaker, and a 75-W lamp a re plugged into the same outlet in a 15-A fuse and 12 0-V
circuit. (The three devices are in parallel when plugge d into the same socket.)
(a) What current is drawn by each device?
(b) Will this combination blow the 15-A fuse?
29. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V system. W hat power
would one headlight and the starter consume if connec ted in series to a 12.0-V battery? (Neglect any other resistance in the
circuit and any change in resistance in the two devices.)
30. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and 24.0-Ω and 96.0-Ω 9 resistors, find the current and power for each when connected in
series.
(b) Repeat when the resistances are in parallel.
31. Referring to the example combining series and paral lel circuits and Figure 10.16, calculate in the followin g two
different ways:

5.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(a) from the known values of and;
(b) using Ohm’s law for. In both parts, explicitly show how y ou follow the steps in the Figure 10.17.
32. Referring to Figure 10.16,
(a) Calculate and note how it compares with found in the f irst two example problems in this module.
(b) Find the total power supplied by the source and compare it with the sum of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
33. Refer to Figure 10.17 and the discussion of lights dimmin g when a heavy appliance comes on.
(a) Given the voltage source is 120 V, the wire resistan ce is 0.800Ω, and the bulb is nominally 75.0 W, what power will
the bulb dissipate if a total of 15.0 A passes throug h the wires when the motor comes on? Assume negligible c hange in
bulb resistance.
(b) What power is consumed by the motor?
34. Show that if two resistors and are combined and one is muc h greater than the other (),
(a) their series resistance is very nearly equal to the grea ter resistance and
(b) their parallel resistance is very nearly equal to the smaller resistance.
35. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal voltage of the battery is V=18.00V.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the power supplied by the battery.
Kirchhoff's Rules
36. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find the voltage across each resistor.
(b)What is the power supplied to the circuit and the powe r dissipated or consumed by the circuit?

5.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7657537. Consider the circuits shown below.
(a) What is the current through each resistor in part (a)?
(b) What is the current through each resistor in part (b)?
(c) What is the power dissipated or consumed by each circu it?
(d) What is the power supplied to each circuit?
38. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.
39. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.
40. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.

5.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575
41. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find and.
(b) Find the power supplied by the voltage sources.
(c) Find the power dissipated by the resistors
42. Consider the circuit shown below. Write the three loop equations for the loops shown.
43. Consider the circuit shown below. Write equations for the three currents in terms of R and V.
44. Consider the circuit shown in the preceding problem. Write equations for the power supplied by the voltag e sources and
the power dissipated by the resistors in terms of R and V.
45. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58-V alkaline cells having internal resistances of 0.0200Ω in series with a
1.53-V carbon-zinc dry cell having a 0.100-Ω internal resistance. The load resistance is 10.0Ω.

5.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the toy and its batteries.
(b) What current flows?
(c) How much power is supplied to the load?
(d) What is the internal resistance of the dry cell if i t goes bad, resulting in only 0.500 W being supplied t o the load?
46. Apply the junction rule to Junction b shown below. Is any new inf ormation gained by applying the junction rule at e?
47. Apply the loop rule to Loop afedcba in the preceding prob lem.
Electrical Measuring Instruments
48. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a 1.585-V a lkaline cell having an internal resistance of 0.100Ω by placing a
1.00-kΩ voltmeter across its terminals (see below).
(a) What current flows?
(b) Find the terminal voltage.
(c) To see how close the measured terminal voltage is to the e mf, calculate their ratio.
RC Circuits
49. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent wip er system is based on an RC time constant and utiliz es a 0.500-μF
capacitor and a variable resistor. Over what range must R be made to vary to achieve time constants from 2.00 to 15.0 s?
50. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery in seri es with a resistor)
to 0.632 of its full voltage. What is the value of the r esistance?
51. The duration of a photographic flash is related to an R C time constant, which is 0.100μs for a certain camera.

5.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(a) If the resistance of the flash lamp is 0.0400Ω during discharge, what is the size of the capacitor sup plying its
energy?
(b) What is the time constant for charging the capacito r, if the charging resistance is 800kΩ?
52. A 2.00- and a 7.50-μF capacitor can be connected in series or parallel, as can a 25.0- and a 100-kΩ resistor. Calculate the
four RC time constants possible from connecting the resu lting capacitance and resistance in series.
53. A 500-Ω resistor, an uncharged 1.50-μF capacitor, and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series.
(a) What is the initial current?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) What is the current after one time constant? (d) Wh at is the voltage on the capacitor after one time consta nt?
54. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has a n RC time constant of 10.0 ms due to the resistance of the patient and
the capacitance of the defibrillator.
(a) If the defibrillator has a capacitance of 8.00μF, what is the resistance of the path through the patien t? (You may
neglect the capacitance of the patient and the resistanc e of the defibrillator.)
(b) If the initial voltage is 12.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to?
55. An ECG monitor must have an RC time constant less than to be able to measure variations in voltage over
small time intervals.
(a) If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to that of the patient’s chest) is 1.00kΩ, what is the maximum
capacitance of the circuit?
(b) Would it be difficult in practice to limit the capaci tance to less than the value found in (a)?
56. Using the exact exponential treatment, determine how mu ch time is required to charge an initially uncharge d 100-pF
capacitor through a 75.0-MΩ resistor to 90.0% of its final voltage.
57. If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at 500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light produce d by an RC discharge
through a flash tube can limit blurring. Assuming 1.00 mm of motion during one RC constant is acceptable, and given that
the flash is driven by a 600-μF capacitor, what is the resistance in the flash tube?
Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
58. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit of 240-V ac t hrough a resistance of 0.250Ω? (b) What current flows?
59. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit throug h a 0.100-Ω resistance?
60. Find the current through a person and identify the likel y effect on her if she touches a 120-V ac source:
(a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and offers a total resi stance of 300kΩ;
(b) if she is standing barefoot on wet grass and has a resist ance of only 4000kΩ.
61. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal case of a radio. The path through the person to the drainp ipe and ground
has a resistance of 4000Ω. What is the smallest voltage on the case of the radio that could cause ventricular fibrillation?
62. A man foolishly tries to fish a burning piece of brea d from a toaster with a metal butter knife and comes i nto contact with
120-V ac. He does not even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubber-soled shoes. What is the minimum re sistance of the
path the current follows through the person?
63. (a) During surgery, a current as small as 20.0μA applied directly to the heart may cause ventricula r fibrillation. If the
resistance of the exposed heart is 300Ω, what is the smallest voltage that poses this danger?
(b) Does your answer imply that special electrical safety prec autions are needed?
64. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V ac short circuit tha t generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
(b) What would the average power be if the voltage were 120 V ac?

5.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7657565. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a patient’s tors o for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore normal beating.
(a) How much charge passed?
(b) What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was dissip ated?
(c) What was the path’s resistance? (d) Find the temperatu re increase caused in the 8.00 kg of affected tissue.
66. A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a 0.500-Ω resistance. Calculate the temperature rise of the 2.0 0 g of
surrounding materials, assuming their specific heat capacity is 0.200cal/g ⋅°C and that it takes 0.0500 s for a circuit breaker to
interrupt the current. Is this likely to be damaging?
Additional Problems
67. A circuit contains a D cell battery, a switch, a 20-Ω resistor, and four 20-mF capacitors connected in series.
(a) What is the equivalent capacitance of the circuit?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) How long before the current decreases to 50% of the initial value once the switch is closed?
68. A circuit contains a D-cell battery, a switch, a 20-Ω resistor, and three 20-mF capacitors. The capacitors a re connected in
parallel, and the parallel connection of capacitors are c onnected in series with the switch, the resistor and the b attery.
(a) What is the equivalent capacitance of the circuit?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) How long before the current decreases to 50% of the initial value once the switch is closed?
69. Consider the circuit below. The battery has an emf of ε=30.00V and an internal resistance of r=1.00Ω.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit and the c urrent out of the battery.
(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
(e) Find the total power supplied by the batteries.
70. A homemade capacitor is constructed of 2 sheets of al uminum foil with an area of 2.00 square meters, separat ed by paper,
0.05 mm thick, of the same area and a dielectric con stant of 3.7. The homemade capacitor is connected in series with a
100.00-Ω resistor, a switch, and a 6.00-V voltage source.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the initial current through the circuit, when the switch is closed? (c) How long does it take the current to
reach one third of its initial value?

5.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7657571. A student makes a homemade resistor from a graphite pencil 5.00 cm long, where the graphite is 0.05 mm i n diameter.
The resistivity of the graphite is. The homemade resi stor is place in series with a switch, a 10.00-mF
capacitor and a 0.50-V power source.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the potential drop across the pencil 1.00 s af ter the switch is closed?
72. The rather simple circuit shown below is known as a volta ge divider. The symbol consisting of three horizontal lines is
represents “ground” and can be defined as the point wh ere the potential is zero. The voltage divider is widel y used in circuits
and a single voltage source can be used to provide reduced voltage to a load resistor as shown in the s econd part of the
figure. (a) What is the output voltage of circuit
(a) in terms of and?
(b) What is the output voltage of circuit (b) in terms of and?
73. Three 300-Ω resistors are connect in series with an AAA battery wit h a rating of 3 AmpHours. (a) How long can the
battery supply the resistors with power? (b) If the resisto rs are connected in parallel, how long can the battery last?
74. Consider a circuit that consists of a real battery with an emf εε and an internal resistance of r connecte d to a variable
resistor R.
(a) In order for the terminal voltage of the batter y to be equal to the emf of the battery, what should the resistance of
the variable resistor be adjusted to?
(b) In order to get the maximum current from the ba ttery, what should the resistance of the variable res istor be adjusted
to?
(c) In order for the maximum power output of the bat tery to be reached, what should the resistance of the variable
resistor be set to?
75. Consider the circuit shown below. What is the energy stored in each capacitor after the switch has been cl osed for a very
long time?
76. Consider a circuit consisting of a battery with an e mf εε and an internal resistance of r connected in series with a
resistorR and a capacitor C. Show that the total energy suppl ied by the battery while charging the battery is equal to.
77. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal voltage s of the batteries are shown.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit and the c urrent out of the battery.

5.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
(e) Find the total power supplied by the batteries.
78. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) What is the terminal voltage of the battery?
(b) What is the potential drop across resistor?
79. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a)Determine the equivalent resistance and the current fr om the battery with switch open.
(b) Determine the equivalent resistance and the current fr om the battery with switch closed.
80. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 145Ω, are connected in parallel to produce a total resistanc e of 150Ω.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
81. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 900kΩ, are connected in series to produce a total resistan ce of 0.500MΩ.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?

5.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
82. Apply the junction rule at point a shown below.
83. Apply the loop rule to Loop akledcba in the preceding problem.
84. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in the preced ing problem. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
Problem-Solving Strategy: Series and Parallel Resistors.
85. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find the current through each resistor.
(b) Check the calculations by analyzing the power in the ci rcuit.
86. A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on an RC discharge of a capacitor through its resistance. T he effective
duration of the flash is 0.250 s, during which it produce s an average 0.500 W from an average 3.00 V.
(a) What energy does it dissipate?
(b) How much charge moves through the lamp?
(c) Find the capacitance.
(d) What is the resistance of the lamp? (Since avera ge values are given for some quantities, the shape of th e pulse
profile is not needed.)
87. A 160-μF capacitor charged to 450 V is discharged through a 31.2-kΩ resistor.
(a) Find the time constant.

5.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575(b) Calculate the temperature increase of the resis tor, given that its mass is 2.50 g and its specific he at is 1.67kJ/kg ⋅°C,
noting that most of the thermal energy is retained in th e short time of the discharge.
(c) Calculate the new resistance, assuming it is pure carbo n.
(d) Does this change in resistance seem significant?
Challenge Problems
88. Some camera flashes use flash tubes that require a high voltage. They obtain a high voltage by charging cap acitors in
parallel and then internally changing the connectio ns of the capacitors to place them in series. Consider a circuit that uses
four AAA batteries connected in series to charge six 10- mF capacitors through an equivalent resistance of 100Ω. The
connections are then switched internally to place the capacitors in series. The capacitors discharge throug h a lamp with a
resistance of 100Ω.
(a) What is the RC time constant and the initial current out of the batteries while they are connected in parallel?
(b) How long does it take for the capacitors to charge to 90% of the terminal voltages of the batteries?
(c) What is the RC time constant and the initial cur rent of the capacitors connected in series assuming it discharges at
90%90% of full charge?
(d) How long does it take the current to decrease to 10% of the initial value?
89. Consider the circuit shown below. Each battery has an em f of 1.50 V and an internal resistance of 1.00Ω.
(a) What is the current through the external resistor, whic h has a resistance of 10.00 ohms?
(b) What is the terminal voltage of each battery?
90. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially co nsists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a p ointer with
a scale attached. When current runs through the coi l, the pointer turns; the amount the pointer turns i s proportional to the
amount of current running through the coil. Galvanome ters can be used to make an ammeter if a resistor is placed in parallel
with the galvanometer. Consider a galvanometer that ha s a resistance of 25.00Ω and gives a full scale reading when a 50-μA
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be used to make an ammeter that has a full scale readi ng of 10.00 A, as shown
below. Recall that an ammeter is connected in series wi th the circuit of interest, so all 10 A must run through the meter.
(a) What is the current through the parallel resistor in t he meter?
(b) What is the voltage across the parallel resistor?
(c) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?

5.7.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575
91. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially co nsists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a p ointer with
a scale attached. When current runs through the coi l, the point turns; the amount the pointer turns is proportional to the
amount of current running through the coil. Galvanom eters can be used to make a voltmeter if a resistor is placed in series
with the galvanometer. Consider a galvanometer that ha s a resistance of 25.00Ω and gives a full scale reading when a 50-μA
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be u sed to make an voltmeter that has a full scale readi ng of 10.00 V, as
shown below. Recall that a voltmeter is connected in parallel with the component of interest, so the meter must have a high
resistance or it will change the current running through the component.
(a) What is the potential drop across the series resistor i n the meter?
(b) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?
92. Consider the circuit shown below. Find and.

5.7.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575
93. Consider the circuit below.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the initial current in the circuit once the swi tch is closed?
(c) How much time passes between the instant the switch is closed and the time the current has reached half of the
initial current?
94. Consider the circuit below.
(a) What is the initial current through resistor when th e switch is closed?
(b) What is the current through resistor when the capac itor is fully charged, long after the switch is closed?
(c) What happens if the switch is opened after it has be en closed for some time?
(d) If the switch has been closed for a time period l ong enough for the capacitor to become fully charge d, and then the
switch is opened, how long before the current through res istor reaches half of its initial value?
95. Consider the infinitely long chain of resistors shown be low. What is the resistance between terminals a and b?

5.7.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575
96. Consider the circuit below. The capacitor has a capa citance of 10 mF. The switch is closed and after a lon g time the
capacitor is fully charged.
(a) What is the current through each resistor a long time a fter the switch is closed?
(b) What is the voltage across each resistor a long time after the switch is closed?
(c) What is the voltage across the capacitor a long time after the switch is closed?
(d) What is the charge on the capacitor a long time aft er the switch is closed?
(e) The switch is then opened. The capacitor dischar ges through the resistors. How long from the time befor e the
current drops to one fifth of the initial value?
97. A 120-V immersion heater consists of a coil of wire t hat is placed in a cup to boil the water. The heater can boil one cup
of 20.00°C water in 180.00 seconds. You buy one to use in your do rm room, but you are worried that you will overload th e
circuit and trip the 15.00-A, 120-V circuit breaker, whi ch supplies your dorm room. In your dorm room, you ha ve four
100.00-W incandescent lamps and a 1500.00-W space heat er.
(a) What is the power rating of the immersion heater?
(b) Will it trip the breaker when everything is turned on?
(c) If it you replace the incandescent bulbs with 18.00- W LED, will the breaker trip when everything is turned on?
98. Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a 25.0-Ω galvanometer having a 50.0-μA sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a 3000-V full-scale reading. Inc lude a circuit diagram
with your solution.
99. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel wi th a 60.0-Ω galvanometer having a 1.00-mA sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a 25.0-A full-scale reading. Incl ude a circuit diagram
with your solution.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

5.7.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575Practice Answers
Check Your Understanding
1. If a wire is connected across the terminals, the loa d resistance is close to zero, or at least considerabl y less than the internal
resistance of the battery. Since the internal resist ance is small, the current through the circuit will b e large,
.The large current causes a high power to be dissipa ted by the internal resistance. The power is
dissipated as heat.
2. The equivalent resistance of nine bulbs connected i n series is 9R. The current is. If one bulb burns out, the
equivalent resistance is 8R, and the voltage does not change, but the current i ncreases. As more bulbs burn out,
the current becomes even higher. Eventually, the current becomes too high, burning out the shunt.
3. The equivalent of the series circuit would be, which is higher than the equivalent
resistance of the parallel circuit. The equivalent resistor of any number of resistors is always higher t han the
equivalent resistance of the same resistors connected in parallel. The current through for the series ci rcuit would be
, which is lower than the sum of the currents through each resistor in the parallel circuit,. This is
not surprising since the equivalent resistance of the series circuit is higher. The current through a seri es connection of any
number of resistors will always be lower than the curr ent into a parallel connection of the same resistors, s ince the equivalent
resistance of the series circuit will be higher than the parallel circuit. The power dissipated by the resi stors in series would be
, which is lower than the power dissipated in the parallel cir cuit.
4. A river, flowing horizontally at a constant rate, split s in two and flows over two waterfalls. The water molecu les are
analogous to the electrons in the parallel circuits. The number of water molecules that flow in the river and falls must be
equal to the number of molecules that flow over each waterfall, just like sum of the current through each resistor must be
equal to the current flowing into the parallel circu it. The water molecules in the river have energy due to their motion and
height. The potential energy of the water molecules i n the river is constant due to their equal heights. T his is analogous to the
constant change in voltage across a parallel circuit. V o ltage is the potential energy across each resistor.
The analogy quickly breaks down when considering the energy. In the waterfall, the potential energy is con verted into kinetic
energy of the water molecules. In the case of electro ns flowing through a resistor, the potential drop is converted into heat
and light, not into the kinetic energy of the electrons.
5.
1. All the overhead lighting circuits are in parallel and connected to the main supply line, so when one bu lb burns out,
all the overhead lighting does not go dark. Each ov erhead light will have at least one switch in series with the light, so
you can turn it on and off.
2. A refrigerator has a compressor and a light that goes on when the door opens. There is usually only one cord for the
refrigerator to plug into the wall. The circuit cont aining the compressor and the circuit containing the lighting circuit
are in parallel, but there is a switch in series with the light. A thermostat controls a switch that is in se ries with the
compressor to control the temperature of the refrigerat or.
6. The circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s loop r ule. The first voltage source supplies power:. The
second voltage source consumes power:
7. The current calculated would be equal to instead of. The sum of the power dissipated and the power
consumed would still equal the power supplied.
8. Since digital meters require less current than analo g meters, they alter the circuit less than analog me ters. Their resistance
as a voltmeter can be far greater than an analog me ter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far le ss than an analog
meter. Consult Figure 10.36 and Figure 10.35 and their discu ssion in the text.

5.7.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575Conceptual Questions
1. Some of the energy being used to recharge the battery will be dissipated as heat by the internal resistance.
3.
5. It would probably be better to be in series because the cu rrent will be less than if it were in parallel.
7. two filaments, a low resistance and a high resistance, connec ted in parallel
9. It can be redrawn.
11. In series the voltages add, but so do the internal resistances, because the internal resistances are in series. In parallel, the
terminal voltage is the same, but the equivalent int ernal resistance is smaller than the smallest individu al internal resistance
and a higher current can be provided.
13. The voltmeter would put a large resistance in series with the circuit, significantly changing the circuit. It would probably
give a reading, but it would be meaningless.
15. The ammeter has a small resistance; therefore, a larg e current will be produced and could damage the mete r and/or
overheat the battery.
17. The time constant can be shortened by using a smaller resistor and/or a smaller capacitor. Care should b e taken when
reducing the resistance because the initial current will i ncrease as the resistance decreases.
19. Not only might water drip into the switch and cause a shock, but also the resistance of your body is lower wh en you are
wet.
Problems
21. a.
b. 0.476W;
c. 0.691 W;
d. As is lowered, the power difference decreases; therefore, at higher volumes, there is no significant difference.
23. a.;
b. No, there is only one independent equation, so only r can be found.
25. a.;
b. 40.0 W;
c.
27. largest,, smallest,
29. 29.6 W
31. a. 0.74 A;
b. 0.742 A

5.7.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7657533. a. 60.8 W;
b. 3.18 kW
35. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
37. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.
39.
41. a.;
b.;
c.
43.
45. a.
b. 0.617 A;
c. 3.81 W;
d.
47.
49. to

5.7.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7657551. a.;
b. 2.00 s
53. a. 12.3 mA;
b.;
c. 4.53 mA;
d. 3.89 V
55. a.;
b. No, in practice it would not be difficult to limit the capacitance to less than 100 nF, since typical capacitors range
from fractions of a picofarad (pF) to milifarad (mF).
57.
59. 12.0 V
61. 400 V
63. a. 6.00 mV;.
b. It would not be necessary to take extra precaution s regarding the power coming from the wall. However, it is
possible to generate voltages of approximately this v alue from static charge built up on gloves, for insta nce, so some
precautions are necessary.
65. a.;
b. 10.0 kV;
c.;
d.
Additional Problems
67. a.;
b.;
c. 0.069 s
69. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
71. a.;
b.
73. a.;
b.
75.,
77. a.;

5.7.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
79. a.;
b.
81. a.;
b. You cannot have negative resistance.
c. The assumption that is unreasonable. Series resis tance is always greater than any of the individual
resistances.
83.
85. a.;
b.
87. a. 4.99 s;
b.;
c.;
d. No, this change does not seem significant. It probably wo uld not be noticed.
Challenge Problems
89. a. 0.273 A; b.
91. a.;
b.
93. a.;
b. 1.26 A;
c.
95.
97. a.,
b.; Yes, the breaker will trip.
c.; No, the breaker will not trip.
99.

5.7.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76575Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.7: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
10.9: Direct-Current Circuits (Exercise) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
10.10: Direct-Current Circuits (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

5.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765765.S: Summary
Key Terms
ammeter instrument that measures current
electromotive force (emf)energy produced per unit charge, drawn from a source that
produces an electrical current
equivalent resistanceresistance of a combination of resistors; it can be thou ght of as the
resistance of a single resistor that can replace a combi nation of
resistors in a series and/or parallel circuit
internal resistanceamount of resistance to the flow of current within the voltage
source
junction rulesum of all currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all
currents leaving the junction
Kirchhoff’s rulesset of two rules governing current and changes in pote ntial in an
electric circuit
loop rulealgebraic sum of changes in potential around any close d circuit
path (loop) must be zero
potential differencedifference in electric potential between two points in an electric
circuit, measured in volts
potential droploss of electric potential energy as a current travels across a
resistor, wire, or other component
RC circuit circuit that contains both a resistor and a capacitor
shock hazard hazard in which an electric current passes through a pe rson
terminal voltagepotential difference measured across the terminals of a source
when there is no load attached
thermal hazardhazard in which an excessive electric current causes und esired
thermal effects
three-wire systemwiring system used at present for safety reasons, with live, neutral,
and ground wires
voltmeter instrument that measures voltage

5.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76576Key Equations
Terminal voltage of a single voltage source
Equivalent resistance of a series circuit
Equivalent resistance of a parallel circuit
Junction rule
Loop rule
Terminal voltage of N voltage sources in series
Terminal voltage of N voltage sources in parallel
Charge on a charging capacitor
Time constant
Current during charging of a capacitor
Charge on a discharging capacitor
Current during discharging of a capacitor
Summary
Electromotive Force
All voltage sources have two fundamental parts: a source of el ectrical energy that has a characteristic electromotive force (emf),
and an internal resistance r. The emf is the work done per charge to keep the potential difference of a source cons tant. The emf
is equal to the potential difference across the terminals whe n no current is flowing. The internal resistance r of a voltage source
affects the output voltage when a current flows.
The voltage output of a device is called its terminal v oltage and is given by, where I is the electric
current and is positive when flowing away from the positive t erminal of the voltage source and r is the internal resis tance.
Resistors in Series and Parallel
The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit with r esistors wired in a series is the sum of the individual resi stances:
Each resistor in a series circuit has the same amount o f current flowing through it.
The potential drop, or power dissipation, across each ind ividual resistor in a series is different, and their combi ned total is the
power source input.
The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit with r esistors wired in parallel is less than the lowest resistanc e of any of the
components and can be determined using the formula
Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full volt age of the source applied to it.
The current flowing through each resistor in a parallel c ircuit is different, depending on the resistance.
If a more complex connection of resistors is a combinatio n of series and parallel, it can be reduced to a single eq uivalent
resistance by identifying its various parts as series or p arallel, reducing each to its equivalent, and continui ng until a single
resistance is eventually reached.
Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any circuit, simp le or complex. The simpler series and parallel connection rules are
special cases of Kirchhoff’s rules.
Kirchhoff’s first rule, also known as the junction rule, app lies to the charge to a junction. Current is the flow of cha rge; thus,
whatever charge flows into the junction must flow out.

5.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76576Kirchhoff’s second rule, also known as the loop rule, states tha t the voltage drop around a loop is zero.
When calculating potential and current using Kirchhof f’s rules, a set of conventions must be followed for determinin g the
correct signs of various terms.
When multiple voltage sources are in series, their inte rnal resistances add together and their emfs add togeth er to get the total
values.
When multiple voltage sources are in parallel, their int ernal resistances combine to an equivalent resistance that i s less than the
individual resistance and provides a higher current than a si ngle cell.
Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to provide increased voltage or current, respectively.
Electrical Measuring Instruments
V oltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters measure current. Analog meters are based on the combination of a resisto r and a
galvanometer, a device that gives an analog reading of current or voltage. Digital meters are based on analog-to- digital
converters and provide a discrete or digital measureme nt of the current or voltage.
A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage source to receive full voltage and must have a large resistance to limit its effect
on the circuit.
An ammeter is placed in series to get the full current f lowing through a branch and must have a small resistance to limi t its
effect on the circuit.
Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the circuit they are connected to and are thus limited in accuracy.
Ohmmeters are used to measure resistance. The component i n which the resistance is to be measured should be isolated
(removed) from the circuit.
RC Circuits
An RC circuit is one that has both a resistor and a capacitor.
The time constant for an RC circuit is.
When an initially uncharged (at) capacitor in series wi th a resistor is charged by a dc voltage source, the capacito r
asymptotically approaches the maximum charge.
As the charge on the capacitor increases, the current expo nentially decreases from the initial current:.
If a capacitor with an initial charge Q is discharged through a resistor starting at, then its charge decreases exponentially.
The current flows in the opposite direction, compared to whe n it charges, and the magnitude of the charge decreases with time.
Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
The two types of electric hazards are thermal (excessive power) and shock (current through a person). Electrical saf ety systems
and devices are employed to prevent thermal and shock haz ards.
Shock severity is determined by current, path, duration, an d ac frequency.
Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive current s to prevent thermal hazards.
The three-wire system guards against thermal and shock h azards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and ground wires, an d grounding
the neutral wire and case of the appliance.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) prevents shock b y detecting the loss of current to unintentional paths.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.S: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
10.8: Direct-Current Circuits (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and Fields
6.1: Introduction to Magnetism
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
6.6: Ampère’s Law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
6.12: The Hall Effect
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
6.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary)
1.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary)
This page titled 6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and Fields is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765896.1: Introduction to Magnetism
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain attraction and repulsion by magnets
Describe the historical and contemporary applications of magnetism
Magnetism has been known since the time of the ancien t Greeks, but it has always been a bit mysterious. You can see electricity in
the flash of a lightning bolt, but when a compass needl e points to magnetic north, you can’t see any force causing it to rotate.
People learned about magnetic properties gradually, over many years, before several physicists of the nine teenth century connected
magnetism with electricity. In this section, we review the basic ideas of magnetism and describe how they fit i nto the picture of a
magnetic field.
Brief History of Magnetism
Magnets are commonly found in everyday objects, such a s toys, hangers, elevators, doorbells, and computer de vices.
Experimentation on these magnets shows that all magne ts have two poles: One is labeled north (N) and the oth er is labeled south
(S). Magnetic poles repel if they are alike (both N or both S), they attract if they are opposite (one N and the other S), and both
poles of a magnet attract unmagnetized pieces of iron. An important point to note here is that you cannot isolate an individual
magnetic pole. Every piece of a magnet, no matter how small, which contains a north pole must also contain a south p ole.
Visit this website for an interactive demonstration of magnetic north and south poles.
An example of a magnet is a compass needle. It is simply a thin bar magnet suspended at its cent er, so it is free to rotate in a
horizontal plane. Earth itself also acts like a very large bar magnet, with its south-seeking pole near th e geographic North Pole
(Figure). The north pole of a compass is attracted t oward Earth’s geographic North Pole because the magnet ic pole that is near
the geographic North Pole is actually a south magneti c pole. Confusion arises because the geographic term “ North Pole” has come
to be used (incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the North Pole. Thus, “ north magnetic pole ” is actually a misnomer—it
should be called the south magnetic pole. [Note that the orientation of Earth’s magnetic fiel d is not permanent but changes
(“flips”) after long time intervals. Eventually, Earth’s n orth magnetic pole may be located near its geographic Nor th Pole.]Learning Objectives
Note

6.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76589
Figure: The north pole of a compass needle points towa rd the south pole of a magnet, which is how today’s ma gnetic field is
oriented from inside Earth. It also points toward Eart h’s geographic North Pole because the geographic North Pole is near the
magnetic south pole.
Back in 1819, the Danish physicist Hans Oersted was performing a lecture demonstration for some student s and noticed that a
compass needle moved whenever current flowed in a near by wire. Further investigation of this phenomenon con vinced Oersted that
an electric current could somehow cause a magnetic f orce. He reported this finding to an 1820 meeting of the French Academy of
Science.
Soon after this report, Oersted’s investigations were rep eated and expanded upon by other scientists. Among thos e whose work was
especially important were Jean-Baptiste Biot and Felix Savart, who investigated the forces exerted on magnets by c urrents; André
Marie Ampère, who studied the forces exerted by one current on an other; François Arago, who found that iron could be
magnetized by a current; and Humphry Davy, who discovered that a magnet exerts a force on a wir e carrying an electric current.
Within 10 years of Oersted’s discovery, Michael Faraday found that the relative motion of a magnet and a m etallic wire induced
current in the wire. This finding showed not only that a current has a magnetic effect, but that a magnet can generate electric
current. You will see later that the names of Biot, Sav art, Ampère, and Faraday are linked to some of the fun damental laws of
electromagnetism.
The evidence from these various experiments led Ampèr e to propose that electric current is the source of a ll magnetic phenomena.
To explain permanent magnets, he suggested that mat ter contains microscopic current loops that are som ehow aligned when a
material is magnetized. Today, we know that permanent magnets are actually created by the alignment of sp inning electrons, a
situation quite similar to that proposed by Ampère. Th is model of permanent magnets was developed by Ampère almost a century
before the atomic nature of matter was understood. (Fo r a full quantum mechanical treatment of magnetic s pins, see Quantum
Mechanics and Atomic Structure.)
Contemporary Applications of Magnetism
Today, magnetism plays many important roles in our l ives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has enab led the development of
technologies that affect both individuals and socie ty. The electronic tablet in your purse or backpack, for example, wouldn’t have
been possible without the applications of magnetism a nd electricity on a small scale (Figure). Weak chang es in a magnetic
field in a thin film of iron and chromium were disco vered to bring about much larger changes in resistanc e, called giant
magnetoresistance. Information can then be recorded magnetically bas ed on the direction in which the iron layer is magnet ized.
As a result of the discovery of giant magnetoresistance and its applications to digital storage, the 2007 No bel Prize in Physics was
awarded to Albert Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany.

6.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76589
Figure: Engineering technology like computer storage would not be possible without a deep understanding of magnetism.
(credit: Klaus Eifert)
All electric motors—with uses as diverse as powering ref rigerators, starting cars, and moving elevators—cont ain magnets.
Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or r unning bicycle lights, use magnetic fields. Recyclin g facilities employ
magnets to separate iron from other refuse. Research into using magnetic containment of fusion as a futu re energy source has been
continuing for several years. Magnetic resonance imagin g (MRI) has become an important diagnostic tool in the field of medicine,
and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a subject of contemporary research and developme nt. The list of applications
also includes computer hard drives, tape recording, de tection of inhaled asbestos, and levitation of high -speed trains. Magnetism is
involved in the structure of atomic energy levels, as well as the motion of cosmic rays and charged part icles trapped in the Van
Allen belts around Earth. Once again, we see that all the se disparate phenomena are linked by a small number o f underlying
physical principles.
This Chapter
In the preceding chapter, we saw that a moving charged particle produces a magnetic field. This connection between electricity and
magnetism is exploited in electromagnetic devices, such as a computer hard drive. In fact, it is the underly ing principle behind most
of the technology in modern society, including telephones, television, computers, and the internet.
Figure: An external hard drive attached to a comput er works by magnetically encoding information that c an be stored or
retrieved quickly. A key idea in the development of digital devices is the ability to produce and use mag netic fields in this way.
(credit: modification of work by “Miss Karen”/Flickr)
In this chapter, we examine how magnetic fields are cr eated by arbitrary distributions of electric curren t, using the Biot-Savart law.
Then we look at how current-carrying wires create magn etic fields and deduce the forces that arise between two current-carrying
wires due to these magnetic fields. We also study the to rques produced by the magnetic fields of current loo ps. We then generalize
these results to an important law of electromagnetism, cal led Ampère’s law.
We examine some devices that produce magnetic fields from currents in geometries based on loops, known as solenoids and
toroids. Finally, we look at how materials behave in magne tic fields and categorize materials based on their r esponses to magnetic
fields.

6.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76589For the past few chapters, we have been studying electr ostatic forces and fields, which are caused by elect ric charges at rest. These
electric fields can move other free charges, such a s producing a current in a circuit; however, the elect rostatic forces and fields
themselves come from other static charges. In this cha pter, we see that when an electric charge moves, it g enerates other forces and
fields. These additional forces and fields are what we com monly call magnetism.
Figure: An industrial electromagnet is capable of lif ting thousands of pounds of metallic waste. (credit: mo dification of work
by “BedfordAl”/Flickr)
Before we examine the origins of magnetism, we first de scribe what it is and how magnetic fields behave. Once we are more
familiar with magnetic effects, we can explain how the y arise from the behavior of atoms and molecules, an d how magnetism is
related to electricity. The connection between electr icity and magnetism is fascinating from a theoretica l point of view, but it is also
immensely practical, as shown by an industrial electrom agnet that can lift thousands of pounds of metal.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

This page titled 6.1: Introduction to Magnetism is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.2: Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
12.1: Prelude to Sources of Magnetic Fields by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
11.1: Prelude to Magnetic Forces and Fields by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/929846.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the difference between the north and south pole s of a magnet.
Describe how magnetic poles interact with each other.
Define ferromagnet.
Describe the role of magnetic domains in magnetization.
Explain the significance of the Curie temperature.
Describe the relationship between electricity and magnet ism.
Magnets

Figure: Magnets come in various shapes, sizes, and strengt hs. All have both a north pole and a south pole. Ther e is never an
isolated pole (a monopole).

All magnets attract iron, such as that in a refrigerat or door. However, magnets may attract or repel other m agnets. Experimentation
shows that all magnets have two poles. If freely suspe nded, one pole will point toward the north. The two pol es are thus named the
north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole (or more properly, north-seeking and south-seeking pole s, for the attractions in
those directions).
UNIVERSAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAGNETS AND MAGNET POLES
It is a universal characteristic of all magnets that like poles repel and unlike poles attract. (Note the similarity with electrostatics:
unlike charges attract and like charges repel.)
Further experimentation shows that it is impossible to separate north and south poles in the manner that + and − charges can be
separated.
Figure: One end of a bar magnet is suspended from a th read that points toward north. The magnet’s two poles are labeled N
and S for north-seeking and south-seeking poles, respecti vely.
MISCONCEPTION ALERT: EARTH'S GEOGRAPHIC NORTH POLE HIDES AN SLearning Objectives

6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984The Earth acts like a very large bar magnet with its south- seeking pole near the geographic North Pole. That is why the n orth pole
of your compass is attracted toward the geographic nort h pole of the Earth—because the magnetic pole that is near the geographic
North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole! Confusion arise s because the geographic term “North Pole” has come to be used
(incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the Nor th Pole. Thus, “North magnetic pole” is actually a misnome r—it should be
called the South magnetic pole.
Figure: Unlike poles attract, whereas like poles repel.
Figure: North and south poles always occur in pairs. At tempts to separate them result in more pairs of poles. I f we continue to
split the magnet, we will eventually get down to an iron atom with a north pole and a south pole—these, t oo, cannot be separated.
The fact that magnetic poles always occur in pairs o f north and south is true from the very large scale—f or example, sunspots
always occur in pairs that are north and south magneti c poles—all the way down to the very small scale. Magn etic atoms have both
a north pole and a south pole, as do many types of subatomic particles, such as electrons, protons, and neutrons.
We know that like magnetic poles repel and unlike po les attract. See if you can show this for two refrigera tor magnets. Will the
magnets stick if you turn them over? Why do they sti ck to the door anyway? What can you say about the ma gnetic properties
of the door next to the magnet? Do refrigerator magnets st ick to metal or plastic spoons? Do they stick to all types of metal?
Ferromagnets
Only certain materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, exhibit strong magnetic effects. Such materials are called
ferromagnetic, after the Latin word for iron, ferrum. A group of materials made from the alloys of the r are earth elements are also
used as strong and permanent magnets; a popular one is neodymium. Other materials exhibit weak magnetic ef fects, which are
detectable only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic materials respond strongly to magnet s (the way iron is
attracted to magnets), they can also be magnetized themselves—that is, they can be induced to be magnet ic or made into permanent
magnets.MAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT -- REFRIGERATOR MAGNETS

6.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984
Figure: An unmagnetized piece of iron is placed betw een two magnets, heated, and then cooled, or simply t apped when cold.
The iron becomes a permanent magnet with the poles al igned as shown: its south pole is adjacent to the north pole of the original
magnet, and its north pole is adjacent to the south po le of the original magnet. Note that there are attr active forces between the
magnets.
When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagneti zed ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetizat ion of the material
with unlike poles closest, as in Figure. (This results in the attraction of the previously unmagnetized mat erial to the magnet.)
What happens on a microscopic scale is illustrated i n Figure. The regions within the material called dom ains act like small bar
magnets. Within domains, the poles of individual atom s are aligned. Each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet. Domains are small and
randomly oriented in an unmagnetized ferromagnetic object. In response to an external magnetic field, the domains may grow to
millimeter size, aligning themselves as shown in Figure 2b. This induced magnetization can be made permanent if the material is
heated and then cooled, or simply tapped in the presence o f other magnets.
Figure: (a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented domai ns. (b) When
magnetized by an external field, the domains show gre ater alignment, and some grow at the expense of other s. Individual atoms are
aligned within domains; each atom acts like a tiny ba r magnet.
Conversely, a permanent magnet can be demagnetized by hard blows or by heating it in the absence of ano ther magnet. Increased
thermal motion at higher temperature can disrupt and randomize the orientation and the size of the domai ns. There is a well-defined
temperature for ferromagnetic materials, which is call ed the Curie temperature, above which they cannot be magnetized. The Curie
temperature for iron is 1043 K, which is well above ro om temperature. There are several elements and alloys that have
Curie temperatures much lower than room temperature and ar e ferromagnetic only below those temperatures.
Electromagnets
Early in the 19th century, it was discovered that el ectrical currents cause magnetic effects. The first sig nificant observation was by
the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851), who found that a compass needle was deflected by a curre nt-carrying
wire. This was the first significant evidence that the mo vement of charges had any connection with magnets. Ele ctromagnetism is
the use of electric current to make magnets. These t emporarily induced magnets are called electromagnets. Electromagnets are
employed for everything from a wrecking yard crane t hat lifts scrapped cars to controlling the beam of a 90-km-circumference
particle accelerator to the magnets in medical imaging mac hines (Figure).

6.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984
Figure: Instrument for magnetic resonance imaging (MR I). The device uses a superconducting cylindrical coil for the main
magnetic field. The patient goes into this “tunnel” o n the gurney. (credit: Bill McChesney, Flickr)
Figure shows that the response of iron filings to a c urrent-carrying coil and to a permanent bar magnet. The patterns are
similar. In fact, electromagnets and ferromagnets hav e the same basic characteristics—for example, they hav e north and south poles
that cannot be separated and for which like poles repel an d unlike poles attract.
Figure: Iron filings near (a) a current-carrying coi l and (b) a magnet act like tiny compass needles, showi ng the shape of their
fields. Their response to a current-carrying coil and a permanent magnet is seen to be very similar, especial ly near the ends of the
coil and the magnet.
Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can pr oduce particularly strong magnetic effects (Figure). Whenever strong
magnetic effects are needed, such as lifting scrap m etal, or in particle accelerators, electromagnets are enhanced by ferromagnetic
materials. Limits to how strong the magnets can be mad e are imposed by coil resistance (it will overheat an d melt at sufficiently
high current), and so superconducting magnets may be employed. These are still limited, because supercon ducting properties are
destroyed by too great a magnetic field.

6.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984
Figure: An electromagnet with a ferromagnetic core can produce very strong magnetic effects. Alignment o f domains in the
core produces a magnet, the poles of which are aligne d with the electromagnet.
Figure shows a few uses of combinations of electromagn ets and ferromagnets. Ferromagnetic materials can act as memory
devices, because the orientation of the magnetic fie lds of small domains can be reversed or erased. Magne tic information storage
on videotapes and computer hard drives are among the m ost common applications. This property is vital in our dig ital world.
Figure: An electromagnet induces regions of permanent magnetism on a floppy disk coated with a ferromagnet ic material. The
information stored here is digital (a region is either magnetic or not); in other applications, it can be analog (with a varying
strength), such as on audiotapes.

6.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984Current: The Source of All Magnetism
An electromagnet creates magnetism with an electric cu rrent. In later sections we explore this more quantitat ively, finding the
strength and direction of magnetic fields created b y various currents. But what about ferromagnets? Figure shows models of
how electric currents create magnetism at the submicr oscopic level. (Note that we cannot directly observe th e paths of individual
electrons about atoms, and so a model or visual image, consistent with all direct observations, is made. We can directly observe the
electron’s orbital angular momentum, its spin moment um, and subsequent magnetic moments, all of which are e xplained with
electric-current-creating subatomic magnetism.) Curr ents, including those associated with other submicros copic particles like
protons, allow us to explain ferromagnetism and all o ther magnetic effects. Ferromagnetism, for example, results from an internal
cooperative alignment of electron spins, possible in some materials but not in others.
Crucial to the statement that electric current is th e source of all magnetism is the fact that it is impo ssible to separate north and
south magnetic poles. (This is far different from th e case of positive and negative charges, which are e asily separated.) A current
loop always produces a magnetic dipole—that is, a ma gnetic field that acts like a north pole and south p ole pair. Since isolated
north and south magnetic poles, called magnetic monop oles, are not observed, currents are used to explain all magnetic effects. If
magnetic monopoles did exist, then we would have to mo dify this underlying connection that all magnetism is due to electrical
current. There is no known reason that magnetic monopo les should not exist—they are simply never observed— and so searches at
the subnuclear level continue. If they do not exist, we would like to find out why not. If they do exist, we would like to see
evidence of them.
Electric current is the source of all magnetism.
Figure: (a) In the planetary model of the atom, an electron orbits a nucleus, forming a closed-current lo op and producing a
magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. (b) Electrons have spin and can be crudely pictured as rotating charge, forming a
current that produces a magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. Neither the planetary model n or the image of a spinning
electron is completely consistent with modern physics. H owever, they do provide a useful way of understanding phenomena.
Explore the interactions between a compass and bar magnet. Discover how you can use a battery and wire to make a magnet!
Can you make it a stronger magnet? Can you make the magne tic field reverse?
Magnetic Materials
At last we can discuss elements of magnetism that we have been aware of since we were young kids – the propertie s and behavior
of bar magnets. As with any phenomenon that requires an understanding of what is going on at a microscopic leve l, magnetism
inside of materials like bar magnets is very compli cated. We’ll look at a greatly-simplified version o f it here, but keep in mind that
a fuller understanding can only be achieved through quan tum theory.
We now know that there are no “magnetic particles” co mprising a bar magnet – its magnetic field can only be created by moving
charges. But unlike an electromagnet, bar magnets ar e not plugged into some emf source, so where does the moving charge come
from? The atoms that comprise the material of course include lots of charges, and these charges are moving in manners that
resemble magnetic dipoles – electrons are orbiting n uclei in more-or-less circular loops, and electrons al so have a quantummechanical property called “spin” that gives them their own magnetic moments as well.ELECTRIC CURRENTS AND MAGNETISM
PHET EXPLORATIONS: MAGNETS AND ELECTROMAGNETS

6.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984We will not concern ourselves too much with the specif ic source of the magnetic moments of these particle s, but we will instead
just focus on the fact that each particle has its own magnetic moment. In the case of a bar magnet, these dipoles tend to be
permanently aligned. This property is called ferromagnetism. Only a few materials have this property: iron (thus “ferro”), nickel,
cobalt, many of their alloys, and some of the rare ear th metals. [Technically, these alignments occur in chunks, called “domains,”
within the magnet, and the degree to which the magnet is magnetized is determined by how much certain domains “swallow-up”
others, creating more broadly-coordinated alignments of dipol es.]
Figure 4.4.7 – Dipoles in a Bar Magnet
It should be clear how two bar magnets attract each o ther. One is a magnetic field source, and the other is a magnetic dipole that
experiences the non-uniform field of the other. The field diverges as it emerges from one magnet, and th e dipole of the other
magnet, if the poles are aligned, reacts by feeling a force in the direction where the field gets stronger, following the mechanism
depicted in Figure 4.2.6.
But this doesn’t explain why a magnet sticks to a refr igerator when the refrigerator metal is not itself m agnetized. The answer is
that some metals, while their particle dipole moment s are not permanently aligned, have the property tha t their particles are free to
rotate their magnetic moments. When an external fiel d is applied, their particles then align, making th em magnetized. When the
field is removed, the random alignments return. This prop erty is known as paramagnetism.
A few general comments to close this subject:
Ferromagnetism relies primarily upon the spin source of ma gnetic moment, and very little on the orbital source, while
paramagnetism relies upon both.
Ferromagnetic materials remain magnetized after a stro ng applied magnetic field aligns the domains, which remain aligned
thanks to anomalies in the crystal structure which “snag” th e domains and hold them in an aligned orientation.
Ferromagnets can be demagnetized (“degaussed”) by relievin g these snags. This is most easily done by raising the temper ature
to a critical temperature known as the Curie temperature, at which magnetic domain "snags” are no longer possible and the
substance has zero ferromagnetism. Other methods for degau ssing include applying rapidly-changing magnetic field s (which
“shake” the domains into random orientations) and poun ding on the magnet so that vibrations cause the domains t o un-snag.

Summary
Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
All magnetism is created by electric current.
Ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, are those that exhibi t strong magnetic effects.

6.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92984The atoms in ferromagnetic materials act like small ma gnets (due to currents within the atoms) and can be aligne d, usually in
millimeter-sized regions called domains.
Domains can grow and align on a larger scale, producing perm anent magnets. Such a material is magnetized, or induced to be
magnetic.
Above a material’s Curie temperature, thermal agitation destroys the alignment of atoms, and ferromagnetism dis appears.
Electromagnets employ electric currents to make magnet ic fields, often aided by induced fields in ferromagnetic materials.
Glossary
ferromagnetic
materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, that exhibit strong magnetic effects
magnetized
to be turned into a magnet; to be induced to be magnetic
domains
regions within a material that behave like small bar magnet s
Curie temperature
the temperature above which a ferromagnetic material cannot be magnetized
electromagnetism
the use of electrical currents to induce magnetism
electromagnet
an object that is temporarily magnetic when an electrical current is passed through it
magnetic monopoles
an isolated magnetic pole; a south pole without a north pol e, or vice versa (no magnetic monopole has ever been obser ved)

Summary
Magnetism is a subject that includes the properties of mag nets, the effect of the magnetic force on moving charge s and currents,
and the creation of magnetic fields by currents.
There are two types of magnetic poles, called the north ma gnetic pole and south magnetic pole.
North magnetic poles are those that are attracted toward the E arth’s geographic north pole.
Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
Glossary
north magnetic pole
the end or the side of a magnet that is attracted toward Earth’ s geographic north pole
south magnetic pole
the end or the side of a magnet that is attracted toward Earth’ s geographic south pole
This page titled 6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.2: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.
22.1: Magnets by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

6.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/929844.4: Sources of Magnetic Fields by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

6.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765916.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the magnetic field based on a moving charge exper iencing a force
Apply the right-hand rule to determine the direction of a magnetic force based on the motion of a charge in a ma gnetic field
Sketch magnetic field lines to understand which way the mag netic field points and how strong it is in a region of spa ce
We have outlined the properties of magnets, describ ed how they behave, and listed some of the applicatio ns of magnetic properties.
Even though there are no such things as isolated mag netic charges, we can still define the attraction and repulsion of magnets as
based on a field. In this section, we define the magne tic field, determine its direction based on the righ t-hand rule, and discuss how
to draw magnetic field lines.
Defining the Magnetic Field
A magnetic field is defined by the force that a cha rged particle experiences moving in this field, afte r we account for the
gravitational and any additional electric forces po ssible on the charge. The magnitude of this force is proportional to the amount of
charge q, the speed of the charged particle v, and the magnitude of the applied magnetic field. The direction of this force is
perpendicular to both the direction of the moving c harged particle and the direction of the applied ma gnetic field. Based on these
observations, we define the magnetic field strength B based on the magnetic force on a charge q moving at velocity as the cross
product of the velocity and magnetic field, that is,
In fact, this is how we define the magnetic field - in terms of the force on a charged particle moving in a magnetic field. The
magnitude of the force is determined from the defin ition of the cross product as it relates to the magn itudes of each of the vectors.
In other words, the magnitude of the force satisfies
where θ is the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength is called th e tesla (T) after the eccentric, but brilliant invent or Nikola Tesla (1856–1943),
where
A smaller unit, called the gauss (G) is sometimes used, where
The strongest permanent magnets have fields near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or m ore. Earth’s magnetic
field on its surface is only about or.
The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicula r to the plane formed by and as determined by the right-hand rule-1
(or RHR-1), which is illustrated in Figure.
1. Orient your right hand so that your fingers curl in the pl ane defined by the velocity and magnetic field vectors.
2. Using your right hand, sweep from the velocity toward the m agnetic field with your fingers through the smallest angle
possible.
3. The magnetic force is directed where your thumb is pointi ng.
4. If the charge was negative, reverse the direction foun d by these steps.Learning Objectives
Problem-Solving Strategy: Direction of the Magnetic Field by the Right-Hand Rule

6.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76591
Figure: Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charge s. The direction of the magnetic force on a moving c harge is
perpendicular to the plane formed by b and and fol lows the right-hand rule-1 (RHR-1) as shown. The magni tude of the
force is proportional to and the sine of the angle b etween and.
Visit this website for additional practice with the direction of magnetic fields.
There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on charges moving at an a ngle to a magnetic field.
When charges are stationary, their electric fields do not affect magnets. However, when charges move, they produce mag netic fields
that exert forces on other magnets. When there is re lative motion, a connection between electric and magn etic forces emerges each affects the other.
An alpha-particle moves through a uniform magnetic field whose magnitude is 1.5 T. The field is directly
parallel to the positive z-axis of the rectangular coordinate system of Figure. What is the magnetic force on the alphaparticle when it is moving (a) in the positive x-direction with a speed of? (b) in the negative y-direction with a
speed of? (c) in the positive z-direction with a speed of? (d) with a velocity
?Note
Example: An Alpha-Particle Moving in a Magnetic Field

6.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76591
Figure: The magnetic forces on an alpha-particle mov ing in a uniform magnetic field. The field is the sam e in each
drawing, but the velocity is different.
Strategy
We are given the charge, its velocity, and the magneti c field strength and direction. We can thus use the eq uation or
to calculate the force. The direction of the force is de termined by RHR-1.
Solution
1. First, to determine the direction, start with your finger s pointing in the positive x-direction. Sweep your fingers upward in
the direction of magnetic field. Your thumb should poin t in the negative y-direction. This should match the mathematical
answer. To calculate the force, we use the given charge, vel ocity, and magnetic field and the definition of the ma gnetic force
in cross-product form to calculate:
2. First, to determine the directionality, start with your fingers pointing in the negative y-direction. Sweep your fingers upward
in the direction of magnetic field as in the previous p roblem. Your thumb should be open in the negative x-direction. This
should match the mathematical answer. To calculate the fo rce, we use the given charge, velocity, and magnetic field and the
definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:
An alternative approach is to use Equation to find th e magnitude of the force. This applies for both parts (a) a nd (b).
Since the velocity is perpendicular to the magnetic fiel d, the angle between them is 90 degrees. Therefore, the magn itude of
the force is:

6.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765913. Since the velocity and magnetic field are parallel to e ach other, there is no orientation of your hand that will result in a force
direction. Therefore, the force on this moving charge is zero. This is confirmed by the cross product. When you cross two
vectors pointing in the same direction, the result is equal to zero.
4. First, to determine the direction, your fingers could poi nt in any orientation; however, you must sweep your fingers up ward
in the direction of the magnetic field. As you rotate your hand, notice that the thumb can point in any x- or y-direction
possible, but not in the z-direction. This should match the mathematical answer. To calculate the force, we use the given
charge, velocity, and magnetic field and the definition o f the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:
This solution can be rewritten in terms of a magnitude and angle in the xy-plane:
The magnitude of the force can also be calculated using Equation. The velocity in this question, however, ha s three
components. The z-component of the velocity can be neglected, because it is parallel to the magnetic field and therefore
generates no force. The magnitude of the velocity is cal culated from the x- and y-components. The angle between the
velocity in the xy-plane and the magnetic field in the z-plane is 90 degrees. Therefore, the force is calculated to be:
This is the same magnitude of force calculated by unit vecto rs.
Significance
The cross product in this formula results in a third vector that must be perpendicular to the other two. Ot her physical quantities,
such as angular momentum, also have three vectors th at are related by the cross product. Note that typic al force values in magnetic
force problems are much larger than the gravitation al force. Therefore, for an isolated charge, the mag netic force is the dominant
force governing the charge’s motion.
Repeat the previous problem with the magnetic field in the x-direction rather than in the z-direction. Check your answers with
RHR-1.
Answer a
0 N
Answer b
Answer c
Answer dExercise

6.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76591Representing Magnetic Fields
The representation of magnetic fields by magnetic field lines is very useful in visualizing the strength and dire ction of the
magnetic field. As shown in Figure, each of these line s forms a closed loop, even if not shown by the const raints of the space
available for the figure. The field lines emerge fr om the north pole (N), loop around to the south pole (S), and continue through the
bar magnet back to the north pole.
Magnetic field lines have several hard-and-fast rules:
1. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the fi eld line at any point in space. A small compass will poin t in the direction
of the field line.
2. The strength of the field is proportional to the clo seness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the nu mber of lines per unit
area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal densi ty).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the f ield is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without a beginning or end. They are directed from the nort h pole to
the south pole.
The last property is related to the fact that the n orth and south poles cannot be separated. It is a dis tinct difference from electric
field lines, which generally begin on positive charg es and end on negative charges or at infinity. If isola ted magnetic charges
(referred to as magnetic monopoles) existed, then magnetic field lines would begin and end on them.
Figure: Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction in which a small compass points when placed at a location in the
field. The strength of the field is proportional to t he closeness (or density) of the lines. If the interior of the magnet could be probed,
the field lines would be found to form continuous, cl osed loops. To fit in a reasonable space, some of these d rawings may not show
the closing of the loops; however, if enough space wer e provided, the loops would be closed.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

6.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766026.4: The Biot-Savart Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how to derive a magnetic field from an arbitrar y current in a line segment
Calculate magnetic field from the Biot-Savart law in spec ific geometries, such as a current in a line and a current in a
circular arc
Explain how the Biot-Savart law is used to determine the mag netic field due to a thin, straight wire.
Determine the dependence of the magnetic field from a t hin, straight wire based on the distance from it and the cu rrent
flowing in the wire.
Sketch the magnetic field created from a thin, straight wir e by using the second right-hand rule.
Explain how parallel wires carrying currents can attract or repel each other
Define the ampere and describe how it is related to current -carrying wires
Calculate the force of attraction or repulsion between t wo current-carrying wires
Biot-Savart Law
We have seen that mass produces a gravitational fiel d and also interacts with that field. Charge produces a n electric field and also
interacts with that field. Since moving charge (that is, current) interacts with a magnetic field, we might expect that it also creates
that field—and it does.
Figure: A current element produces a magnetic field at point given by the Biot-Savart law (Equation).
The equation used to calculate the magnetic field pr oduced by a current is known as the Biot-Savart law. I t is an empirical law
named in honor of two scientists who investigated the i nteraction between a straight, current-carrying wire a nd a permanent
magnet. This law enables us to calculate the magnitud e and direction of the magnetic field produced by a current in a wire. The
Biot-Savart law states that at any point (Figure), the magnetic fi eld due to an element of a current-carrying wire i s
given by
The constant is known as the permeability of free space and is exactly
in the SI system. The infinitesimal wire segment is in the same direction as the current (assumed positive), is the distance
from to and is a unit vector that points from t o, as shown in Figure. The direction of is determin ed by applying
the right-hand rule to the vector product. The magnitud e of is
where is the angle between and. Notice that if, th en. The field produced by a current element has n o
component parallel to.Learning Objectives

6.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602The magnetic field due to a finite length of curren t-carrying wire is found by integrating Equation al ong the wire, giving us
the usual form of the Biot-Savart law.
The magnetic field due to an element of a current-ca rrying wire is given by
Since this is a vector integral, contributions from di fferent current elements may not point in the same d irection. Consequently, the
integral is often difficult to evaluate, even for fairly simple geometries. The following strategy may be helpfu l.
To solve Biot-Savart law problems, the following steps are hel pful:
1. Identify that the Biot-Savart law is the chosen method to solve the given problem. If there is symmetry in the p roblem
comparing and, Ampère’s law may be the preferred method t o solve the question.
2. Draw the current element length and the unit vector not ing that points in the direction of the current and points
from the current element toward the point where the field is desired.
3. Calculate the cross product.The resultant vector give s the direction of the magnetic field according to the Biot-Savart
law.
4. Use Equation and substitute all given quantities into the expression to solve for the magnetic field. Note all variables
that remain constant over the entire length of the wire m ay be factored out of the integration.
5. Use the right-hand rule to verify the direction of the magnetic field produced from the current or to write down t he direction
of the magnetic field if only the magnitude was solved for in the previous part.
Biot-Savart Law for a Charge
The section above provided the equation used to calc ulate the magnetic field produced by a current. A c harge moving with a
velocity also produces a magnetic field. The equati on providing the magnitude and direction of the mag netic field produced by
the charge is also called Biot-Savart law. It states that at any point (Figure), the magnetic field due to a charge moving
with a velocity is given by
Figure: A charge moving with a velocity produces a magnetic field at point given by the Biot-Savart l aw (Equation).

Magnetic Field of a Long Straight Wire
We begin by computing the field of a long-straight wire that carries a current. Aside from the vectors, th e procedure follows
almost exactly the same path as the case of the electric field of a long line of charge.Biot-Savart law
Problem-Solving Strategy: Solving Biot-Savart Problems

6.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602
Figure: – Calculating Magnetic Field of Long, Straight Wire
One of the key differences between computing magnetic fields and electric fields is that while we were able to use symmetry to
help us solve for components of the electric field, in the case of the magnetic field, this is much harder to do, and is much safer to
just get all the vectors right and trust vector math thereafter. We could have used this "trust the vecto r math" approach for the
electric field as well, of course, but the necessity of usin g it in cases where cross-products are involved becomes q uickly apparent.
Okay, we start by expressing all the relevant quantities in terms of our chosen coordinate system:
Next, write down Biot-Savart's law for the current element, an d simplify:
All that remains is to add up the contributions to the field from all the current elements, which means int egrating this from
to:

6.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602The resemblance the magnitude of this field bears to that of the electric field (Equation 1.5.2) is interesting, though not all that
surprising, given that both fields weaken with distance from the source according to an inverse-square law. The direction of the
magnetic field vector is tangent to a circle centered a t the line of the current, and circles around the current lin e.

Figure: – Magnetic Field Circulates Around the Long, Straight Wire
As with the electric field, the magnetic field obeys sup erposition, which means we can combine the result of thi s physical situation
with others to get a net magnetic field. It is also worth noting that both the moving point charge and the lo ng, straight wire yield
magnetic fields whose line close back on themselves (form closed loops) – in nether case does a field eman ate out of or into the
source. There are no magnetic monopole fields.
Magnetic Field of a Long Straight Wire
How much current is needed to produce a significant m agnetic field, perhaps as strong as Earth’s field? Su rveyors will tell you that
overhead electric power lines create magnetic fields that interfere with their compass readings. Indeed, when Oersted discovered in
1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass nee dle, he was not dealing with extremely large currents. How does the shape of
wires carrying current affect the shape of the magne tic field created? We noted in Chapter 28 that a cu rrent loop created a magnetic
field similar to that of a bar magnet, but what abou t a straight wire? We can use the Biot-Savart law to answer all of these
questions, including determining the magnetic field of a long straight wire.
Figure shows a section of an infinitely long, straight wire that carries a current I. What is the magnetic field at a point P,
located a distance R from the wire?

6.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602
Figure: A section of a thin, straight current-carryin g wire. The independent variable has the limits and.
Let’s begin by considering the magnetic field due t o the current element located at the position x. Using the right-hand rule 1
from the previous chapter, points out of the page for any element along the wire. At point, therefore, t he magnetic fields
due to all current elements have the same direction. T his means that we can calculate the net field there by evaluating the scalar
sum of the contributions of the elements. With
we have from the Biot-Savart law
The wire is symmetrical about point, so we can set th e limits of the integration from zero to infinity an d double the answer, rather
than integrate from negative infinity to positive in finity. Based on the picture and trigonometry, we can write expressions for and
in terms of x and R, namely:
Substituting these expressions into Equation, the magneti c field integration becomes
Evaluating the integral yields
Substituting the limits gives us the solution
The magnetic field lines of the infinite wire are cir cular and centered at the wire (Figure), and they are identical in every plane
perpendicular to the wire. Since the field decreases wi th distance from the wire, the spacing of the field lines must increase
correspondingly with distance. The direction of this m agnetic field may be found with a second form of the right-hand rule
(Figure). If you hold the wire with your right hand so that your thumb points along the current, then your fingers wrap around
the wire in the same sense as.

6.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602
Figure:. Some magnetic field lines of an infin ite wire. The direction of can be found with a for m of the right-hand rule.

The direction of the field lines can be observed ex perimentally by placing several small compass needle s on a circle near the wire,
as illustrated in Figure. When there is no current in the wire, the needles align with Earth’s magnetic f ield. However, when a
large current is sent through the wire, the compass needles all point tangent to the circle. Iron filing s sprinkled on a horizontal
surface also delineate the field lines, as shown in Figur e.
Figure: The shape of the magnetic field lines of a lo ng wire can be seen using (a) small compass needles and (b) iron filings.
Examples
A short wire of length 1.0 cm carries a current of 2.0 A in the vertical direction (Figure). The rest of th e wire is shielded so
it does not add to the magnetic field produced by th e wire. Calculate the magnetic field at point P, which is 1 meter from the
wire in the x-direction.
Figure: A small line segment carries a current in the vertical direction. What is the magnetic field at a distance x from
the segment?Example: Calculating Magnetic Fields of Short Current Segments

6.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602Strategy
We can determine the magnetic field at point using the Biot-Savart law. Since the current segment is much smaller than
the distance x, we can drop the integral from the expression. The i ntegration is converted back into a summation, but on ly
for small, which we now write as. Another way to think about it is that each of the radius values is nearly the same, no
matter where the current element is on the line segme nt, if is small compared to x. The angle is calculated using a
tangent function. Using the numbers given, we can calculat e the magnetic field at.
Solution
The angle between and is calculated from trigonomet ry, knowing the distances l and x from the problem:
The magnetic field at point is calculated by the Biot -Savart law (Equation):
From the right-hand rule and the Biot-Savart law, the fie ld is directed into the page.
Significance
This approximation is only good if the length of the line segment is very small compared to the distance from the
current element to the point. If not, the integral fo rm of the Biot-Savart law must be used over the entir e line segment to
calculate the magnetic field.
Using Example, at what distance would P have to be to measure a magnetic field half of the given a nswer?
Answer
1.41 meters
A wire carries a current I in a circular arc with radius R swept through an arbitrary angle (Figure). Calculat e the
magnetic field at the center of this arc at point P.
Figure: A wire segment carrying a current I. The path and radial direction are indicated.
Strategy
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law. The radial and path leng th directions are always
at a right angle, so the cross product turns into mul tiplication. We also know that the distance along the path dl is related to
the radius times the angle (in radians). Then we can p ull all constants out of the integration and solve f or the magnetic
field.Exercise
Example: Calculating Magnetic Field of a Circular Arc of Wire

6.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602Solution
The Biot-Savart law starts with the following equation:
As we integrate along the arc, all the contributions to the magnetic field are in the same direction (out o f the page), so
we can work with the magnitude of the field. The cross p roduct turns into multiplication because the path and the
radial direction are perpendicular. We can also substitute the arc length formula,:
The current and radius can be pulled out of the int egral because they are the same regardless of where we are on the
path. This leaves only the integral over the angle,
The angle varies on the wire from 0 to; hence, the result i s
Significance
The direction of the magnetic field at point is de termined by the right-hand rule, as shown in the prev ious chapter. If
there are other wires in the diagram along with the a rc, and you are asked to find the net magnetic field, find each
contribution from a wire or arc and add the results b y superposition of vectors. Make sure to pay attention t o the
direction of each contribution. Also note that in a sy mmetric situation, like a straight or circular wire, contributions from
opposite sides of point cancel each other.
The wire loop forms a full circle of radius R and current I. What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the cen ter?
Answer
Three wires sit at the corners of a square, all carryin g currents of 2 amps into the page as shown in Figure. Calculate the
magnitude of the magnetic field at the other corner of t he square, point P, if the length of each side of the square is 1 cm.
Figure: Three wires have current flowing into the page. The magnetic field is determined at the f ourth corner of the
square.
Strategy
The magnetic field due to each wire at the desired p oint is calculated. The diagonal distance is calculate d using the
Pythagorean theorem. Next, the direction of each magn etic field’s contribution is determined by drawing a circle centeredExercise
Example: Calculating Magnetic Field Due to Three Wires

6.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602at the point of the wire and out toward the desired po int. The direction of the magnetic field contributi on from that wire is
tangential to the curve. Lastly, working with these vector s, the resultant is calculated.
Solution
Wires 1 and 3 both have the same magnitude of magnetic fi eld contribution at point P:
Wire 2 has a longer distance and a magnetic field contri bution at point P of:
The vectors for each of these magnetic field contributi ons are shown.
The magnetic field in the x-direction has contributions from wire 3 and the x-component of wire 2:
The y-component is similarly the contributions from wire 1 and th e y-component of wire 2:
Therefore, the net magnetic field is the resultant of the se two components:
Significance
The geometry in this problem results in the magnetic field contributions in the x- and y-directions having the same
magnitude. This is not necessarily the case if the c urrents were different values or if the wires were loca ted in different
positions. Regardless of the numerical results, working o n the components of the vectors will yield the resul ting
magnetic field at the point in need.
Using Example, keeping the currents the same i n wires 1 and 3, what should the current be in wire 2 to counteract the
magnetic fields from wires 1 and 3 so that there is no net mag netic field at point?
Answer
4 amps flowing out of the pageExercise

6.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, hav e a current of magnitude 5.0 mA. The first wire is locate d at (0.0 cm, 3.0
cm) while the other wire is located at (4.0 cm, 0.0 cm) as shown in Figure. What is the magnetic force per un it length of
the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first?
Figure: Two current-carrying wires at given location s with currents out of the page.
Strategy
Each wire produces a magnetic field felt by the othe r wire. The distance along the hypotenuse of the triang le between the
wires is the radial distance used in the calculation t o determine the force per unit length. Since both wir es have currents
flowing in the same direction, the direction of the force is toward each other.
Solution
The distance between the wires results from finding the h ypotenuse of a triangle:
The force per unit length can then be calculated using the known currents in the wires:
The force from the first wire pulls the second wire. T he angle between the radius and the x-axis is
The unit vector for this is calculated by
Therefore, the force per unit length from wire one on wire 2 is
The force per unit length from wire 2 on wire 1 is the negat ive of the previous answer:
Significance
These wires produced magnetic fields of equal magnitud e but opposite directions at each other’s locations. Whether the
fields are identical or not, the forces that the wir es exert on each other are always equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction (Newton’s third law).
Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, hav e a current of magnitude 2.0 mA and 3.0 mA, respectiv ely. The first wire
is located at (0.0 cm, 5.0 cm) while the other wire is located at (12.0 cm, 0.0 cm). What is the magnitude of the magnetic force
per unit length of the first wire on the second and the secon d wire on the first?Example: Calculating Forces on Wires
Exercise

6.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76602Answer
Both have a force per unit length of
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

This page titled 6.4: The Biot-Savart Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.2: The Biot-Savart Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
12.3: Magnetic Field due to a Thin Straight Wire by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
12.4: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
4.4: Sources of Magnetic Fields by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

6.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766056.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how the Biot-Savart law is used to determine the mag netic field due to a current in a loop of wire at a point al ong a
line perpendicular to the plane of the loop.
Determine the magnetic field of an arc of current.
The circular loop of Figure has a radius R, carries a current I, and lies in the xz-plane. What is the magnetic field due to the
current at an arbitrary point P along the axis of the loop?
Figure: Determining the magnetic field at point P along the axis of a current-carrying loop of wire.
We can use the Biot-Savart law to find the magnetic f ield due to a current. We first consider arbitrary se gments on opposite sides of
the loop to qualitatively show by the vector results that the net magnetic field direction is along the central ax is from the loop. From
there, we can use the Biot-Savart law to derive the expression for magnetic field.
Let P be a distance y from the center of the loop. From the right-hand rul e, the magnetic field at P, produced by the current
element is directed at an angle above the y-axis as shown. Since is parallel along the x-axis and is in the yz-plane, the
two vectors are perpendicular, so we have
where we have used.
Now consider the magnetic field due to the current e lement, which is directly opposite on the loop. The m agnitude of
is also given by Equation, but it is directed at a n angle below the y-axis. The components of and perpendicular
to the y-axis therefore cancel, and in calculating the net m agnetic field, only the components along the y-axis need to be
considered. The components perpendicular to the axis o f the loop sum to zero in pairs. Hence at point P:Learning Objectives

6.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76605For all elements on the wire, y, R, and are constant and are related by
Now from Equation, the magnetic field at P is
where we have used. As discussed in the previous chap ter, the closed current loop is a magnetic dipole of moment
. For this example, and, so the magnetic field at P can also be written as
By setting in Equation, we obtain the magnetic field at the center of the loop:
This equation becomes for a flat coil of n loops per length. It can also be expressed as
If we consider in Equation, the expression reduces to an expression known as the magnetic field from a dipole:
The calculation of the magnetic field due to the ci rcular current loop at points off-axis requires rath er complex mathematics, so
we’ll just look at the results. The magnetic field lin es are shaped as shown in Figure. Notice that one field line follows the axis
of the loop. This is the field line we just found. Also, very close to the wire, the field lines are almost cir cular, like the lines of a
long straight wire.
Figure: Sketch of the magnetic field lines of a circu lar current loop.
Two loops of wire carry the same current of 10 mA, but flow in opposite directions as seen in Figure. One lo op is
measured to have a radius of while the other loop h as a radius of. The distance from the first loop to theNote
Magnetic Field between Two Loops

6.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76605point where the magnetic field is measured is 0.25 m, a nd the distance from that point to the second loop i s 0.75 m. What is the
magnitude of the net magnetic field at point P?
Figure: Two loops of different radii have the same cu rrent but flowing in opposite directions. The magneti c field at point
P is measured to be zero.
Strategy
The magnetic field at point P has been determined in Equation. Since the current s are flowing in opposite directions, the
net magnetic field is the difference between the two f ields generated by the coils. Using the given quantit ies in the problem, the
net magnetic field is then calculated.
Solution
Solving for the net magnetic field using Equation and t he given quantities in the problem yields
to the right.
Significance
Helmholtz coils typically have loops with equal radii with current flowing in the same direction to have a strong uniform field
at the midpoint between the loops. A similar applicati on of the magnetic field distribution created by Hel mholtz coils is found
in a magnetic bottle that can temporarily trap charged pa rticles. See Magnetic Forces and Fields for a discussion on this.
Using Example, at what distance would you have to move t he first coil to have zero measurable magnetic field at p oint P?
Solution
0.608 metersExercise

6.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76605Field of a Loop
Another useful field to know is that which points alon g the axis of a circular loop of current. The method i s essentially the same as
above, but the coordinate system used is different, which lea ds to a little bit more complicated vector manipulati on.
Figure 4.4.3 – Calculating Magnetic Field on the Axis of a Circular Lo op of Current
Again start by expressing quantities in terms of the c oordinates we have set up. We can again write everythi ng in terms of the
unit vectors, but this time we can do it a bit differently. First we have the magnitude of the segment of wire:
Next we note that tail-to-head vector addition gives:
Biot-Savart's law gives:
Before we can integrate, we have to resolve the vector products. Looking at the diagram, we can see that the current element, the
position vector of the current element, and the un it vector are all mutually orthogonal, making par allel to, and
parallel to. This allows us to use the right-hand rule to com plete these products:
Putting this result into the integral and noting tha t magnitudes of the vectors and are constant in th e integral, and satisfy
, we get:
While the magnitude of doesn't change over the int egral, its direction does change, so we have to write the unit vector in terms
of the coordinates to do the integral of the second term. Let's do each integral separately. The first is straightforward, since the
integral of just is simply the circumference of the circle:

6.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76605The second integral just ends up vanishing, giving t he result for a magnetic field along the axis of a loop of radius a distance
from the plane of the loop:
If we are only interested in the field at the center of the loop, we plug in to get the simple result:
The direction of shows us yet another shortcut for us ing the right-hand-rule for the field along the axi s (and only along the axis!)
of a loop: Curl the fingers of the right hand such that they trace the circulation of the current aroun d the loop, and the thumb points
the direction of the field.
We have already talked about a loop as a magnetic di pole which interacts with fields that are present, and here (as in the case of the
electric dipole), we see that the dipole also emits a field, and this field – like the electric dipole field – gets weaker as the inverse
cube of the distance (which in this case is measured by). Also, like the electric dipole, the field along it s axis points in the
direction of the dipole moment:
Figure 4.4.4 – Magnetic Dipole Field of a Loop

Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
4.4: Sources of Magnetic Fields by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

6.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76605

6.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766066.6: Ampère’s Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how Ampère’s law relates the magnetic field produced b y a current to the value of the current
Calculate the magnetic field from a long straight wire, e ither thin or thick, by Ampère’s law
A fundamental property of a static magnetic field i s that, unlike an electrostatic field, it is not conse rvative. A conservative field is
one that does the same amount of work on a particle m oving between two different points regardless of the p ath chosen. Magnetic
fields do not have such a property. Instead, there i s a relationship between the magnetic field and its s ource, electric current. It is
expressed in terms of the line integral of and is k nown as Ampère’s law. This law can also be derived directly from the Biot Savart law. We now consider that derivation for the specia l case of an infinite, straight wire.
Figure shows an arbitrary plane perpendicular to an infinite, straight wire whose current I is directed out of the page. The
magnetic field lines are circles directed countercl ockwise and centered on the wire. To begin, let’s cons ider over the closed
paths M and N. Notice that one path (M) encloses the wire, whereas the other (N) does not. Since the field lines are circular,
is the product of B and the projection of dl onto the circle passing through. If the radius of t his particular circle is r, the
projection is, and
Figure: The current I of a long, straight wire is dir ected out of the page. The integral equals and 0, respectively, for
paths M and N.
With given by Equation 12.4.1,
For path M, which circulates around the wire, and
Path N, on the other hand, circulates through both positi ve (counterclockwise) and negative (clockwise) (see Figure), and
since it is closed,. Thus for path N,Learning Objectives

6.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76606The extension of this result to the general case is Amp ère’s law.
Over an arbitrary closed path,
where I is the total current passing through any open surfac e S whose perimeter is the path of integration. Only curre nts inside
the path of integration need be considered.
To determine whether a specific current I is positive or negative, curl the fingers of your ri ght hand in the direction of the path of
integration, as shown in Figure. If I passes through S in the same direction as your extended thumb, I is positive; if I passes
through S in the direction opposite to your extended thumb, it is negative.
To calculate the magnetic field created from current in wire(s), use the following steps:
1. Identify the symmetry of the current in the wire(s). If t here is no symmetry, use the Biot-Savart law to determine th e
magnetic field.
2. Determine the direction of the magnetic field create d by the wire(s) by right-hand rule 2.
3. Chose a path loop where the magnetic field is either constant or zero.
4. Calculate the current inside the loop.
5. Calculate the line integral around the closed loop.
6. Equate with with and solve for.
Use Ampère’s law to calculate the magnetic field due to a steady current I in an infinitely long, thin, straight wire as shown in
Figure.
Figure: The possible components of the magnetic field B due to a current I, which is directed out of the page. The radial
component is zero because the angle between the magne tic field and the path is at a right angle.
StrategyAmpere's Law
Problem-Solving Strategy: Ampère’s Law
Using Ampère’s Law to Calculate the Magnetic Field Due to a Wire

6.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76606Consider an arbitrary plane perpendicular to the wir e, with the current directed out of the page. The po ssible magnetic field
components in this plane, and are shown at arbitrar y points on a circle of radius r centered on the wire. Since the field is
cylindrically symmetric, neither nor varies with th e position on this circle. Also from symmetry, the ra dial lines, if they
exist, must be directed either all inward or all outwa rd from the wire. This means, however, that there must be a net magnetic
flux across an arbitrary cylinder concentric with the wire. The radial component of the magnetic field mus t be zero because
. Therefore, we can apply Ampère’s law to the circular pa th as shown.
Solution
Over this path is constant and parallel to, so
Thus Ampère’s law reduces to
Finally, since is the only component of, we can drop the subscript and write
This agrees with the Biot-Savart calculation above.
Significance
Ampère’s law works well if you have a path to integrate over which has results that are easy to simplify. For t he infinite
wire, this works easily with a path that is circular arou nd the wire so that the magnetic field factors out o f the integration. If the
path dependence looks complicated, you can always go bac k to the Biot-Savart law and use that to find the magnetic fie ld.
The radius of the long, straight wire of Figure is a, and the wire carries a current that is distributed uniformly over its
cross-section. Find the magnetic field both inside and outs ide the wire.
Figure: (a) A model of a current-carrying wire of r adius a and current. (b) A cross-section of the same wire show ing the
radius a and the Ampère’s loop of radius r.
Strategy
This problem has the same geometry as Example, but th e enclosed current changes as we move the integratio n path from
outside the wire to inside the wire, where it doesn’t capt ure the entire current enclosed (see Figure).
Solution
For any circular path of radius r that is centered on the wire,
From Ampère’s law, this equals the total current passing th rough any surface bounded by the path of integration.Example: Calculating the Magnetic Field of a Thick Wire with Ampère’s Law

6.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76606Consider first a circular path that is inside the wi re such as that shown in part (a) of Figure. We need the current I
passing through the area enclosed by the path. It’s e qual to the current density J times the area enclosed. Since the current is
uniform, the current density inside the path equals the current density in the whole wire, which is. Ther efore the current
I passing through the area enclosed by the path is
We can consider this ratio because the current densi ty J is constant over the area of the wire. Therefore, the current density of a
part of the wire is equal to the current density in the whole ar ea. Using Ampère’s law, we obtain
and the magnetic field inside the wire is
Outside the wire, the situation is identical to that of the infinite thin wire of the previous example; that is,
The variation of B with r is shown in Figure.
Figure: Variation of the magnetic field produced by a current in a long, straight wire of radius a.
Significance
The results show that as the radial distance increas es inside the thick wire, the magnetic field increase s from zero to a familiar
value of the magnetic field of a thin wire. Outside the wire, the field drops off regardless of whether it was a thick o r thin wire.
This result is similar to how Gauss’s law for electrical c harges behaves inside a uniform charge distribution, except that
Gauss’s law for electrical charges has a uniform volume distribution of charge, whereas Ampère’s law here has a uniform area
of current distribution. Also, the drop-off outside the thick wire is similar to how an electric field drops off outside of a linear
charge distribution, since the two cases have the sam e geometry and neither case depends on the configur ation of charges or
currents once the loop is outside the distribution.
Use Ampère’s law to evaluate for the current configuration s and paths in Figure.Using Ampère’s Law with Arbitrary Paths

6.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76606
Figure: Current configurations and paths for Example.
Strategy
Ampère’s law states that where I is the total current passing through the enclosed l oop. The quickest way to
evaluate the integral is to calculate by finding t he net current through the loop. Positive currents f low with your right-hand
thumb if your fingers wrap around in the direction of the l oop. This will tell us the sign of the answer.
Solution
(a) The current going downward through the loop equal s the current going out of the loop, so the net cur rent is zero. Thus,
(b) The only current to consider in this problem is 2 A because it is the only current inside the loop. T he right-hand rule shows
us the current going downward through the loop is in the positive direction. Therefore, the answer is
(c) The right-hand rule shows us the current going do wnward through the loop is in the positive direction. T here are
of current going downward and –3 A going upward. There fore, the total current is 9 A and
Significance
If the currents all wrapped around so that the same current went into the loop and out of the loop, the net current would be zero
and no magnetic field would be present. This is why wir es are very close to each other in an electrical cord. The currents
flowing toward a device and away from a device in a wir e equal zero total current flow through an Ampère loo p around these
wires. Therefore, no stray magnetic fields can be present fro m cords carrying current.
Consider using Ampère’s law to calculate the magnetic f ields of a finite straight wire and of a circular loo p of wire. Why is it
not useful for these calculations?
Answer
In these cases the integrals around the Ampèrian loop are very difficult because there is no symmetry, so t his method would
not be useful.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).Exercise

6.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76606This page titled 6.6: Ampère’s Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.6: Ampère’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766076.7: Solenoids and Toroids
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Establish a relationship for how the magnetic field of a solenoid varies with distance and current by using both the BiotSavart law and Ampère’s law
Establish a relationship for how the magnetic field of a toroid varies with distance and current by using Ampère ’s law
Two of the most common and useful electromagnetic devi ces are called solenoids and toroids. In one form or a nother, they are part
of numerous instruments, both large and small. In this sec tion, we examine the magnetic field typical of these devi ces.
Solenoids
A long wire wound in the form of a helical coil is kn own as a solenoid. Solenoids are commonly used in experimental research
requiring magnetic fields. A solenoid is generally ea sy to wind, and near its center, its magnetic field is quite uniform and directly
proportional to the current in the wire.
Figure shows a solenoid consisting of N turns of wire tightly wound over a length L. A current I is flowing along the wire of
the solenoid. The number of turns per unit length i s N/L; therefore, the number of turns in an infinitesimal l ength dy are (N/L)dy
turns. This produces a current
We first calculate the magnetic field at the point P of Figure. This point is on the central axis of the solenoid. We are basically
cutting the solenoid into thin slices that are dy thick and treating each as a current loop. Thus, dI is the current through each slice.
The magnetic field due to the current dI in dy can be found with the help of Equation 12.5.3 and Equation:
where we used Equation to replace dI. The resultant field at P is found by integrating along the entire length of the
solenoid. It’s easiest to evaluate this integral by changing the independent variable from y to. From inspection of Figure, we
have:Learning Objectives

6.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607
Figure: (a) A solenoid is a long wire wound in the sha pe of a helix. (b) The magnetic field at the point P on the axis of the
solenoid is the net field due to all of the current l oops.
Taking the differential of both sides of this equation, we o btain
When this is substituted into the equation for, we have
which is the magnetic field along the central axis of a fi nite solenoid.
Of special interest is the infinitely long solenoid, for which. From a practical point of view, the infini te solenoid is one
whose length is much larger than its radius. In this c ase, and. Then from Equation, the magnetic
field along the central axis of an infinite solenoid is
or
where n is the number of turns per unit length. You can fi nd the direction of with a right-hand rule: Curl yo ur fingers in the
direction of the current, and your thumb points along the magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid.

6.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607We now use these properties, along with Ampère’s law, to calculate the magnitude of the magnetic field at a ny location inside the
infinite solenoid. Consider the closed path of Figure. Along segment 1, is uniform and parallel to the p ath. Along segments
2 and 4, is perpendicular to part of the path and vanishes over the rest of it. Therefore, segments 2 a nd 4 do not contribute to the
line integral in Ampère’s law. Along segment 3, because the magnetic field is zero outside the solenoid. If you consider an
Ampère’s law loop outside of the solenoid, the current flows in opposite directions on different segments of wire. Therefore, there
is no enclosed current and no magnetic field accord ing to Ampère’s law. Thus, there is no contribution t o the line integral from
segment 3. As a result, we find
Figure: The path of integration used in Ampère’s law to evaluate the magnetic field of an infinite soleno id.
The solenoid has n turns per unit length, so the current that passes th rough the surface enclosed by the path is nlI. Therefore, from
Ampère’s law,
and
within the solenoid. This agrees with what we found earl ier for B on the central axis of the solenoid. Here, however, th e location of
segment 1 is arbitrary, so we have found that this equation g ives the magnetic field everywhere inside the infinite solen oid.
Outside the solenoid, one can draw an Ampère’s law loop around the entire solenoid. This would enclose curren t flowing in both
directions. Therefore, the net current inside the loo p is zero. According to Ampère’s law, if the net current is zero, the magnetic
field must be zero. Therefore, for locations outside of t he solenoid’s radius, the magnetic field is zero.
When a patient undergoes a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the person lies down on a table that is moved into the center
of a large solenoid that can generate very large ma gnetic fields. The solenoid is capable of these high f ields from high currents
flowing through superconducting wires. The large magneti c field is used to change the spin of protons in the patient’s body. The
time it takes for the spins to align or relax (retu rn to original orientation) is a signature of differe nt tissues that can be analyzed to
see if the structures of the tissues is normal (Figure).Note

6.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607
Figure:. In an MRI machine, a large magnetic field is genera ted by the cylindrical solenoid surrounding the patie nt. (credit:
Liz West)
A solenoid has 300 turns wound around a cylinder of di ameter 1.20 cm and length 14.0 cm. If the current thr ough the coils is
0.410 A, what is the magnitude of the magnetic field insid e and near the middle of the solenoid?
Strategy
We are given the number of turns and the length of the solenoid so we can find the number of turns per u nit length. Therefore,
the magnetic field inside and near the middle of the solenoid is given by Equation. Outside the solenoi d, the magnetic
field is zero.
Solution
The number of turns per unit length is
The magnetic field produced inside the solenoid is
Significance
This solution is valid only if the length of the sol enoid is reasonably large compared with its diameter. This example is a case
where this is valid.
What is the ratio of the magnetic field produced fr om using a finite formula over the infinite approxim ation for an angle of
(a)? (b)? The solenoid has 1000 turns in 50 cm with a cu rrent of 1.0 A flowing through the coils
Solution
a. 1.00382; b. 1.00015
Toroids
A toroid is a donut-shaped coil closely wound with one continuous wire, as illustrated in part (a) of Figure. If the toroid has N
windings and the current in the wire is I, what is the magnetic field both inside and outside the tor oid?Example: Magnetic Field Inside a SOlenoid
Exercise

6.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607
Figure: (a) A toroid is a coil wound into a donut-sha ped object. (b) A loosely wound toroid does not have cylindrical
symmetry. (c) In a tightly wound toroid, cylindrical symmetry is a very good approximation. (d) Several pa ths of integration for
Ampère’s law.
We begin by assuming cylindrical symmetry around the axis OO’. Actually, this assumption is not precisely correct, f or as part (b)
of Figure shows, the view of the toroidal coil varies from point to point (for example, and) on a circu lar path
centered around OO’. However, if the toroid is tightly wound, all points on the circle become essentially equivalent [part (c) of
Figure], and cylindrical symmetry is an accurate approxima tion.
With this symmetry, the magnetic field must be tange nt to and constant in magnitude along any circular path centered on OO’. This
allows us to write for each of the paths and shown in part (d) of Figure,
Ampère’s law relates this integral to the net current pa ssing through any surface bounded by the path of int egration. For a path that
is external to the toroid, either no current passes through the enclosing surface (path), or the curren t passing through the surface
in one direction is exactly balanced by the current passing through it in the opposite direction (path). In either case, there is no
net current passing through the surface, so
and
The turns of a toroid form a helix, rather than circu lar loops. As a result, there is a small field external t o the coil; however, the
derivation above holds if the coils were circular.
For a circular path within the toroid (path), the cu rrent in the wire cuts the surface N times, resulting in a net current NI through
the surface. We now find with Ampère’s law,
and

6.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607The magnetic field is directed in the counterclockwis e direction for the windings shown. When the current in the coils is reversed,
the direction of the magnetic field also reverses.
The magnetic field inside a toroid is not uniform, as it varies inversely with the distance r from the axis OO’. However, if the
central radius R (the radius midway between the inner and outer radii of the toroid) is much larger than the cross-section al diameter
of the coils r, the variation is fairly small, and the magnitude of the magnetic field may be calculated by Equation where
Field of a Solenoid
It is possible to stack lots of individual dipoles on top of each other to create a long tube called a solenoid. Such a device consists of
a number of turns in the coil, and a length, resulting in what will be the critical measure, the turn density:
Figure 4.4.5 – A Solenoid
How do we compute the field for such an object? Well, first of all, we need to specify what field we want. Lik e the loop, we will
only look on the axis. But we will also simplify it f urther by assuming we are looking at a point on the a xis inside the solenoid far
from the ends (so essentially it has an infinite length, thou gh the turn density is of course finite).
We treat this as a collection of an infinite number of loops. If we pick an origin (which we can place anywh ere along the infinite
axis), then we have the field at that point by a loop at a position on the axis is given by Equation 4.4.10. Then we need to add up
the field contributions at the origin due to all of the loops. The problem is, there is not a loop at ev ery point along the -axis. With a
turn density of, the number of turns in a tiny sli ce would be The total current in that slice would t hen be this number
multiplied by the current through the wound wire (which we will call):
Plugging this into Equation 4.4.10 for the current, gives the tiny contribution to the field by the slice, and adding them all up gives
the field. We are not given the radius of the solenoid, but we will call it, and we'll see that it isn't relevant!
There are a few particularly interesting aspects of t he fields of solenoids, which are not immediately evid ent from this solution, but
which we will state without proof (for now – we have another too l to use later that makes this easier):
The field within the solenoid doesn’t change much (it is p retty much uniform). This basically comes from the fact – as we found
here – that the field on the axis doesn't depend upon th e radius of the solenoid.
The field just outside the solenoid (on its side, not the e nd) is very weak (basically it is zero).
The field looks just like that of a bar magnet, but it can be turned on and off by switching the current on or off.
Figure 4.4.6 – Solenoid Magnetic FieldNote

6.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76607
Digression: Electromagnets
Solenoids have lots of practical uses, a common one being something known as an “electromagnet.” For example, junk ya rds
use these to move large chunks of scrap metal. Obviously th e ability to cut the current to turn off the magnetic field is key here.
If the crane used a permanent magnet, it wouldn’t be ab le to let go of the crushed car. Another application is for fire doors.
Imagine large doors held open in hallways of a buildi ng with electromagnets, and if a fire breaks out, th e power is cut and the
doors close, hopefully slowing the spread of the fire. Gates where you are “buzzed-in” are held shut by a latch that is released
with the activation of an electromagnet that draws the latc h back with a magnetic field.

Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.7: Solenoids and Toroids is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.7: Solenoids and Toroids by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
4.4: Sources of Magnetic Fields by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

6.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765926.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how a charged particle in an external magnetic fi eld undergoes circular motion
Describe how to determine the radius of the circular motio n of a charged particle in a magnetic field
A charged particle experiences a force when moving t hrough a magnetic field. What happens if this field i s uniform over the
motion of the charged particle? What path does the particle follow? In this section, we discuss the circul ar motion of the charged
particle as well as other motion that results from a charge d particle entering a magnetic field.
The simplest case occurs when a charged particle moves perpendicular to a uniform B-field (Figure). If the field is in a
vacuum, the magnetic field is the dominant factor de termining the motion. Since the magnetic force is pe rpendicular to the
direction of travel, a charged particle follows a curv ed path in a magnetic field. The particle continues to follow this curved path
until it forms a complete circle. Another way to look at this is that the magnetic force is always perpend icular to velocity, so that it
does no work on the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of motion is
affected but not the speed.
Figure: A negatively charged particle moves in the p lane of the paper in a region where the magnetic fi eld is perpendicular to
the paper (represented by the small ’s - like the tail s of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendicular to t he velocity, so velocity
changes in direction but not magnitude. The result is uniform circular motion. (Note that because the char ge is negative, the force is
opposite in direction to the prediction of the right -hand rule.)
In this situation, the magnetic force supplies the c entripetal force. Noting that the velocity is perpen dicular to the
magnetic field, the magnitude of the magnetic force is reduced to. Because the magnetic force F supplies the centripetal
force, we have
Solving for r yields
Here, r is the radius of curvature of the path of a charge d particle with mass m and charge q, moving at a speed v that is
perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength B. The time for the charged particle to go around th e circular path is defined as the
period, which is the same as the distance traveled (t he circumference) divided by the speed. Based on th is and Equation, we can
derive the period of motion asLearning Objectives

6.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76592If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field, then we can compare each component of the ve locity separately with the
magnetic field. The component of the velocity perpen dicular to the magnetic field produces a magnetic fo rce perpendicular to both
this velocity and the field:
where is the angle between v and B. The component parallel to the magnetic field crea tes constant motion along the same
direction as the magnetic field, also shown in Equati on. The parallel motion determines the pitch p of the helix, which is the
distance between adjacent turns. This distance equals th e parallel component of the velocity times the period:
The result is a helical motion, as shown in the following figure.
Figure: A charged particle moving with a velocity n ot in the same direction as the magnetic field. The v elocity component
perpendicular to the magnetic field creates circular motion, whereas the component of the velocity paral lel to the field moves the
particle along a straight line. The pitch is the hori zontal distance between two consecutive circles. The r esulting motion is helical.
While the charged particle travels in a helical path, it may enter a region where the magnetic field is n ot uniform. In particular,
suppose a particle travels from a region of strong mag netic field to a region of weaker field, then back to a region of stronger field.
The particle may reflect back before entering the st ronger magnetic field region. This is similar to a wav e on a string traveling from
a very light, thin string to a hard wall and reflectin g backward. If the reflection happens at both ends, t he particle is trapped in a socalled magnetic bottle.
Trapped particles in magnetic fields are found in th e Van Allen radiation belts around Earth, which are pa rt of Earth’s magnetic
field. These belts were discovered by James Van Allen whi le trying to measure the flux of cosmic rays on Ear th (high-energy
particles that come from outside the solar system) to see whether this was similar to the flux measured on Ea rth. Van Allen found
that due to the contribution of particles trapped i n Earth’s magnetic field, the flux was much higher o n Earth than in outer space.
Aurorae, like the famous aurora borealis (northern l ights) in the Northern Hemisphere (Figure), are beautif ul displays of light
emitted as ions recombine with electrons entering th e atmosphere as they spiral along magnetic field li nes. (The ions are primarily
oxygen and nitrogen atoms that are initially ionize d by collisions with energetic particles in Earth’s atmosphere.) Aurorae have also
been observed on other planets, such as Jupiter and Satur n.

6.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76592
Figure: (a) The Van Allen radiation belts around Ear th trap ions produced by cosmic rays striking Earth’s at mosphere. (b) The
magnificent spectacle of the aurora borealis, or nort hern lights, glows in the northern sky above Bear Lake near Eielson Air Force
Base, Alaska. Shaped by Earth’s magnetic field, this lig ht is produced by glowing molecules and ions of oxygen and nitrogen.
(credit b: modification of work by USAF Senior Airman Joshua Strang)
A research group is investigating short-lived radioac tive isotopes. They need to design a way to transport alpha-particles
(helium nuclei) from where they are made to a place where they will collide with another material to form an isotope. The
beam of alpha-particles bends through a 90-degree region with a uniform magnetic field
of 0.050 T (Figure). (a) In what direction should the magnetic field be applied? (b) How much time does it take the alphaparticles to traverse the uniform magnetic field regio n?
Figure: Top view of the beam deflector setup.
Strategy
1. The direction of the magnetic field is shown by the RHR-1. Your fingers point in the direction of v, and your thumb needs
to point in the direction of the force, to the left. There fore, since the alpha-particles are positively charged, the magnetic
field must point down.
2. The period of the alpha-particle going around the cir cle is
Because the particle is only going around a quarter of a circle, we can take 0.25 times the period to fin d the time it takes to go
around this path.Example: Beam Deflector

6.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76592Solution
1. Let’s start by focusing on the alpha-particle enteri ng the field near the bottom of the picture. First, point your thumb up the
page. In order for your palm to open to the left where th e centripetal force (and hence the magnetic force) poin ts, your
fingers need to change orientation until they point into the page. This is the direction of the applied magnetic fie ld.
2. The period of the charged particle going around a cir cle is calculated by using the given mass, charge, and mag netic field in
the problem. This works out to be
However, for the given problem, the alpha-particle goes aro und a quarter of the circle, so the time it takes would be
Significance
This time may be quick enough to get to the material we would like to bombard, depending on how short-lived the radioactive
isotope is and continues to emit alpha-particles. If we could increase the magnetic field applied in the r egion, this would
shorten the time even more. The path the particles need to take could be shortened, but this may not be economical given the
experimental setup.
A uniform magnetic field of magnitude 1.5 T is direct ed horizontally from west to east. (a) What is the ma gnetic force on a
proton at the instant when it is moving vertically down ward in the field with a speed of? (b) Compare this f orce
with the weight w of a proton.
Solution
a. toward the south;
b.
A proton enters a uniform magnetic field of with a speed of. At what angle must the magnetic field be
from the velocity so that the pitch of the resulting h elical motion is equal to the radius of the helix?
Strategy
The pitch of the motion relates to the parallel vel ocity times the period of the circular motion, where as the radius relates to the
perpendicular velocity component. After setting the radius and the pitch equal to each other, solve for t he angle between the
magnetic field and velocity or.
Solution
The pitch is given by Equation, the period is give n by Equation, and the radius of circular motion i s given by
Equation. Note that the velocity in the radius equat ion is related to only the perpendicular velocity, which is where the
circular motion occurs. Therefore, we substitute the s ine component of the overall velocity into the radi us equation to equate
the pitch and radiusExercise
Example: Helical Motion in a Magnetic Field

6.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76592Significance
If this angle were, only parallel velocity would occ ur and the helix would not form, because there would be no circular
motion in the perpendicular plane. If this angle wer e only circular motion would occur and there would b e no movement of
the circles perpendicular to the motion. That is what crea tes the helical motion.
This page titled 6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Fie ld is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.4: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765966.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how a mass spectrometer works to separate charges
Explain how a cyclotron works
Being able to manipulate and sort charged particles allows deeper experimentation to understand what matt er is made of. We first
look at a mass spectrometer to see how we can separate ions by their charge-to-mass ratio. Then we discuss c yclotrons as a method
to accelerate charges to very high energies.
Mass Spectrometer
The mass spectrometer is a device that separates ions according to their charge-to-mass ratios. One particula r version, the
Bainbridge mass spectrometer, is illustrated in Figure. Ions produced at a source are first sent through a velocity selector,
where the magnetic force is equally balanced with the electric force. These ions all emerge with the same speed since any
ion with a different velocity is deflected preferenti ally by either the electric or magnetic force, and ul timately blocked from the next
stage. They then enter a uniform magnetic field whe re they travel in a circular path whose radius R is given by Equation 11.4.2,
. The radius is measured by a particle detector located as shown in the figure.
Figure: A schematic of the Bainbridge mass spectrometer, showing charged particles leaving a source, followed by a velocity
selector where the electric and magnetic forces are b alanced, followed by a region of uniform magnetic f ield where the particle is
ultimately detected.
The relationship between the charge-to-mass ratio q/m and the radius R is determined by combining Equation 11.4.2 and Equation
11.7.2:
Since most ions are singly charged, measured values o f R can be used with this equation to determine the mas s
of ions. With modern instruments, masses can be determined to one part in.
An interesting use of a spectrometer is as part of a system for detecting very small leaks in a research ap paratus. In low-temperature
physics laboratories, a device known as a dilution ref rigerator uses a mixture of He-3, He-4, and other cryo gens to reachLearning Objectives

6.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596temperatures well below 1 K. The performance of the re frigerator is severely hampered if even a minute lea k between its various
components occurs. Consequently, before it is cooled down to the desired temperature, the refrigerator is subjected to a leak test. A
small quantity of gaseous helium is injected into on e of its compartments, while an adjacent, but supposedl y isolated, compartment
is connected to a high-vacuum pump to which a mass s pectrometer is attached. A heated filament ionizes an y helium atoms
evacuated by the pump. The detection of these ions b y the spectrometer then indicates a leak between the two compartments of the
dilution refrigerator.
In conjunction with gas chromatography, mass spectrome ters are used widely to identify unknown substances. Whi le the gas
chromatography portion breaks down the substance, the mass spectrometer separates the resulting ionized mo lecules. This
technique is used with fire debris to ascertain the ca use, in law enforcement to identify illegal drugs, in security to identify
explosives, and in many medicinal applications.
Cyclotron
The cyclotron was developed by E.O. Lawrence to acceler ate charged particles (usually protons, deuterons, or al pha-particles) to
large kinetic energies. These particles are then used for nuclear-collision experiments to produce radioa ctive isotopes. A cyclotron
is illustrated in Figure. The particles move between two flat, semi-cylindrical metallic containers D1 and D2, called dees. The
dees are enclosed in a larger metal container, and t he apparatus is placed between the poles of an electro magnet that provides a
uniform magnetic field. Air is removed from the large container so that the particles neither lose energ y nor are deflected because
of collisions with air molecules. The dees are connect ed to a high-frequency voltage source that provides an alternating electric
field in the small region between them. Because the dees are made of metal, their interiors are shielded from the elec tric field.
Figure: The inside of a cyclotron. A uniform magneti c field is applied as circulating protons travel throu gh the dees, gaining
energy as they traverse through the gap between the d ees.
Suppose a positively charged particle is injected into the gap between the dees when D2 is at a positive pote ntial relative to D1. The
particle is then accelerated across the gap and ente rs D1 after gaining kinetic energy qV, where V is the average potential
difference the particle experiences between the dees. When the particle is inside D1, only the uniform ma gnetic field of the
electromagnet acts on it, so the particle moves in a circle of radius
with a period of
The period of the alternating voltage course is set at T, so while the particle is inside D1, moving along its semicircular orbit in a
time T/2, the polarity of the dees is reversed. When the par ticle reenters the gap, D1 is positive with respect to D2, and the particle
is again accelerated across the gap, thereby gaining a kinetic energy qV. The particle then enters D2, circulates in a slightl y larger
circle, and emerges from D2 after spending a time T/2 in this dee. This process repeats until the orbit of the particle reaches the

6.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596boundary of the dees. At that point, the particle (actu ally, a beam of particles) is extracted from the cycl otron and used for some
experimental purpose.
The operation of the cyclotron depends on the fact that, in a uniform magnetic field, a particle’s orbita l period is independent of its
radius and its kinetic energy. Consequently, the perio d of the alternating voltage source need only be se t at the one value given by
Equation. With that setting, the electric field accel erates particles every time they are between the dees.
If the maximum orbital radius in the cyclotron is R, then from Equation, the maximum speed of a circu lating particle of mass
m and charge q is
Thus, its kinetic energy when ejected from the cyclotron is
The maximum kinetic energy attainable with this type of cyclotron is approximately 30 MeV. Above this ener gy, relativistic effects
become important, which causes the orbital period to increase with the radius. Up to energies of several hundred MeV, the
relativistic effects can be compensated for by makin g the magnetic field gradually increase with the rad ius of the orbit. However,
for higher energies, much more elaborate methods must be u sed to accelerate particles.
Particles are accelerated to very high energies with ei ther linear accelerators or synchrotrons. The linear accelerator accelerates
particles continuously with the electric field of an electromagnetic wave that travels down a long evacua ted tube. The Stanford
Linear Accelerator (SLAC) is about 3.3 km long and acce lerates electrons and positrons (positively charged el ectrons) to energies
of 50 GeV. The synchrotron is constructed so that it s bending magnetic field increases with particle speed in such a way that the
particles stay in an orbit of fixed radius. The world ’s highest-energy synchrotron is located at CERN, which is on the Swiss-French
border near Geneva. CERN has been of recent interest wi th the verified discovery of the Higgs Boson (see Particle Physics and
Cosmology). This synchrotron can accelerate beams of approximately protons to energies of about GeV.
A cyclotron used to accelerate alpha-particles has a radius of 0.50 m and a magnetic
field of 1.8 T. (a) What is the period of revolution of th e alpha-particles? (b) What is their maximum kinetic en ergy?
Strategy
1. The period of revolution is approximately the dista nce traveled in a circle divided by the speed. Identifyi ng that the
magnetic force applied is the centripetal force, we can de rive the period formula.
2. The kinetic energy can be found from the maximum spe ed of the beam, corresponding to the maximum radius withi n the
cyclotron.
Solution
1. By identifying the mass, charge, and magnetic field in th e problem, we can calculate the period:
2. By identifying the charge, magnetic field, radius of pa th, and the mass, we can calculate the maximum kinetic energ y:Example: Accelerating Alpha-Particles in a Cyclotron

6.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596A cyclotron is to be designed to accelerate protons to kinetic energies of 20 MeV using a magnetic fiel d of 2.0 T. What is the
required radius of the cyclotron?
Solution
0.32 m
Mass Spectrometry
The curved paths followed by charged particles in ma gnetic fields can be put to use. A charged particle moving perpendicular to a
magnetic field travels in a circular path having a radius.
It was noted that this relationship could be used to measure the mass of charged particles such as ions. A mass spectrometer is a
device that measures such masses. Most mass spectromet ers use magnetic fields for this purpose, although som e of them have
extremely sophisticated designs. Since there are five va riables in the relationship, there are many possibil ities. However, if,, and
can be fixed, then the radius of the path is simply proportional to the mass of the charged particle. Let us examine one such
mass spectrometer that has a relatively simple design (Figure). The process begins with an ion source, a devic e like an
electron gun. The ion source gives ions their charge, a ccelerates them to some velocity, and directs a be am of them into the next
stage of the spectrometer. This next region is a velocity selector that only allows particles with a particular value of to get through.
Figure: This mass spectrometer uses a velocity selector to fix so that the radius of the path is proportional t o mass.
The velocity selector has both an electric field and a magnetic field, perpendicular to one another, pro ducing forces in opposite
directions on the ions. Only those ions for which the f orces balance travel in a straight line into the nex t region. If the forces
balance, then the electric force equals the magnetic forc e, so that. Noting that cancels, we see that
is the velocity particles must have to make it throu gh the velocity selector, and further, that can be se lected by varying and. In
the final region, there is only a uniform magnetic f ield, and so the charged particles move in circular a rcs with radii proportional to
particle mass. The paths also depend on charge, but since is in multiples of electron charges, it is ea sy to determine and to
discriminate between ions in different charge states.
Mass spectrometry today is used extensively in chemist ry and biology laboratories to identify chemical an d biological substances
according to their mass-to-charge ratios. In medicine, mass spectrometers are used to measure the concentr ation of isotopes used as
tracers. Usually, biological molecules such as protein s are very large, so they are broken down into smalle r fragments before
analyzing. Recently, large virus particles have been analyzed as a whole on mass spectrometers. Sometimes a g as chromatograph or
high-performance liquid chromatograph provides an in itial separation of the large molecules, which are th en input into the mass
spectrometer.Exercise

6.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596Cathode Ray Tubes—CRTs—and the Like
What do non-flat-screen TVs, old computer monitors, x -ray machines, and the 2-mile-long Stanford Linear Ac celerator have in
common? All of them accelerate electrons, making the m different versions of the electron gun. Many of th ese devices use magnetic
fields to steer the accelerated electrons. Figure sho ws the construction of the type of cathode ray tube (CRT) found in some
TVs, oscilloscopes, and old computer monitors. Two pairs of coils are used to steer the electrons, one vertic ally and the other
horizontally, to their desired destination.
Figure: The cathode ray tube (CRT) is so named because rays of electrons originate at the cathode in the el ectron gun.
Magnetic coils are used to steer the beam in many CRTs. In this case, the beam is moved down. Another pair of horizontal coils
would steer the beam horizontally.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most useful and rapidly growing medical imaging tools. It non-invasively
produces two-dimensional and three-dimensional images o f the body that provide important medical informati on with none of the
hazards of x-rays. MRI is based on an effect called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in which an externally applied magnetic
field interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms, pa rticularly those of hydrogen (protons). These nuclei possess their own small
magnetic fields, similar to those of electrons and the current loops discussed earlier in this chapter.
When placed in an external magnetic field, such nucl ei experience a torque that pushes or aligns the nucle i into one of two new
energy states—depending on the orientation of its spin (analogous to the N pole and S pole in a bar magnet). Transitions from the
lower to higher energy state can be achieved by using an external radio frequency signal to “flip” the or ientation of the small
magnets. (This is actually a quantum mechanical proc ess. The direction of the nuclear magnetic field is q uantized as is energy in
the radio waves. We will return to these topics in later chapters.) The specific frequency of the radio waves that are absorbed and
reemitted depends sensitively on the type of nucleus, the chemical environment, and the external magnetic field strength.
Therefore, this is a resonance phenomenon in which nuclei in a magnetic field act like resonators (analogous to those discuss ed in
the treatment of sound in "Oscillatory Motion and Wav es") that absorb and reemit only certain frequencie s. Hence, the
phenomenon is named nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
NMR has been used for more than 50 years as an analyti cal tool. It was formulated in 1946 by F. Bloch and E. Purcell, with the
1952 Nobel Prize in Physics going to them for their work. Over the past two decades, NMR has been developed to produce detailed
images in a process now called magnetic resonance ima ging (MRI), a name coined to avoid the use of the word “nuclear” and the
concomitant implication that nuclear radiation is i nvolved. (It is not.) The 2003 Nobel Prize in Medicine went to P. Lauterbur and P.
Mansfield for their work with MRI applications.
The largest part of the MRI unit is a superconducti ng magnet that creates a magnetic field, typically between 1 and 2 T in strength,
over a relatively large volume. MRI images can be bot h highly detailed and informative about structures an d organ functions. It is
helpful that normal and non-normal tissues respond di fferently for slight changes in the magnetic field. I n most medical images, the
protons that are hydrogen nuclei are imaged. (About 2/3 of the atoms in the body are hydrogen.) Their lo cation and density give a
variety of medically useful information, such as org an function, the condition of tissue (as in the brain), and the shape of structures,
such as vertebral disks and knee-joint surfaces. MRI ca n also be used to follow the movement of certain ion s across membranes,
yielding information on active transport, osmosis, dialy sis, and other phenomena. With excellent spatial res olution, MRI can
provide information about tumors, strokes, shoulder inj uries, infections, etc.

6.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596An image requires position information as well as the density of a nuclear type (usually protons). By varyi ng the magnetic field
slightly over the volume to be imaged, the resonant f requency of the protons is made to vary with positio n. Broadcast radio
frequencies are swept over an appropriate range and n uclei absorb and reemit them only if the nuclei are in a magnetic field with
the correct strength. The imaging receiver gathers information through the body almost point by point, b uilding up a tissue map.
The reception of reemitted radio waves as a function o f frequency thus gives position information. These “ slices” or cross sections
through the body are only several mm thick. The inte nsity of the reemitted radio waves is proportional to the concentration of the
nuclear type being flipped, as well as information on the chemical environment in that area of the body. V arious techniques are
available for enhancing contrast in images and for obtaining more information. Scans called T1, T2, or proton density scans rely on
different relaxation mechanisms of nuclei. Relaxatio n refers to the time it takes for the protons to retu rn to equilibrium after the
external field is turned off. This time depends upon t issue type and status (such as inflammation).
While MRI images are superior to x rays for certain ty pes of tissue and have none of the hazards of x rays, they do not completely
supplant x-ray images. MRI is less effective than x rays for detecting breaks in bone, for example, and in imaging breast tissue, so
the two diagnostic tools complement each other. MRI i mages are also expensive compared to simple x-ray ima ges and tend to be
used most often where they supply information not re adily obtained from x rays. Another disadvantage of MRI is that the patient is
totally enclosed with detectors close to the body fo r about 30 minutes or more, leading to claustrophobi a. It is also difficult for the
obese patient to be in the magnet tunnel. New “open-MRI ” machines are now available in which the magnet does not completely
surround the patient.
Over the last decade, the development of much faster sc ans, called “functional MRI” (fMRI), has allowed us to map the
functioning of various regions in the brain responsibl e for thought and motor control. This technique measu res the change in blood
flow for activities (thought, experiences, action) in the brain. The nerve cells increase their consumptio n of oxygen when active.
Blood hemoglobin releases oxygen to active nerve ce lls and has somewhat different magnetic properties wh en oxygenated than
when deoxygenated. With MRI, we can measure this and d etect a blood oxygen-dependent signal. Most of the brai n scans today
use fMRI.
Currents in nerve cells and the heart create magneti c fields like any other currents. These can be measur ed but with some
difficulty since their strengths are about to less than the Earth’s magnetic field. Recording of the heart’s magnetic
field as it beats is called a magnetocardiogram (MCG), while measurements of the brain's magnetic field is called a
magnetoencephalogram (MEG). Both give information that differs from that obtai ned by measuring the electric fields of
these organs (ECGs and EEGs), but they are not yet of sufficient i mportance to make these difficult measurements common.
In both of these techniques, the sensors do not touc h the body. MCG can be used in fetal studies, and is pro bably more
sensitive than echocardiography. MCG also looks at the heart’s electrical activity whose voltage output is too small to be
recorded by surface electrodes as in EKG. It has the potential of being a rapid scan for early diagnosis of cardiac ischemia
(obstruction of blood flow to the heart) or problems with t he fetus.
MEG can be used to identify abnormal electrical disch arges in the brain that produce weak magnetic signal s. Therefore, it
looks at brain activity, not just brain structure. I t has been used for studies of Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy. Advances in
instrumentation to measure very small magnetic fiel ds have allowed these two techniques to be used more in recent years.
What is used is a sensor called a SQUID, for superconducti ng quantum interference device. This operates at li quid helium
temperatures and can measure magnetic fields thousands o f times smaller than the Earth’s.
Finally, there is a burgeoning market for magnetic cur es in which magnets are applied in a variety of ways to the body, from
magnetic bracelets to magnetic mattresses. The best t hat can be said for such practices is that they are apparently harmless,
unless the magnets get close to the patient’s comput er or magnetic storage disks. Claims are made for a broad spectrum of
benefits from cleansing the blood to giving the pat ient more energy, but clinical studies have not ver ified these claims, nor is
there an identifiable mechanism by which such benefits m ight occur.
Contributors and AttributionsOther Medical Uses of Magnetic Fields

6.9.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76596Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.8: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
22.11: More Applications of Magnetism by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

6.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765936.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the direction in which a current-carrying wire e xperiences a force in an external magnetic field
Calculate the force on a current-carrying wire in an exte rnal magnetic field
Moving charges experience a force in a magnetic field. If these moving charges are in a wire—that is, if th e wire is carrying a
current—the wire should also experience a force. Howev er, before we discuss the force exerted on a current b y a magnetic field,
we first examine the magnetic field generated by an electric current. We are studying two separate effect s here that interact closely:
A current-carrying wire generates a magnetic field and t he magnetic field exerts a force on the current-carrying wire.
Magnetic Fields Produced by Electrical Currents
When discussing historical discoveries in magnetism, we mentioned Oersted’s finding that a wire carrying an e lectrical current
caused a nearby compass to deflect. A connection was es tablished that electrical currents produce magnetic f ields. (This connection
between electricity and magnetism is discussed in more d etail in Sources of Magnetic Fields.)
The compass needle near the wire experiences a force that aligns the needle tangent to a circle around t he wire. Therefore, a
current-carrying wire produces circular loops of magne tic field. To determine the direction of the magnet ic field generated from a
wire, we use a second right-hand rule. In RHR-2, your t humb points in the direction of the current while yo ur fingers wrap around
the wire, pointing in the direction of the magnetic f ield produced (Figure). If the magnetic field were co ming at you or out of
the page, we represent this with a dot. If the magnetic fiel d were going into the page, we represent this with an
These symbols come from considering a vector arrow: An a rrow pointed toward you, from your perspective, would l ook like a dot
or the tip of an arrow. An arrow pointed away from you, from your perspective, would look like a cross or an A composite
sketch of the magnetic circles is shown in Figure, whe re the field strength is shown to decrease as you get farther from the
wire by loops that are farther separated.
Figure: (a) When the wire is in the plane of the pap er, the field is perpendicular to the paper. Note th e symbols used for the
field pointing inward (like the tail of an arrow) a nd the field pointing outward (like the tip of an a rrow). (b) A long and straight wire
creates a field with magnetic field lines forming cir cular loops.
Calculating the Magnetic Force
Electric current is an ordered movement of charge. A current-carrying wire in a magnetic field must there fore experience a force
due to the field. To investigate this force, let’s con sider the infinitesimal section of wire as shown in Fig ure. The length and
cross-sectional area of the section are dl and A, respectively, so its volume is. The wire is formed from material that
contains n charge carriers per unit volume, so the number of charge carriers in the section is. If the charge c arriers move
with drift velocity the current I in the wire is (from Current and Resistance)Learning Objectives

6.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593The magnetic force on any single charge carrier is, so the total magnetic force on the charge carrie rs in the
section of wire is
We can define dl to be a vector of length dl pointing along, which allows us to rewrite this equation as
or
This is the magnetic force on the section of wire. Note that it is actually the net force exerted by the f ield on the charge carriers
themselves. The direction of this force is given by RHR -1, where you point your fingers in the direction of the current and curl
them toward the field. Your thumb then points in the dir ection of the force.
Figure: An infinitesimal section of current-carrying wire in a magnetic field.
To determine the magnetic force on a wire of arbitr ary length and shape, we must integrate Equation ov er the entire wire.
If the wire section happens to be straight and B is uniform, the equation differentials become absolute quantities, giving us
This is the force on a straight, current-carrying wire in a uniform magnetic field.
A wire of length 50 cm and mass 10 g is suspended in a horizontal plane by a pair of flexible leads (Figure). The wire is
then subjected to a constant magnetic field of magn itude 0.50 T, which is directed as shown. What are the mag nitude and
direction of the current in the wire needed to remove the tension in the supporting leads?Example: Balancing the Gravitational and Magnetic Forces on a Current-Carrying Wire

6.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593
Figure: (a) A wire suspended in a magnetic field. (b) The free-body diagram for the wire.
Strategy
From the free-body diagram in the figure, the tension s in the supporting leads go to zero when the gravitat ional and magnetic
forces balance each other. Using the RHR-1, we find that the magnetic force points up. We can then determine the current I by
equating the two forces.
Solution
Equate the two forces of weight and magnetic force on the wi re:
Thus,
Significance
This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a length of wire to counteract the weight of the wire.
A long, rigid wire lying along the y-axis carries a 5.0-A current flowing in the positive y-direction. (a) If a constant magnetic
field of magnitude 0.30 T is directed along the posi tive x-axis, what is the magnetic force per unit length on th e wire? (b) If a
constant magnetic field of 0.30 T is directed 30 deg rees from the + x-axis towards the + y-axis, what is the magnetic force per
unit length on the wire?
Strategy
The magnetic force on a current-carrying wire in a m agnetic field is given by. For part a, since the curre nt and
magnetic field are perpendicular in this problem, we can simplify the formula to give us the magnitude and find the direction
through the RHR-1. The angle θ is 90 degrees, which means Also, the length can be divi ded over to the left-hand side
to find the force per unit length. For part b, the c urrent times length is written in unit vector notatio n, as well as the magnetic
field. After the cross product is taken, the directional ity is evident by the resulting unit vector.
Solution
1. We start with the general formula for the magnetic fo rce on a wire. We are looking for the force per unit length, so we
divide by the length to bring it to the left-hand side. We also set. The solution therefore isExample: Calculating Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire

6.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593Directionality: Point your fingers in the positive y-direction and curl your fingers in the positive x-direction. Your thumb
will point in the direction. Therefore, with directiona lity, the solution is
2. The current times length and the magnetic field are writ ten in unit vector notation. Then, we take the cross prod uct to find
the force:
Significance
This large magnetic field creates a significant forc e on a small length of wire. As the angle of the magne tic field becomes more
closely aligned to the current in the wire, there is less of a force on it, as seen from comparing parts a and b.
A straight, flexible length of copper wire is immersed in a magnetic field that is directed into the page. (a) If the wire’s current
runs in the + x-direction, which way will the wire bend? (b) Which way will the wire bend if the current runs in the – xdirection?
Solution
a. bends upward; b. bends downward
A circular current loop of radius R carrying a current I is placed in the xy-plane. A constant uniform magnetic field cuts
through the loop parallel to the y-axis (Figure). Find the magnetic force on the upper h alf of the loop, the lower half of
the loop, and the total force on the loop.
Figure: A loop of wire carrying a current in a magn etic field.
Strategy
The magnetic force on the upper loop should be writte n in terms of the differential force acting on each segment of the loop. If
we integrate over each differential piece, we solve f or the overall force on that section of the loop. T he force on the lower loop
is found in a similar manner, and the total force is the addit ion of these two forces.
Solution
A differential force on an arbitrary piece of wire locate d on the upper ring is:
where is the angle between the magnetic field direct ion (+ y) and the segment of wire. A differential segment is located at the
same radius, so using an arc-length formula, we have:Exercise
Example: Force on a Circular Wire

6.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593In order to find the force on a segment, we integrate ove r the upper half of the circle, from 0 to. This results in:
The lower half of the loop is integrated from to zero, g iving us:
The net force is the sum of these forces, which is zero.
Significance
The total force on any closed loop in a uniform mag netic field is zero. Even though each piece of the l oop has a force acting on
it, the net force on the system is zero. (Note that there is a net torque on the loop, which we consider in the next section.)
Magnetic Force of Two Parallel Wires
You might expect that two current-carrying wires gener ate significant forces between them, since ordinary currents produce
magnetic fields and these fields exert significant fo rces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect th at the force between wires
is used to define the ampere. It might also surprise you to learn that this force has something to do with why large circuit breakers
burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.
The force between two long, straight, and parallel con ductors separated by a distance r can be found by applying what we have
developed in the preceding sections. Figure shows the wires, their currents, the field created by one wire, an d the consequent
force the other wire experiences from the created fie ld. Let us consider the field produced by wire 1 and t he force it exerts on wire
2 (call the force). The field due to at a distance r is
Figure: (a) The magnetic field produced by a long st raight conductor is perpendicular to a parallel cond uctor, as indicated by
right-hand rule (RHR)-2. (b) A view from above of t he two wires shown in (a), with one magnetic field li ne shown for wire 1.
RHR-1 shows that the force between the parallel condu ctors is attractive when the currents are in the same d irection. A similar
analysis shows that the force is repulsive between curren ts in opposite directions.
This field is uniform from the wire 1 and perpendicula r to it, so the force it exerts on a length l of wire 2 is given by
with:
The forces on the wires are equal in magnitude, so we just write F for the magnitude of (Note that.) Since the wires
are very long, it is convenient to think in terms of F/l, the force per unit length. Substituting the expressi on for into Equation
and rearranging terms gives

6.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593The ratio F/l is the force per unit length between two parallel cu rrents and separated by a distance r. The force is attractive if
the currents are in the same direction and repulsive if t hey are in opposite directions.
This force is responsible for the pinch effect in electric arcs and other plasmas. The force exist s whether the currents are in wires or
not. It is only apparent if the overall charge densit y is zero; otherwise, the Coulomb repulsion overwhelms t he magnetic attraction.
In an electric arc, where charges are moving parallel to one another, an attractive force squeezes curren ts into a smaller tube. In
large circuit breakers, such as those used in neighb orhood power distribution systems, the pinch effect can concentrate an arc
between plates of a switch trying to break a large curr ent, burn holes, and even ignite the equipment. Anoth er example of the pinch
effect is found in the solar plasma, where jets of ionized ma terial, such as solar flares, are shaped by magnetic forces.
The definition of the ampere is based on the force between current-carrying wires. Note that for long, parallel wires separated by 1
meter with each carrying 1 ampere, the force per meter is
Since is exactly by definition, and because, the f orce per meter is exactly.
This is the basis of the definition of the ampere.
Infinite-length wires are impractical, so in practice, a current balance is constructed with coils of wire separated by a few
centimeters. Force is measured to determine current. Th is also provides us with a method for measuring the coul omb. We measure
the charge that flows for a current of one ampere in one second. That is,. For both the ampere and the co ulomb, the
method of measuring force between conductors is the most accurate in practice.
Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, hav e a current of magnitude 5.0 mA. The first wire is locate d at (0.0 cm, 3.0
cm) while the other wire is located at (4.0 cm, 0.0 cm) as shown in Figure. What is the magnetic force per u nit length of
the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first?
Figure: Two current-carrying wires at given location s with currents out of the page.
Strategy
Each wire produces a magnetic field felt by the other wire. The distance along the hypotenuse of the trian gle between the wires
is the radial distance used in the calculation to d etermine the force per unit length. Since both wires h ave currents flowing in
the same direction, the direction of the force is towar d each other.
Solution
The distance between the wires results from finding the hy potenuse of a triangle:
The force per unit length can then be calculated using the known currents in the wires:Note
Example: Calculating Forces on Wires

6.10.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76593The force from the first wire pulls the second wire. T he angle between the radius and the x-axis is
The unit vector for this is calculated by
Therefore, the force per unit length from wire one on wire 2 is
The force per unit length from wire 2 on wire 1 is the negat ive of the previous answer:
Significance
These wires produced magnetic fields of equal magnitu de but opposite directions at each other’s location s. Whether the fields
are identical or not, the forces that the wires exert on each other are always equal in magnitude and oppo site in direction
(Newton’s third law).
Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, hav e a current of magnitude 2.0 mA and 3.0 mA, respectiv ely. The first wire
is located at (0.0 cm, 5.0 cm) while the other wire is located at (12.0 cm, 0.0 cm). What is the magnitude of the magnetic force
per unit length of the first wire on the second and the secon d wire on the first?
Answer
Both have a force per unit length of
This page titled 6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.5: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
12.4: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Exercise

6.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765946.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Evaluate the net force on a current loop in an external magn etic field
Evaluate the net torque on a current loop in an external mag netic field
Define the magnetic dipole moment of a current loop
Motors are the most common application of magnetic fo rce on current-carrying wires. Motors contain loops of wire in a magnetic
field. When current is passed through the loops, the m agnetic field exerts torque on the loops, which rotate s a shaft. Electrical
energy is converted into mechanical work in the proce ss. Once the loop’s surface area is aligned with the ma gnetic field, the
direction of current is reversed, so there is a conti nual torque on the loop (Figure). This reversal of the current is done with
commutators and brushes. The commutator is set to re verse the current flow at set points to keep continual motion in the motor. A
basic commutator has three contact areas to avoid a nd dead spots where the loop would have zero instantan eous torque at that
point. The brushes press against the commutator, creatin g electrical contact between parts of the commutator during the spinning
motion.
Figure: A simplified version of a dc electric motor. (a) The rectangular wire loop is placed in a magneti c field. The forces on
the wires closest to the magnetic poles (N and S) are op posite in direction as determined by the right-hand r ule-1. Therefore, the
loop has a net torque and rotates to the position shown in (b). (b) The brushes now touch the commutator segm ents so that no
current flows through the loop. No torque acts on the loop, but the loop continues to spin from the initia l velocity given to it in part
(a). By the time the loop flips over, current flows t hrough the wires again but now in the opposite direct ion, and the process repeats
as in part (a). This causes continual rotation of the l oop.
In a uniform magnetic field, a current-carrying loop of wire, such as a loop in a motor, experiences both forces and torques on the
loop. Figure shows a rectangular loop of wire that carr ies a current I and has sides of lengths a and b. The loop is in a
uniform magnetic field:. The magnetic force on a st raight current-carrying wire of length l is given by. To find the
net force on the loop, we have to apply this equation t o each of the four sides. The force on side 1 is
where the direction has been determined with the RHR-1. The cu rrent in side 3 flows in the opposite direction to that of side 1, so
The currents in sides 2 and 4 are perpendicular to and the forces on these sides areLearning Objectives

6.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76594We can now find the net force on the loop:
Although this result has been obtained for a rectang ular loop, it is far more general and holds for curr ent-carrying loops
of arbitrary shapes; that is, there is no net force on a c urrent loop in a uniform magnetic field.
Figure: (a) A rectangular current loop in a uniform magnetic field is subjected to a net torque but not a net force. (b) A side
view of the coil.
To find the net torque on the current loop shown in Fi gure, we first consider and. Since they have the s ame line of
action and are equal and opposite, the sum of their torques about any axis is zero (see Fixed-Axis Rotation). Thus, if there is any
torque on the loop, it must be furnished by and. Let ’s calculate the torques around the axis that passe s through point O of
Figure (a side view of the coil) and is perpendicula r to the plane of the page. The point O is a distance x from side 2 and a
distance from side 4 of the loop. The moment arms o f and are and, respectively, so the net torque
on the loop is
This simplifies to
where is the area of the loop.
Notice that this torque is independent of x; it is therefore independent of where point O is located in the plane of the current loop.
Consequently, the loop experiences the same torque fr om the magnetic field about any axis in the plane o f the loop and parallel to
the x-axis.
A closed-current loop is commonly referred to as a magnetic dipole and the term IA is known as its magnetic dipole moment.
Actually, the magnetic dipole moment is a vector that is de fined as
where is a unit vector directed perpendicular to the plane of the loop (see Figure). The direction of is obtained with the
RHR-2—if you curl the fingers of your right hand in the direction of current flow in the loop, then your thumb points along. If
the loop contains N turns of wire, then its magnetic dipole moment is given by
In terms of the magnetic dipole moment, the torque on a c urrent loop due to a uniform magnetic field can be writte n simply as
This equation holds for a current loop in a two-dimensional plane of arbitrary shape.

6.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76594Using a calculation analogous to that found in Capacitance for an electric dipole, the potential energy of a magnet ic dipole is
A circular current loop of radius 2.0 cm carries a cu rrent of 2.0 mA. (a) What is the magnitude of its magne tic dipole moment?
(b) If the dipole is oriented at 30 degrees to a un iform magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T, what is the magnitude of the torque
it experiences and what is its potential energy?
Strategy
The dipole moment is defined by the current times th e area of the loop. The area of the loop can be calc ulated from the area of
the circle. The torque on the loop and potential en ergy are calculated from identifying the magnetic m oment, magnetic field,
and angle oriented in the field.
Solution
1. The magnetic moment μ is calculated by the current times the area of the loo p or.
2. The torque and potential energy are calculated by i dentifying the magnetic moment, magnetic field, and th e angle between
these two vectors. The calculations of these quantities are:
Significance
The concept of magnetic moment at the atomic level is discussed in the next chapter. The concept of alig ning the magnetic
moment with the magnetic field is the functionality o f devices like magnetic motors, whereby switching the ex ternal magnetic
field results in a constant spinning of the loop as it trie s to align with the field to minimize its potential energy.
In what orientation would a magnetic dipole have to b e to produce (a) a maximum torque in a magnetic fie ld? (b) A maximum
energy of the dipole?
Solution
a. aligned or anti-aligned; b. perpendicular
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.6: Force and Torque on a Current Loop by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Example: Forces and Torques on Current-Carrying Loops
Exercise

6.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/929906.12: The Hall Effect
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain a scenario where the magnetic and electric fields are crossed and their forces balance each other as a char ged
particle moves through a velocity selector
Compare how charge carriers move in a conductive material a nd explain how this relates to the Hall effect
In 1879, E.H. Hall devised an experiment that can be us ed to identify the sign of the predominant charge c arriers in a conducting
material. From a historical perspective, this experime nt was the first to demonstrate that the charge carrie rs in most metals are
negative.
Visit this website to find more information about the Hall effect.
We investigate the Hall effect by studying the motion of the free electrons along a metallic strip of width l in a constant magnetic
field (Figure). The electrons are moving from left to right, so the magnetic force they experience pushe s them to the bottom
edge of the strip. This leaves an excess of positive ch arge at the top edge of the strip, resulting in an e lectric field E directed from
top to bottom. The charge concentration at both edge s builds up until the electric force on the electro ns in one direction is balanced
by the magnetic force on them in the opposite direction. E quilibrium is reached when:
where e is the magnitude of the electron charge, is the drif t speed of the electrons, and E is the magnitude of the electric field
created by the separated charge. Solving this for the drift speed results in
Figure: In the Hall effect, a potential difference between the top and bottom edges of the metal strip i s produced when
moving charge carriers are deflected by the magnetic field. (a) Hall effect for negative charge carrier s; (b) Hall effect for positive
charge carriers.
A scenario where the electric and magnetic fields ar e perpendicular to one another is called a crossed- field situation. If these fields
produce equal and opposite forces on a charged parti cle with the velocity that equates the forces, these particles are able to pass
through an apparatus, called a velocity selector, undeflected. This velocity is represented in Equati on. Any other velocity of
a charged particle sent into the same fields would be defl ected by the magnetic force or electric force.
Going back to the Hall effect, if the current in the strip i s I, then from Current and Resistance, we know that
where n is the number of charge carriers per volume and A is the cross-sectional area of the strip. Combining the equations for
and I results inLearning Objectives

6.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92990The field E is related to the potential difference V between the edges of the strip by
The quantity is called the Hall potential and can be measured with a voltmeter. Finally, combi ning the equations for I and E
gives us
where the upper edge of the strip in Figure is positive with respect to the lower edge.
We can also combine Equation and Equation to get a n expression for the Hall voltage in terms of the magnet ic field:
What if the charge carriers are positive, as in Figure? For the same current I, the magnitude of V is still given by Equation
. However, the upper edge is now negative with respect to the lower edge. Therefore, by simply measuring the sign of V, we
can determine the sign of the majority charge carriers in a metal.
Hall potential measurements show that electrons are t he dominant charge carriers in most metals. However, Ha ll potentials indicate
that for a few metals, such as tungsten, beryllium, and many semiconductors, the majority of charge carriers are positive. It turns
out that conduction by positive charge is caused by t he migration of missing electron sites (called holes) on ions. Conduction by
holes is studied later in Condensed Matter Physics.
The Hall effect can be used to measure magnetic fiel ds. If a material with a known density of charge carri ers n is placed in a
magnetic field and V is measured, then the field can be determined from E quation. In research laboratories where the fields o f
electromagnets used for precise measurements have to be extremely steady, a “Hall probe” is commonly used as part of an
electronic circuit that regulates the field.
An electron beam enters a crossed-field velocity selec tor with magnetic and electric fields of 2.0 mT and,
respectively. (a) What must the velocity of the elec tron beam be to traverse the crossed fields undeflec ted? If the electric field
is turned off, (b) what is the acceleration of the electro n beam and (c) what is the radius of the circular motion th at results?
Strategy
The electron beam is not deflected by either of the magnetic or electric fields if these forces are bal anced. Based on these
balanced forces, we calculate the velocity of the be am. Without the electric field, only the magnetic f orce is used in Newton’s
second law to find the acceleration. Lastly, the radi us of the path is based on the resulting circular m otion from the magnetic
force.
Solution
1. The velocity of the unperturbed beam of electrons with crossed fields is calculated by Equation:
2. The acceleration is calculated from the net force from the magnetic field, equal to mass times acceleration. The magnitude
of the acceleration is:
3. The radius of the path comes from a balance of the circ ular and magnetic forces, or Equation:Example: Velocity Selector

6.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92990Significance
If electrons in the beam had velocities above or bel ow the answer in part (a), those electrons would have a s tronger net force
exerted by either the magnetic or electric field. Ther efore, only those electrons at this specific velocity would mak e it through.
Figure shows a silver ribbon whose cross section is 1.0 c m by 0.20 cm. The ribbon carries a current of 100 A f rom left to
right, and it lies in a uniform magnetic field of m agnitude 1.5 T. Using a density value of electrons p er cubic
meter for silver, find the Hall potential between the edge s of the ribbon.
Figure: Finding the Hall potential in a silver ribbon in a magnetic field is shown.
Strategy
Since the majority of charge carriers are electrons, t he polarity of the Hall voltage is that indicated in the figure. The value of
the Hall voltage is calculated using Equation.
Solution
When calculating the Hall voltage, we need to know the current through the material, the magnetic field, the length, the
number of charge carriers, and the area. Since all of thes e are given, the Hall voltage is calculated as:
Significance
As in this example, the Hall potential is generally very small, and careful experimentation with sensitive e quipment is required
for its measurement.
A Hall probe consists of a copper strip, electrons per cubic meter, which is 2.0 cm wide and 0.10 cm thick. W hat
is the magnetic field when I = 50 A and the Hall potential is
a. and
b.?
Answer a
1.1 T
Answer b
1.6 TThe Hall Potential in a Silver Ribbon
Exercise

6.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/92990This page titled 6.12: The Hall Effect is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.7: The Hall Effect by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766086.13: Magnetism in Matter
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Classify magnetic materials as paramagnetic, diamagneti c, or ferromagnetic, based on their response to a magnetic field
Sketch how magnetic dipoles align with the magnetic field in each type of substance
Define hysteresis and magnetic susceptibility, which dete rmines the type of magnetic material
Why are certain materials magnetic and others not? An d why do certain substances become magnetized by a f ield, whereas others
are unaffected? To answer such questions, we need an unders tanding of magnetism on a microscopic level.
Within an atom, every electron travels in an orbit and spins on an internal axis. Both types of motion produce current loops and
therefore magnetic dipoles. For a particular atom, th e net magnetic dipole moment is the vector sum of the magnetic dipole
moments. Values of for several types of atoms are gi ven in Table. Notice that some atoms have a zero ne t dipole moment
and that the magnitudes of the nonvanishing moments are typically.
Table: Magnetic Moments of Some Atoms
Atom Magnetic Moment
H 9.27
He 0
Li 9.27
O 13.9
Na 9.27
S 13.9
A handful of matter has approximately atoms and io ns, each with its magnetic dipole moment. If no externa l magnetic field is
present, the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented —as many are pointed up as down, as many are pointed east as west, and so on.
Consequently, the net magnetic dipole moment of the sample is zero. However, if the sample is placed in a magnetic field, these
dipoles tend to align with the field, and this alignm ent determines how the sample responds to the field. On the basis of this
response, a material is said to be either paramagnetic, f erromagnetic, or diamagnetic.
In a paramagnetic material, only a small fraction (roughly one-third) of the magnetic dipoles are aligned with the applied field.
Since each dipole produces its own magnetic field, thi s alignment contributes an extra magnetic field, which enhances the applied
field. When a ferromagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field, its magnetic dipoles also become aligned; furthermore, they
become locked together so that a permanent magnetiz ation results, even when the field is turned off or re versed. This permanent
magnetization happens in ferromagnetic materials but not paramagnetic materials. Diamagnetic materials are composed of atoms
that have no net magnetic dipole moment. However, when a diamagnetic material is placed in a magnetic fie ld, a magnetic dipole
moment is directed opposite to the applied field and therefore produces a magnetic field that opposes t he applied field. We now
consider each type of material in greater detail.
Paramagnetic Materials
For simplicity, we assume our sample is a long, cylindr ical piece that completely fills the interior of a lo ng, tightly wound solenoid.
When there is no current in the solenoid, the magnet ic dipoles in the sample are randomly oriented and pro duce no net magnetic
field. With a solenoid current, the magnetic field d ue to the solenoid exerts a torque on the dipoles t hat tends to align them with the
field. In competition with the aligning torque are th ermal collisions that tend to randomize the orienta tions of the dipoles. The
relative importance of these two competing processes can be estimated by comparing the energies involved. The energy differenceLearning Objectives

6.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608between a magnetic dipole aligned with and against a m agnetic field is. If (the value of atomic
hydrogen) and B = 1.0 T, then
At a room temperature of the thermal energy per atom is
which is about 220 times greater than. Clearly, ener gy exchanges in thermal collisions can seriously in terfere with the alignment
of the magnetic dipoles. As a result, only a small fraction of the dipoles is aligned at any instant.
The four sketches of Figure furnish a simple model o f this alignment process. In part (a), before the field of the solenoid (not
shown) containing the paramagnetic sample is applied, the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented and the re is no net magnetic
dipole moment associated with the material. With the introduction of the field, a partial alignment of t he dipoles takes place, as
depicted in part (b). The component of the net magne tic dipole moment that is perpendicular to the fiel d vanishes. We may then
represent the sample by part (c), which shows a collecti on of magnetic dipoles completely aligned with the fi eld. By treating these
dipoles as current loops, we can picture the dipole al ignment as equivalent to a current around the surfac e of the material, as in part
(d). This fictitious surface current produces its own magneti c field, which enhances the field of the solenoid.
Figure: The alignment process in a paramagnetic mater ial filling a solenoid (not shown). (a) Without an ap plied field, the
magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented. (b) With a f ield, partial alignment occurs. (c) An equivalent re presentation of part (b). (d)
The internal currents cancel, leaving an effective su rface current that produces a magnetic field similar to that of a finite solenoid.
We can express the total magnetic field in the materia l as
where is the field due to the current in the solen oid and is the field due to the surface current ar ound the sample. Now
is usually proportional to a fact we express by
where is a dimensionless quantity called the magneti c susceptibility. Values of for some paramagnetic ma terials are given in
Table. Since the alignment of magnetic dipoles is so we ak, is very small for paramagnetic materials. By co mbining
Equation and Equation, we obtain:
For a sample within an infinite solenoid, this becomes

6.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608This expression tells us that the insertion of a para magnetic material into a solenoid increases the fiel d by a factor of.
However, since is so small, the field isn’t enhanced ver y much.
The quantity
is called the magnetic permeability of a material. In terms of, Equation can be written as
for the filled solenoid.
Table: Magnetic Susceptibilities*Note: Unless otherwise specified, values given are for room temperature.
Paramagnetic Materials Diamagnetic Materials
Aluminum Bismuth
Calcium Carbon (diamond)
Chromium Copper
Magnesium Lead
Oxygen gas (1 atm) Mercury
Oxygen liquid (90 K) Hydrogen gas (1 atm)
Tungsten Nitrogen gas (1 atm)
Air (1 atm) Water
Diamagnetic Materials
A magnetic field always induces a magnetic dipole in an atom. This induced dipole points opposite to the applied field, so its
magnetic field is also directed opposite to the appl ied field. In paramagnetic and ferromagnetic materia ls, the induced magnetic
dipole is masked by much stronger permanent magnetic dipoles of the atoms. However, in diamagnetic material s, whose atoms
have no permanent magnetic dipole moments, the effect o f the induced dipole is observable.
We can now describe the magnetic effects of diamagne tic materials with the same model developed for param agnetic materials. In
this case, however, the fictitious surface current flo ws opposite to the solenoid current, and the magnetic susceptibility is
negative. Values of for some diamagnetic materials are also given in Table.
Water is a common diamagnetic material. Animals are m ostly composed of water. Experiments have been perfor med on frogs
and mice in diverging magnetic fields. The water molecules a re repelled from the applied magnetic field against gravity until
the animal reaches an equilibrium. The result is that t he animal is levitated by the magnetic field.
Ferromagnetic Materials
Common magnets are made of a ferromagnetic material such as iron or one of its alloys. Experiments reve al that a ferromagnetic
material consists of tiny regions known as magnetic domains. Their volumes typically range from to, and they
contain about to atoms. Within a domain, the magn etic dipoles are rigidly aligned in the same direct ion by coupling
among the atoms. This coupling, which is due to quantum mechanical effects, is so strong that even thermal agi tation at room
temperature cannot break it. The result is that each domain has a net dipole moment. Some materials have weaker coupling and are
ferromagnetic only at lower temperatures.
If the domains in a ferromagnetic sample are randoml y oriented, as shown in Figure, the sample has no net magnetic dipole
moment and is said to be unmagnetized. Suppose that we fill the volume of a solenoid with an unmagnetized fe rromagnetic sample.

6.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608When the magnetic field of the solenoid is turned o n, the dipole moments of the domains rotate so that they align somewhat
with the field, as depicted in Figure. In addition, the aligned domains tend to increase in size at the expense of unaligned
ones. The net effect of these two processes is the creat ion of a net magnetic dipole moment for the ferroma gnet that is directed
along the applied magnetic field. This net magnetic dipole moment is much larger than that of a parama gnetic sample, and the
domains, with their large numbers of atoms, do not bec ome misaligned by thermal agitation. Consequently, t he field due to the
alignment of the domains is quite large.
Figure: (a) Domains are randomly oriented in an unma gnetized ferromagnetic sample such as iron. The arrows represent the
orientations of the magnetic dipoles within the domai ns. (b) In an applied magnetic field, the domains ali gn somewhat with the
field. (c) The domains of a single crystal of nickel. The white lines show the boundaries of the domains. The se lines are produced
by iron oxide powder sprinkled on the crystal.
Besides iron, only four elements contain the magnetic domains needed to exhibit ferromagnetic behavior: co balt, nickel,
gadolinium, and dysprosium. Many alloys of these elem ents are also ferromagnetic. Ferromagnetic materials can be described
using Equation through Equation, the paramagnetic equations. However, the value of for ferromagnetic m aterial is
usually on the order of to, and it also depends on the history of the magnetic field to which the mate rial has been subject. A
typical plot of B (the total field in the material) versus (the app lied field) for an initially unmagnetized piece of i ron is shown in
Figure. Some sample numbers are (1) for,, and; for (2) for
,, and.
Figure: (a) The magnetic field B in annealed iron a s a function of the applied field.
When is varied over a range of positive and negati ve values, B is found to behave as shown in Figure. Note that the same
(corresponding to the same current in the solenoid) can produce different values of B in the material. The magnetic field B
produced in a ferromagnetic material by an applied field depends on the magnetic history of the mater ial. This effect is called
hysteresis, and the curve of Figure is called a hysteresis lo op. Notice that B does not disappear when (i.e., when the
current in the solenoid is turned off). The iron stays magn etized, which means that it has become a permanent magnet.

6.13.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608
Figure: A typical hysteresis loop for a ferromagnet. W hen the material is first magnetized, it follows a cur ve from 0 to a.
When is reversed, it takes the path shown from a to b. If is reversed again, the material follows the curv e from b to a.
Like the paramagnetic sample of Figure, the partial alignment of the domains in a ferromagnet is equivale nt to a current
flowing around the surface. A bar magnet can therefo re be pictured as a tightly wound solenoid with a lar ge current circulating
through its coils (the surface current). You can see i n Figure that this model fits quite well. The fields o f the bar magnet and
the finite solenoid are strikingly similar. The figure also shows how the poles of the bar magnet are identi fied. To form closed
loops, the field lines outside the magnet leave the n orth (N) pole and enter the south (S) pole, whereas ins ide the magnet, they leave
S and enter N.
Figure: Comparison of the magnetic fields of a finite solenoid and a bar magnet.
Ferromagnetic materials are found in computer hard di sk drives and permanent data storage devices (Figure). A material used
in your hard disk drives is called a spin valve, whic h has alternating layers of ferromagnetic (aligning wit h the external magnetic
field) and antiferromagnetic (each atom is aligned o pposite to the next) metals. It was observed that a significant change in
resistance was discovered based on whether an applied magnetic field was on the spin valve or not. This lar ge change in resistance
creates a quick and consistent way for recording or reading information by an applied current.

6.13.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608
Figure: The inside of a hard disk drive. The silver di sk contains the information, whereas the thin stylus on top of the disk
reads and writes information to the disk.
A long coil is tightly wound around an iron cylinder whose magnetization curve is shown in Figure. (a) If turns
per centimeter, what is the applied field when? (b) What is the net magnetic field for this same curren t? (c) What
is the magnetic susceptibility in this case?
Strategy
(a) The magnetic field of a solenoid is calculated using. (b) The graph is read to determine the net magnetic field for
this same current. (c) The magnetic susceptibility is calc ulated using Equation.
Solution
1. The applied field of the coil is
2. From inspection of the magnetization curve of Figure, we see that, for this value of. Notice that the
internal field of the aligned atoms is much larger tha n the externally applied field.
3. The magnetic susceptibility is calculated to be
Significance
Ferromagnetic materials have susceptibilities in the ra nge of which compares well to our results here. Paramag netic
materials have fractional susceptibilities, so thei r applied field of the coil is much greater than th e magnetic field generated by
the material.
Repeat the calculations from the previous example for
Answer
a.; b. 0.60 T; c. Example: Iron Core in a Coil
Exercise

6.13.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76608Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.13: Magnetism in Matter is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.8: Magnetism in Matter by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

6.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/765996.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary)
Key Terms
cosmic rayscomprised of particles that originate mainly from out side the solar
system and reach Earth
cyclotron device used to accelerate charged particles to large kinetic energies
deeslarge metal containers used in cyclotrons that serve co ntain a
stream of charged particles as their speed is increased
gauss G, unit of the magnetic field strength;
Hall effectcreation of voltage across a current-carrying conduct or by a
magnetic field
helical motionsuperposition of circular motion with a straight-line motion that is
followed by a charged particle moving in a region o f magnetic
field at an angle to the field
magnetic dipole closed-current loop
magnetic dipole moment term IA of the magnetic dipole, also called
magnetic field linescontinuous curves that show the direction of a magnetic field;
these lines point in the same direction as a compass poin ts, toward
the magnetic south pole of a bar magnet
magnetic forceforce applied to a charged particle moving through a magnetic
field
mass spectrometer device that separates ions according to their charge-t o-mass ratios
motor (dc)loop of wire in a magnetic field; when current is pa ssed through
the loops, the magnetic field exerts torque on the lo ops, which
rotates a shaft; electrical energy is converted into m echanical work
in the process
north magnetic polecurrently where a compass points to north, near the ge ographic
North Pole; this is the effective south pole of a bar m agnet but has
flipped between the effective north and south poles o f a bar
magnet multiple times over the age of Earth
right-hand rule-1using your right hand to determine the direction of either the
magnetic force, velocity of a charged particle, or magnetic field
south magnetic polecurrently where a compass points to the south, near the geographic
South Pole; this is the effective north pole of a bar m agnet but has
flipped just like the north magnetic pole
tesla SI unit for magnetic field:
velocity selectorapparatus where the crossed electric and magnetic field s produce
equal and opposite forces on a charged particle movin g with a
specific velocity; this particle moves through the vel ocity selector
not affected by either field while particles moving with different
velocities are deflected by the apparatus

6.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76599Key Equations
Force on a charge in a magnetic field
Magnitude of magnetic force
Radius of a particle’s path in a magnetic field
Period of a particle’s motion in a magnetic field
Force on a current-carrying wire in a uniform magnet ic field
Magnetic dipole moment
Torque on a current loop
Energy of a magnetic dipole
Drift velocity in crossed electric and magnetic field s
Hall potential
Hall potential in terms of drift velocity
Charge-to-mass ratio in a mass spectrometer
Maximum speed of a particle in a cyclotron
Summary
11.2 Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
Magnets have two types of magnetic poles, called the north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole. North magnetic poles
are those that are attracted toward Earth’s geographic North Pole.
Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
Discoveries of how magnets respond to currents by Oersted and others created a framework that led to the invention o f modern
electronic devices, electric motors, and magnetic imaging technology.
11.3 Magnetic Fields and Lines
Charges moving across a magnetic field experience a forc e determined by. The force is perpendicular to the pl ane
formed by and.
The direction of the force on a moving charge is given by the right hand rule 1 (RHR-1): Sweep your fingers in a vel ocity,
magnetic field plane. Start by pointing them in the dire ction of velocity and sweep towards the magnetic field. Yo ur thumb
points in the direction of the magnetic force for positive charges.
Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by magn etic field lines, which have the following properties:
1. The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
2. Field strength is proportional to the line density.
3. Field lines cannot cross.
4. Field lines form continuous, closed loops.
Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
11.4 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
A magnetic force can supply centripetal force and cause a charged particle to move in a circular path of rad ius.
The period of circular motion for a charged particle m oving in a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of motion is

6.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76599Helical motion results if the velocity of the charged parti cle has a component parallel to the magnetic field as wel l as a
component perpendicular to the magnetic field.
11.5 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
An electrical current produces a magnetic field around the wire.
The directionality of the magnetic field produced is de termined by the right hand rule-2, where your thumb points in the
direction of the current and your fingers wrap around the wire in the direction of the magnetic field.
The magnetic force on current-carrying conductors is gi ven by where I is the current and l is the length of a wir e in
a uniform magnetic field B.
11.6 Force and Torque on a Current Loop
The net force on a current-carrying loop of any plane sh ape in a uniform magnetic field is zero.
The net torque τ on a current-carrying loop of any shape in a uniform magnetic field is calculated using where i s
the magnetic dipole moment and is the magnetic field strength.
The magnetic dipole moment is the product of the num ber of turns of wire N, the current in the loop I, and the area of the
loop A or.
11.7 The Hall Effect
Perpendicular electric and magnetic fields exert equal and opposite forces for a specific velocity of enterin g particles, thereby
acting as a velocity selector. The velocity that passes through undeflected is calculated by.
The Hall effect can be used to measure the sign of the major ity of charge carriers for metals. It can also be used to me asure a
magnetic field.
11.8 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
A mass spectrometer is a device that separates ions accordin g to their charge-to-mass ratios by first sending them thr ough a
velocity selector, then a uniform magnetic field.
Cyclotrons are used to accelerate charged particles t o large kinetic energies through applied electric and magnetic fields.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.9: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766111.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary)
Key Terms
Ampère’s lawphysical law that states that the line integral of the magnetic field
around an electric current is proportional to the cu rrent
Biot-Savart lawan equation giving the magnetic field at a point pr oduced by a
current-carrying wire
diamagnetic materialstheir magnetic dipoles align oppositely to an applied magnetic
field; when the field is removed, the material is unm agnetized
ferromagnetic materialscontain groups of dipoles, called domains, that align with the
applied magnetic field; when this field is removed, th e material is
still magnetized
hysteresisproperty of ferromagnets that is seen when a material’s magnetic
field is examined versus the applied magnetic field; a loop is
created resulting from sweeping the applied field forw ard and
reverse
magnetic domainsgroups of magnetic dipoles that are all aligned in th e same
direction and are coupled together quantum mechanic ally
magnetic susceptibilityratio of the magnetic field in the material over th e applied field at
that time; positive susceptibilities are either paramag netic or
ferromagnetic (aligned with the field) and negative susceptibilities
are diamagnetic (aligned oppositely with the field)
paramagnetic materialstheir magnetic dipoles align partially in the same di rection as the
applied magnetic field; when this field is removed, th e material is
unmagnetized
permeability of free space, measure of the ability of a material, in this case f ree space, to
support a magnetic field
solenoidthin wire wound into a coil that produces a magnetic field when an
electric current is passed through it
toroiddonut-shaped coil closely wound around that is one cont inuous
wire

1.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76611Key Equations
Permeability of free space
Contribution to magnetic field from a current eleme nt
Biot–Savart law
Magnetic field due to a long straight wire
Force between two parallel currents
Magnetic field of a current loop (at center of loop)
Ampère’s law
Magnetic field strength inside a solenoid
Magnetic field strength inside a toroid
Magnetic permeability
Magnetic field of a solenoid filled with paramagnetic material
Summary
12.2 The Biot-Savart Law
The magnetic field created by a current-carrying wire is f ound by the Biot-Savart law.
The current element produces a magnetic field a dista nce r away.
12.3 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
The strength of the magnetic field created by current i n a long straight wire is given by (long straight wire) whe re I is
the current, R is the shortest distance to the wire, and the constant is the permeability of free space.
The direction of the magnetic field created by a long str aight wire is given by right-hand rule 2 (RHR-2): Point th e thumb of the
right hand in the direction of current, and the fingers cu rl in the direction of the magnetic field loops created b y it.
12.4 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
The force between two parallel currents and, separated by a distance r, has a magnitude per unit length given by
The force is attractive if the currents are in the same dir ection, repulsive if they are in opposite directions.
12.5 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
The magnetic field strength at the center of a circular loop is given by (at center of loop),, where R is the radius of the
loop. RHR-2 gives the direction of the field about the lo op.
12.6 Ampère’s Law
The magnetic field created by current following any path i s the sum (or integral) of the fields due to segments along the path
(magnitude and direction as for a straight wire), resulti ng in a general relationship between current and field kn own as Ampère’s
law.
Ampère’s law can be used to determine the magnetic field fro m a thin wire or thick wire by a geometrically convenient path of
integration. The results are consistent with the Biot-Sava rt law.
12.7 Solenoids and Toroids
The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is

1.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76611 (inside a solenoid)
where n is the number of loops per unit length of the soleno id. The field inside is very uniform in magnitude and
direction.
The magnetic field strength inside a toroid is
(within the toroid)
where N is the number of windings. The field inside a toroid is n ot uniform and varies with the distance as 1/r.
12.8 Magnetism in Matter
Materials are classified as paramagnetic, diamagnetic, or ferromagnetic, depending on how they behave in an applie d magnetic
field.
Paramagnetic materials have partial alignment of their ma gnetic dipoles with an applied magnetic field. This is a positive
magnetic susceptibility. Only a surface current remains, creating a solenoid-like magnetic field.
Diamagnetic materials exhibit induced dipoles opposite to an applied magnetic field. This is a negative magn etic susceptibility.
Ferromagnetic materials have groups of dipoles, called domains, which align with the applied magnetic field. Howev er, when
the field is removed, the ferromagnetic material remai ns magnetized, unlike paramagnetic materials. This m agnetization of the
material versus the applied field effect is called hys teresis.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 1.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.9: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
7.2: Motional Emf
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
7.6: Inductance
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
7.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
7.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers)
7.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electri cal Technologies (Exercise)
7.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary)
This page titled 7: Electromagnetic Induction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766147.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the magnetic flux through a surface, knowing the strength of the magnetic field, the surface area, and the angle
between the normal to the surface and the magnetic field
Use Faraday’s law to determine the magnitude of induced emf in a closed loop due to changing magnetic flux through the
loop
Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced emf whenever a magnetic flux changes
Use Faraday’s law with Lenz’s law to determine the induced emf in a coil and in a solenoid
We have been considering electric fields created by fixed charge distributions and magnetic fields prod uced by constant currents,
but electromagnetic phenomena are not restricted to these stationary situations. Most of the interesting applications of
electromagnetism are, in fact, time-dependent. To in vestigate some of these applications, we now remove t he time-independent
assumption that we have been making and allow the fie lds to vary with time. In this and the next several c hapters, you will see a
wonderful symmetry in the behavior exhibited by time -varying electric and magnetic fields. Mathematical ly, this symmetry is
expressed by an additional term in Ampère’s law and by another key equation of electromagnetism called Far aday’s law. We also
discuss how moving a wire through a magnetic field pr oduces an emf or voltage. Lastly, we describe applicati ons of these
principles.
Faraday’s Law
The first productive experiments concerning the effe cts of time-varying magnetic fields were performed by Michael Faraday in
1831. One of his early experiments is represented in Fi gure. An emf is induced when the magnetic field in the coil is cha nged
by pushing a bar magnet into or out of the coil. Em fs of opposite signs are produced by motion in oppo site directions, and the
directions of emfs are also reversed by reversing po les. The same results are produced if the coil is m oved rather than the magnet—
it is the relative motion that is important. The fast er the motion, the greater the emf, and there is no em f when the magnet is
stationary relative to the coil.
Figure: Movement of a magnet relative to a coil pro duces emfs as shown (a–d). The same emfs are produced if the coil is
moved relative to the magnet. This short-lived emf is only present during the motion. The greater the speed, the greater the
magnitude of the emf, and the emf is zero when there is no motion, as shown in (e).
Faraday also discovered that a similar effect can be produced using two circuits—a changing current in one circuit induces a
current in a second, nearby circuit. For example, when the switch is closed in circuit 1 of Figure, the amm eter needle of
circuit 2 momentarily deflects, indicating that a sh ort-lived current surge has been induced in that ci rcuit. The ammeter needleLearning Objectives

7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614quickly returns to its original position, where it re mains. However, if the switch of circuit 1 is now suddenly opened, another shortlived current surge in the direction opposite from befor e is observed in circuit 2.
Figure: (a) Closing the switch of circuit 1 produces a short-lived current surge in circuit 2. (b) If the sw itch remains closed, no
current is observed in circuit 2. (c) Opening the swit ch again produces a short-lived current in circuit 2 but in the opposite direction
from before.
Faraday realized that in both experiments, a current flowed in the circuit containing the ammeter only wh en the magnetic field in
the region occupied by that circuit was changing. As the magnet of the figure was moved, the strength of its magnetic field at the
loop changed; and when the current in circuit 1 was tu rned on or off, the strength of its magnetic field at circuit 2 changed. Faraday
was eventually able to interpret these and all other experiments involving magnetic fields that vary with time in terms of the
following law.
The emf induced is the negative change in the magn etic flux per unit time. Any change in the magnetic field or change in
orientation of the area of the coil with respect to the ma gnetic field induces a voltage (emf).
The magnetic flux is a measurement of the amount of magnetic field lines through a given surface area, a s seen in Figure. This
definition is similar to the electric flux studied earlier. T his means that if we have
then the induced emf or the voltage generated by a conductor or coil moving in a magnetic field is
The negative sign describes the direction in which th e induced emf drives current around a circuit. However, that direction is most
easily determined with a rule known as Lenz’s law, which we wil l discuss shortly.
Figure: The magnetic flux is the amount of magnetic field lines cutting through a surface area A defined by the unit area
vector. If the angle between the unit area and ma gnetic field vector are parallel or antiparallel, as shown in the diagram, the
magnetic flux is the highest possible value given the v alues of area and magnetic field.
depicts a circuit and an arbitrary surface S that it bounds. Notice that S is an open surface. It can be shown that any open
surface bounded by the circuit in question can be use d to evaluate. For example, is the same for the vari ous surfaces
of part (b) of the figure.Faraday's Law

7.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614
Figure: (a) A circuit bounding an arbitrary open sur face S. The planar area bounded by the circuit is not part of S. (b) Three
arbitrary open surfaces bounded by the same circuit. T he value of is the same for all these surfaces.
The SI unit for magnetic flux is the weber (Wb),
Occasionally, the magnetic field unit is expressed as we bers per square meter () instead of teslas, based on this definition.
In many practical applications, the circuit of intere st consists of a number N of tightly wound turns (Figure). Each turn
experiences the same magnetic flux. Therefore, the ne t magnetic flux through the circuits is N times the flux through one turn, and
Faraday’s law is written as
Lenz's Law
The direction in which the induced emf drives current around a wire loop can be found through the negativ e sign. However, it is
usually easier to determine this direction with Lenz ’s law, named in honor of its discoverer, Heinrich Len z (1804–1865). (Faraday
also discovered this law, independently of Lenz.) We st ate Lenz’s law as follows:
The direction of the induced emf drives current aro und a wire loop to always oppose the change in magnetic flux that causes
the emf.
Lenz’s law can also be considered in terms of conserva tion of energy. If pushing a magnet into a coil cau ses current, the energy in
that current must have come from somewhere. If the i nduced current causes a magnetic field opposing the in crease in field of the
magnet we pushed in, then the situation is clear. We pu shed a magnet against a field and did work on the sy stem, and that showed
up as current. If it were not the case that the indu ced field opposes the change in the flux, the magnet wo uld be pulled in produce a
current without anything having done work. Electric p otential energy would have been created, violating th e conservation of
energy.
To determine an induced emf, you first calculate the ma gnetic flux and then obtain. The magnitude of is given by
Finally, you can apply Lenz’s law to determine the sense of. This will be developed through examples that il lustrate the following
problem-solving strategy.Lenz's Law

7.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614To use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of induced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs:
Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and recor ding directions.
Determine the direction of the applied magnetic field.
Determine whether its magnetic flux is increasing or decre asing.
Now determine the direction of the induced magnetic field. The induced magnetic field tries to reinforce a magnet ic flux
that is decreasing or opposes a magnetic flux that is incr easing. Therefore, the induced magnetic field adds or s ubtracts to
the applied magnetic field, depending on the change in magnetic flux.
Use right-hand rule 2 (RHR-2; see Magnetic Forces and Fields) to determine the di rection of the induced current I that is
responsible for the induced magnetic field.
The direction (or polarity) of the induced emf can now d rive a conventional current in this direction.
Let’s apply Lenz’s law to the system of Figure. We desig nate the “front” of the closed conducting loop as t he region
containing the approaching bar magnet, and the “bac k” of the loop as the other region. As the north pole of the magnet moves
toward the loop, the flux through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the strength of field lines directed from
the front to the back of the loop is increasing. A cu rrent is therefore induced in the loop. By Lenz’s la w, the direction of the induced
current must be such that its own magnetic field is di rected in a way to oppose the changing flux caused by the field of the
approaching magnet. Hence, the induced current circul ates so that its magnetic field lines through the loo p are directed from the
back to the front of the loop. By RHR-2, place your t humb pointing against the magnetic field lines, whic h is toward the bar
magnet. Your fingers wrap in a counterclockwise direct ion as viewed from the bar magnet. Alternatively, we can determine the
direction of the induced current by treating the cu rrent loop as an electromagnet that opposes the approach of the north pole of the
bar magnet. This occurs when the induced current flo ws as shown, for then the face of the loop nearer the approaching magnet is
also a north pole.
Figure: The change in magnetic flux caused by the ap proaching magnet induces a current in the loop. (a) An approaching
north pole induces a counterclockwise current with re spect to the bar magnet. (b) An approaching south pol e induces a clockwise
current with respect to the bar magnet.
Part (b) of the figure shows the south pole of a magne t moving toward a conducting loop. In this case, the f lux through the loop due
to the field of the magnet increases because the num ber of field lines directed from the back to the fr ont of the loop is increasing.
To oppose this change, a current is induced in the loop whose field lines through the loop are directed from the front to the back.
Equivalently, we can say that the current flows in a di rection so that the face of the loop nearer the appr oaching magnet is a south
pole, which then repels the approaching south pole o f the magnet. By RHR-2, your thumb points away from th e bar magnet. Your
fingers wrap in a clockwise fashion, which is the direction of the induced current.
Another example illustrating the use of Lenz’s law is shown in Figure. When the switch is opened, the decrea se in current
through the solenoid causes a decrease in magnetic f lux through its coils, which induces an emf in the so lenoid. This emf must
oppose the change (the termination of the current) causing it. Consequently, the induced emf has the po larity shown and drives in
the direction of the original current. This may generat e an arc across the terminals of the switch as it is ope ned.Problem-Solving Strategy: Lenz’s Law

7.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614
Figure: (a) A solenoid connected to a source of emf. (b) Opening switch S terminates the current, which in turn induces an emf
in the solenoid. (c) A potential difference between the ends of the sharply pointed rods is produced by ind ucing an emf in a coil.
This potential difference is large enough to produce an arc between the sharp points.
Examples and Exercises
Calculate the magnitude of the induced emf when the magnet in the Figure is thrust into the coil, given t he following
information: the single loop coil has a radius of 6.0 0 cm and the average value of (this is given, since the bar magnet’s
field is complex) increases from 0.0500 T to 0.250 T in 0.100 s.
Strategy
To find the magnitute of emf, we use Faraday’s law of induction as stated by, but without the minus sign that
indicates direction:
Solution
We are given that and but we must determine the cha nge in flux before we can find emf. Since
the area of the loop is fixed, we see that
Now, since it was given that changes from 0.0500 to 0.2 50 T. The area of the loop is
. Thus,
Entering the determined values into the expression for em f gives
Discussion:Example: Calculating Emf: How Great is the Induced Emf?

7.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614While this is an easily measured voltage, it is certa inly not large enough for most practical application s. More loops in
the coil, a stronger magnet, and faster movement make in duction the practical source of voltages that it is.
The square coil of Figure has sides long and is tig htly wound with turns of wire. The resistance of the
coil is The coil is placed in a spatially uniform ma gnetic field that is directed perpendicular to the f ace of the coil and
whose magnitude is decreasing at a rate. (a) What is the magnitude of the emf induced in the coil? (b)
What is the magnitude of the current circulating throug h the coil?
Figure: A square coil with N turns of wire with uniform magnetic field directed in the downward direction,
perpendicular to the coil.
Strategy
The area vector, or direction, is perpendicular to area covering the loop. We will choose this to be poi nting downward so
that is parallel to and that the flux turns into m ultiplication of magnetic field times area. The are a of the loop is not
changing in time, so it can be factored out of the time derivative, leaving the magnetic field as the only quantity varying in
time. Lastly, we can apply Ohm’s law once we know the induced emf to find the current in the loop.
Solution
1. The flux through one turn is
so we can calculate the magnitude of the emf from Far aday’s law. The sign of the emf will be discussed in t he next
section, on Lenz’s law:
The magnitude of the current induced in the coil is

Significance
If the area of the loop were changing in time, we would not be able to pull it out of the time derivative. Since the loop is
a closed path, the result of this current would be a small amount of heating of the wires until the magne tic field stops
changing. This may increase the area of the loop slightl y as the wires are heated.Example: A Square Coil in a Changing Magnetic Field

7.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614Below are 4 cases: the left panels show the initial a nd the right panels show the final configurations. Th e arrows indicate the
direction and magnitude of the external magnetic fiel d.
Fill in the table below for each case
SolutionExample:

7.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614
Consider a magnetic field is created by a large sole noid magnet. The solenoid is 1.5 meters long, has 5000 turns, a resistance of
, and a one-meter radius. A coil located inside the solenoid has a single loop (as depicted below), a r esistance of, and a
0.4 m radius. The solenoid initially has a current wh ich produces a 0.2 T magnetic field. The solenoid’s cur rent is then reduced
linearly to zero in 0.1 seconds as shown in the left plot below.
a) Calculate which is marked on the plot below.
b) Make a graph of the current in the coil on the ri ght plot below. Make sure to indicate numerical value s and explain your
choice of sign for the current.
Solution
a) The magnetic field for a solenoid is. The maximum cur rent with be when the magnetic field is at 0.2 T, sin ce
the current is reduced with time:Example:

7.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614b) The magnetic field is upward using the current RHR, which is reduced to zero. Thus, the induced magnetic f ield will also
be upward to oppose the change of flux decreasing in the upward direction. Using the same RHR again, this re sults in an
induced current which is counterclockwise as viewed f rom top. In other words, the direction of the current in the coil is the
same as the direction of the current in the solenoid.
Now that we have established the direction of curren t, we just need to worry about the magnitude of the in duced emf and
current. The magnitude of induced emf for the wire which onl y contains one loop is:
Solving for induced current:
A square loop of wire with a total resistance has a side-length of. It resides near a long, straight wire such that the long
wire is in the same plane as the loop, with one of its sid es parallel to the wire a distance d from it, as shown in the diagram.
a. Compute the magnetic flux through the loop due to a current flowing in the direction shown in the diagram.
b. If the current in the long wire is changing, then the magne tic field flux through the loop will also be changing. Sup pose that
the current in the long wire is increasing at a constant rate of. Find the current induced in the loop, including its
direction.
Solution
a. We know the magnetic field for a long-straight wire gets weaker at greater distances, which means we have t o perform
the flux integral. The diagram below shows the magnetic field a nd introduces some axes for performing the math required.Example:

7.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614
The magnetic field strength in the - plane in terms of the dista nce from the long wire is given by:
We take as a differential area element a thin vertica l slice down the length of the circuit. This slice has an area of,
and the field is constant throughout the slice. Also, the area vector is parallel to the magnetic field, so c hoosing the loop
direction as counterclockwise, the angle between the fiel d and the area vector is. The flux integral is therefore:
b. The emf induced in the loop (which has only one turn in it) is found using Faraday's law:
The magnitude of the current is this emf divided by the resista nce:
The direction of the current will be such that it prov ides a field that will seek to counter the change. Th e current that is
causing the field is increasing, so the flux out of the page in increasing. The induced current will ther efore produce a
magnetic field inside the loop that points into the page, whi ch means it must flow clockwise.
A magnetic field is directed outward perpendicular to the plane of a circular coil of radius (Figure). The field
is cylindrically symmetrical with respect to the cen ter of the coil, and its magnitude decays exponential ly according to
, where B is in teslas and t is in seconds. (a) Calculate the emf induced in th e coil at the times,
, and. (b) Determine the current in the coil at these thre e times if its resistance is.Example: A Circular Coil in a Changing Magnetic Field

7.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614
Figure: A circular coil in a decreasing magnetic fie ld.
Strategy
Since the magnetic field is perpendicular to the pla ne of the coil and constant over each spot in the c oil, the dot product of
the magnetic field and normal to the area unit vec tor turns into a multiplication. The magnetic fiel d can be pulled out of
the integration, leaving the flux as the product of the magnetic field times area. We need to take the time derivative of the
exponential function to calculate the emf using Faraday’ s law. Then we use Ohm’s law to calculate the current.
Solution
1. Since is perpendicular to the plane of the coil, the mag netic flux is given by
From Faraday’s law, the magnitude of the induced emf is
Since is directed out of the page and is decreasing, the induced current must flow counterclockwise when viewed
from above so that the magnetic field it produces throug h the coil also points out of the page. For all three tim es, the
sense of e is counterclockwise; its magnitudes are
2. From Ohm’s law, the respective currents are
and
Significance
An emf voltage is created by a changing magnetic flux over time. If we know how the magnetic field varies wi th time
over a constant area, we can take its time derivative to ca lculate the induced emf.

7.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614The current through the windings of a solenoid with t urns per meter is changing at a rate. (See
Sources of Magnetic Fields for a discussion of solenoids.) The solenoid is 50-cm long and has a cross-section al diameter of 3.0
cm. A small coil consisting of closely wound turns wrap ped in a circle of diameter 1.0 cm is placed in the middle of the
solenoid such that the plane of the coil is perpendi cular to the central axis of the solenoid. Assuming th at the infinite-solenoid
approximation is valid at the location of the small coil, determine the magnitude of the emf induced in the co il.
Strategy
The magnetic field in the middle of the solenoid is a uniform value of. This field is producing a maxi mum magnetic
flux through the coil as it is directed along the le ngth of the solenoid. Therefore, the magnetic flux through the coil is the
product of the solenoid’s magnetic field times the a rea of the coil. Faraday’s law involves a time derivati ve of the magnetic
flux. The only quantity varying in time is the curren t, the rest can be pulled out of the time derivative. Lastly, we include
the number of turns in the coil to determine the induc ed emf in the coil.
Solution
Since the field of the solenoid is given by, the flux thro ugh each turn of the small coil is
where d is the diameter of the coil. Now from Faraday’s law, the m agnitude of the emf induced in the coil is
Significance
When the current is turned on in a vertical solenoi d, as shown in Figure, the ring has an induced emf fro m the
solenoid’s changing magnetic flux that opposes the chang e. The result is that the ring is fired vertically into t he air.
Figure: The jumping ring. When a current is turned o n in the vertical solenoid, a current is induced in t he metal
ring. The stray field produced by the solenoid causes t he ring to jump off the solenoid.Example: Changing Magnetic Field Inside a Solenoid

7.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614A closely wound coil has a radius of 4.0 cm, 50 turns, and a total resistance of. At what rate must a magn etic field
perpendicular to the face of the coil change in order to p roduce Joule heating in the coil at a rate of 2.0 mW?
Solution
1.1 T/s
Find the direction of the induced current in the wire loop shown below as the magnet enters, passes through, and leaves the
loop.
Solution
To the observer shown, the current flows clockwise as t he magnet approaches, decreases to zero when the mag net is centered
in the plane of the coil, and then flows counterclockwise as the magnet leaves the coil.
Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
There are many applications of Faraday’s Law of induct ion, as we will explore in this chapter and others. At this juncture, let us
mention several that have to do with data storage and magnetic fields. A very important application has to do with audio and video
recording tapes. A plastic tape, coated with iron oxide, moves past a recording head. This recording head is basically a r ound iron
ring about which is wrapped a coil of wire—an electroma gnet (Figure 2). A signal in the form of a varying in put current from a
microphone or camera goes to the recording head. Th ese signals (which are a function of the signal ampli tude and frequency)
produce varying magnetic fields at the recording hea d. As the tape moves past the recording head, the magneti c field orientations of
the iron oxide molecules on the tape are changed th us recording the signal. In the playback mode, the magnetized tape is run past
another head, similar in structure to the recording head. The different magnetic field orientations of the iron oxide molecules on the
tape induces an emf in the coil of wire in the playback head. Thi s signal then is sent to a loudspeaker or video player.
Figure: Recording and playback heads used with audio and video magnetic tapes. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
Similar principles apply to computer hard drives, excep t at a much faster rate. Here recordings are on a coa ted, spinning disk. Read
heads historically were made to work on the principle of induction. However, the input information is carri ed in digital rather than
analog form – a series of 0’s or 1’s are written upon the spinning hard drive. Today, most hard drive read out devices do not work on
the principle of induction, but use a technique known as giant magnetoresistance. (The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic
field in a thin film of iron and chromium could bri ng about much larger changes in electrical resistanc e was one of the first large
successes of nanotechnology.) Another application of i nduction is found on the magnetic stripe on the back of your personal creditExercise
Exercise

7.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614card as used at the grocery store or the ATM machine. This works on the same principle as the audio or video tape mentioned in the
last paragraph in which a head reads personal information fr om your card.
Another application of electromagnetic induction is wh en electrical signals need to be transmitted across a barrier. Consider the
cochlear implant shown below. Sound is picked up by a microphone on the outside of the skull and is used to set up a varyin g
magnetic field. A current is induced in a receiver secured in the bone beneath the skin and transmitte d to electrodes in the inner ear.
Electromagnetic induction can be used in other instanc es where electric signals need to be conveyed across various media.
Figure: Electromagnetic induction used in transmittin g electric currents across mediums. The device on the b aby’s head
induces an electrical current in a receiver secured i n the bone beneath the skin. (credit: Bjorn Knetsch)
Another contemporary area of research in which electro magnetic induction is being successfully implemented (and with substantial
potential) is transcranial magnetic simulation. A hos t of disorders, including depression and hallucinations can be traced to irregular
localized electrical activity in the brain. In transcranial magnetic stimulation, a rapidly varying and very localized magnetic fie ld is
placed close to certain sites identified in the brai n. Weak electric currents are induced in the identif ied sites and can result in
recovery of electrical functioning in the brain tissue.
Sleep apnea (“the cessation of breath”) affects both adults and infants (especially premature babies and it may be a cause of sudden
infant deaths [SID]). In such individuals, breath can stop repeatedly during their sleep. A cessation of m ore than 20 seconds can be
very dangerous. Stroke, heart failure, and tiredness are just some of the possible consequences for a pe rson having sleep apnea. The
concern in infants is the stopping of breath for th ese longer times. One type of monitor to alert parents when a child is not breathing
uses electromagnetic induction. A wire wrapped around the infant’s chest has an alternating current runni ng through it. The
expansion and contraction of the infant’s chest as t he infant breathes changes the area through the coil. A pickup coil located nearby
has an alternating current induced in it due to the changing magnetic field of the initial wire. If the child stops breathing, there will
be a change in the induced current, and so a parent can be a lerted.
Other applications include:
Seismograph: One way to exploit Faraday’s Law is to attach a magnet to anythi ng that moves and place it near a loop of wire;
any movement or oscillation in the object can be detec ted as an induced current in the wire loop. In this way we c an translate
physical movements and oscillations into electrical im pulses. In all devices of this kind, the movement or oscil lation is
measured between the position of a coil relative to a ma gnet, whose movement causes the current in the coil to var y, generating
an electrical signal. For example, as the vibrations produ ced by an earthquake pass through a seismograph, a magnet 's
vibrations produce a current that can be amplified to dri ve a plotting pen. This is how the seismograph operates.
Guitar Pickup: Les Paul, a pioneer musician of pop-jazz guitar, applied Fa raday’s Law to the making of musical instruments
and invented the first electric guitar. The “pickup” of an electric guitar consists of a per manent magnet with a coil of wire
wrapped around it several times. The permanent magnet is p laced very close to the metal guitar strings. The magnetic field of
the permanent magnet causes a part of the metal stri ng of the guitar to become magnetized. When one plucks t he string, it
vibrates, creating a changing magnetic flux through the c oil of wire surrounding the permanent magnet. The coil “p icks up” the
vibrations that generate an induced current and sends the signal to an amplifier, to the pleasure of rock fans ev erywhere.
Electric Generator: An electric generator is used to efficiently convert mec hanical energy to electrical energy. The mechanical
energy can be provided by any number of means, such as fa lling water (like in a hydroelectric generator), expandin g steam (as
in coal, oil, and nuclear power plants), or wind (as in wind turbine generators). In all cases, the principle is the sa me, the
mechanical energy is used to move a conducting wire coi l inside a magnetic field (usually by rotating the wire). In this case, the
area of the coil is the constant, the magnitude of the fie ld is constant, so the angle term in the equation for Far aday's law is
responsible for the changing flux. This is caused by the change in the relative orientation between the magnetic f ield and the
normal to the area of the coil. Consider the simple scenar io where we rotate the coil with constant angular speed. T he rotation
angle is given by, and the flux will be proportional to. Using calculus, the time rate of change of the flux will the n
be proportional to. This means the induced current will o scillate sinusoidally. In other words, the current in the coil

7.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76614alternates in direction, flowing in one direction for hal f the cycle and flowing the other direction for the other hal f. This kind of
generator is referred to as an alternating current generator, or simply an AC generator. The standard plugs you use t o power all
of your electrical appliances are all powered by an electri c generator of this form.
Electric Motor: Electric motors work in basically the reverse principle th at operates electric generators: an alternating electri c
current causes an electromagnetic cylinder to periodic ally switch poles, which interacts with the field of an inlai d magnet to
turn it. Some motors use electromagnets for both componen ts, but the principle is the same. The stationary magneti c piece is
called the stator and the magnetic piece that rotates is called that rotor
Hybrid Cars: Regenerative breaking discussed above.
MAKING CONNECTIONS: CONSERVATION OF ENERGY:
Lenz’s law is a manifestation of the conservation of energy. The induced emf produces a current that oppo ses the change in flux,
because a change in flux means a change in energy. E nergy can enter or leave, but not instantaneously. L enz’s law is a
consequence. As the change begins, the law says induct ion opposes and, thus, slows the change. In fact, if the induced emf were in
the same direction as the change in flux, there would be a positive feedback that would give us free energy from no apparent source
—conservation of energy would be violated.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.2: Faraday’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
23.5: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
5.1: Magnetic Induction by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766167.2: Motional Emf
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the magnitude of an induced emf in a wire moving at a constant speed through a magnetic field
Discuss examples that use motional emf, such as a rail gun and a tethered satellite
Magnetic flux depends on three factors: the strength of the magnetic field, the area through which the fi eld lines pass, and the
orientation of the field with the surface area. If an y of these quantities varies, a corresponding variation in magnetic flux occurs. So
far, we’ve only considered flux changes due to a chan ging field. Now we look at another possibility: a chang ing area through which
the field lines pass including a change in the orientati on of the area.
Two examples of this type of flux change are represen ted in Figure. In part (a), the flux through the rec tangular loop increases
as it moves into the magnetic field, and in part (b), the flu x through the rotating coil varies with the angle.
Figure: (a) Magnetic flux changes as a loop moves into a magnetic field; (b) magnetic flux changes as a loo p rotates in a
magnetic field.
It’s interesting to note that what we perceive as the cause of a particular flux change actually depends o n the frame of reference we
choose. For example, if you are at rest relative to th e moving coils of Figure, you would see the flux vary because of a
changing magnetic field—in part (a), the field move s from left to right in your reference frame, and in part (b), the field is rotating.
It is often possible to describe a flux change thro ugh a coil that is moving in one particular referen ce frame in terms of a changing
magnetic field in a second frame, where the coil is st ationary. However, reference-frame questions related to magnetic flux are
beyond the level of this textbook. We’ll avoid such complexities by always working in a frame at rest re lative to the laboratory and
explain flux variations as due to either a changing field or a changing area.
Now let’s look at a conducting rod pulled in a circuit, changing magnetic flux. The area enclosed by the c ircuit ‘MNOP’ of Figure
is lx and is perpendicular to the magnetic field, so we ca n simplify the integration of into a multiplication of
magnetic field and area. The magnetic flux through the ope n surface is therefore
Since B and l are constant and the velocity of the rod is, we ca n now restate Faraday’s law, Equation 13.2.2, for the
magnitude of the emf in terms of the moving conducting r od as
The current induced in the circuit is the emf divided by the resistance or
Furthermore, the direction of the induced emf satisfies L enz’s law, as you can verify by inspection of the figure.Learning Objectives

7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616This calculation of motionally induced emf is not res tricted to a rod moving on conducting rails. With as the starting
point, it can be shown that holds for any change in flux caused by the motion of a conductor. We saw in Faraday’s
Law that the emf induced by a time-varying magnetic fi eld obeys this same relationship, which is Faraday’s law. Thus Faraday’s
law holds for all flux changes, whether they are produced by a changing magnetic f ield, by motion, or by a combination of the
two.
Figure: A conducting rod is pushed to the right at co nstant velocity. The resulting change in the magnetic flux induces a
current in the circuit.
From an energy perspective, produces power, and the resistor dissipates power. Since the rod is moving at constant
velocity, the applied force must balance the magne tic force on the rod when it is carrying the induced current I. Thus
the power produced is
The power dissipated is
In satisfying the principle of energy conservation, the p roduced and dissipated powers are equal.
This principle can be seen in the operation of a rail gun. A rail gun is an electromagnetic projectile launcher that use s an apparatus
similar to Figure and is shown in schematic form in Figure. The conducting rod is replaced with a project ile or weapon to
be fired. So far, we’ve only heard about how motion cause s an emf. In a rail gun, the optimal shutting off/ra mping down of a
magnetic field decreases the flux in between the rai ls, causing a current to flow in the rod (armature) that holds the projectile. This
current through the armature experiences a magnetic force and is propelled forward. Rail guns, however, ar e not used widely in the
military due to the high cost of production and hig h currents: Nearly one million amps is required to pro duce enough energy for a
rail gun to be an effective weapon.
Figure: Current through two rails drives a conductive projectile forward by the magnetic force created.
We can calculate a motionally induced emf with Farada y’s law even when an actual closed circuit is not present. We simply
imagine an enclosed area whose boundary includes the moving conductor, calculate, and then find the emf from Faraday’s law.
For example, we can let the moving rod of Figure be on e side of the imaginary rectangular area represented by the dashed
lines. The area of the rectangle is lx, so the magnetic flux through it is. Differentiating thi s equation, we obtain

7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616which is identical to the potential difference between t he ends of the rod that we determined earlier.
Figure: With the imaginary rectangle shown, we can u se Faraday’s law to calculate the induced emf in the m oving rod.
Motional emfs in Earth’s weak magnetic field are not ordinarily very large, or we would notice voltage alon g metal rods, such as a
screwdriver, during ordinary motions. For example, a s imple calculation of the motional emf of a 1.0-m rod moving at 3.0 m/s
perpendicular to the Earth’s field gives
This small value is consistent with experience. There is a spectacular exception, however. In 1992 and 1996, attempts were made
with the space shuttle to create large motional emfs. The tethered satellite was to be let out on a 20-km length of wire, as shown in
Figure, to create a 5-kV emf by moving at orbital s peed through Earth’s field. This emf could be used t o convert some of the
shuttle’s kinetic and potential energy into electri cal energy if a complete circuit could be made. To c omplete the circuit, the
stationary ionosphere was to supply a return path thr ough which current could flow. (The ionosphere is the rarefied and partially
ionized atmosphere at orbital altitudes. It conducts be cause of the ionization. The ionosphere serves the sam e function as the
stationary rails and connecting resistor in Figure, wi thout which there would not be a complete circuit.) Dr ag on the current in
the cable due to the magnetic force does the work th at reduces the shuttle’s kinetic and potential ener gy, and allows it
to be converted into electrical energy. Both tests we re unsuccessful. In the first, the cable hung up and could only be extended a
couple of hundred meters; in the second, the cable b roke when almost fully extended. Example indicates fe asibility in
principle.
Figure: Motional emf as electrical power conversion f or the space shuttle was the motivation for the tether ed satellite
experiment. A 5-kV emf was predicted to be induced i n the 20-km tether while moving at orbital speed in Earth’s magnetic field.
The circuit is completed by a return path through th e stationary ionosphere.
Calculate the motional emf induced along a 20.0-km c onductor moving at an orbital speed of 7.80 km/s pe rpendicular to
Earth’s magnetic field.
Strategy
This is a great example of using the equation motional.Example: Calculating the Large Motional Emf of an Object in Orbit

7.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616Solution
Entering the given values into gives
Significance
The value obtained is greater than the 5-kV measure d voltage for the shuttle experiment, since the act ual orbital motion
of the tether is not perpendicular to Earth’s field. The 7.80-kV value is the maximum emf obtained when a nd so
Part (a) of Figure shows a metal rod OS that is rotating in a horizontal plane around poin t O. The rod slides along a wire
that forms a circular arc PST of radius r. The system is in a constant magnetic field that i s directed out of the page. (a) If you
rotate the rod at a constant angular velocity, what is the current I in the closed loop OPSO? Assume that the resistor R
furnishes all of the resistance in the closed loop. (b) Calculate the work per unit time that you do whil e rotating the rod and
show that it is equal to the power dissipated in the resistor.
Figure: (a) The end of a rotating metal rod slides al ong a circular wire in a horizontal plane. (b) The induced current in the
rod. (c) The magnetic force on an infinitesimal curr ent segment.
Strategy
The magnetic flux is the magnetic field times the a rea of the quarter circle or. When finding the emf through
Faraday’s law, all variables are constant in time but, with. To calculate the work per unit time, we know this is
related to the torque times the angular velocity. T he torque is calculated by knowing the force on a ro d and integrating it
over the length of the rod.
Solution
1. From geometry, the area of the loop OPSO is. Hence, the magnetic flux through the loop is
Differentiating with respect to time and using, we have
When divided by the resistance R of the loop, this yields for the magnitude of the indu ced currentExample: A Metal Rod Rotating in a Magnetic Field

7.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616As increases, so does the flux through the loop due to. To counteract this increase, the magnetic field due to th e
induced current must be directed into the page in the reg ion enclosed by the loop. Therefore, as part (b) of Figure
illustrates, the current circulates clockwise.
2. You rotate the rod by exerting a torque on it. Since t he rod rotates at constant angular velocity, this torque is equal
and opposite to the torque exerted on the current in the rod by the original magnetic field. The magnetic force on the
infinitesimal segment of length dx shown in part (c) of Figure is, so the magnetic torque on this
segment is
The net magnetic torque on the rod is then
The torque that you exert on the rod is equal and oppos ite to, and the work that you do when the rod rotates
through an angle is. Hence, the work per unit time that yo u do on the rod is
where we have substituted for I. The power dissipated in the resister is, which can be writ ten as
Therefore, we see that
Hence, the power dissipated in the resistor is equal to the work per unit time done in rotating the rod.
Significance
An alternative way of looking at the induced emf from Faraday’s law is to integrate in space instead of time. The
solution, however, would be the same. The motional emf is
The velocity can be written as the angular velocity time s the radius and the differential length written as dr. Therefore,
which is the same solution as before.
A rectangular coil of area A and N turns is placed in a uniform magnetic field, as sho wn in Figure. The coil is
rotated about the z-axis through its center at a constant angular velocity. Obt ain an expression for the induced emf in the coil.Example: A Rectangular Coil Rotating in a Magnetic Field

7.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616
Figure: A rectangular coil rotating in a uniform ma gnetic field.
Strategy
According to the diagram, the angle between the perpen dicular to the surface ((\hat{n}\)) and the magneti c field is.
The dot product of simplifies to only the componen t of the magnetic field, namely where the magnetic f ield
projects onto the unit area vector. The magnitude of the magnetic field and the area of the loop are fixed over time, which
makes the integration simplify quickly. The induced e mf is written out using Faraday’s law.
Solution
When the coil is in a position such that its normal vector makes an angle with the magnetic field the magnetic flux
through a single turn of the coil is
From Faraday’s law, the emf induced in the coil is
The constant angular velocity is. The angle represe nts the time evolution of the angular velocity or. This
is changes the function to time space rather than. The induced emf therefore varies sinusoidally with time accor ding to
where.
Significance
If the magnetic field strength or area of the loop were also changing over time, these variables wouldn’t be able to be
pulled out of the time derivative to simply the sol ution as shown. This example is the basis for an elec tric generator, as
we will give a full discussion in Applications of Newton’s Law.
Shown below is a rod of length l that is rotated counterclockwise around the axis thr ough O by the torque due to. Assuming
that the rod is in a uniform magnetic field, what is the emf induced between the ends of the rod when its angular velocity is
? Which end of the rod is at a higher potential?Exercise

7.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76616
Answer
, with O at a higher potential than S
A rod of length 10 cm moves at a speed of 10 m/s pe rpendicularly through a 1.5-T magnetic field. What is the potential
difference between the ends of the rod?
Answer
1.5 V
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.2: Motional Emf is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.4: Motional Emf by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Exercise

7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766177.3: Induced Electric Fields
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Connect the relationship between an induced emf from Far aday’s law to an electric field, thereby showing that a chan ging
magnetic flux creates an electric field
Solve for the electric field based on a changing magnetic flux in time
The fact that emfs are induced in circuits implies t hat work is being done on the conduction electrons in the wires. What can
possibly be the source of this work? We know that it’s n either a battery nor a magnetic field, for a batter y does not have to be
present in a circuit where current is induced, and ma gnetic fields never do work on moving charges. The an swer is that the source
of the work is an electric field that is induced in the wires. The work done by in moving a unit charge co mpletely around a
circuit is the induced emf; that is,
where represents the line integral around the circuit. Farad ay’s law can be written in terms of the induced electric f ield as
There is an important distinction between the electr ic field induced by a changing magnetic field and t he electrostatic field
produced by a fixed charge distribution. Specifically, the induced electric field is nonconservative becau se it does net work in
moving a charge over a closed path, whereas the elect rostatic field is conservative and does no net work over a closed path. Hence,
electric potential can be associated with the electr ostatic field, but not with the induced field. The fol lowing equations represent the
distinction between the two types of electric field:
Our results can be summarized by combining these equatio ns:
What is the induced electric field in the circular coil of Example 13.3.1A (and Figure 13.3.3) at the three times indicated?
Strategy
Using cylindrical symmetry, the electric field integra l simplifies into the electric field times the circu mference of a circle.
Since we already know the induced emf, we can connect th ese two expressions by Faraday’s law to solve for the i nduced
electric field.
Solution
The induced electric field in the coil is constant in magnitude over the cylindrical surface, similar to how Ampere’s law
problems with cylinders are solved. Since is tangent to t he coil,Learning Objectives
Example: Induced Electric Field in a Circular Coil

7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76617When combined with Equation, this gives
The direction of is counterclockwise, and circulate s in the same direction around the coil. The values of E are
Significance
When the magnetic flux through a circuit changes, a nonconservative electric field is induced, which driv es current
through the circuit. But what happens if in free spa ce where there isn’t a conducting path? The answer is t hat
this case can be treated as if a conducting path were present; that is, nonconservative electric fields are induce d
wherever whether or not there is a conducting path prese nt.
These nonconservative electric fields always satisfy E quation. For example, if the circular coil were remo ved, an
electric field in free space at would still be directed counterclockwise, and its magnitude would still be 1.9
V/m at. 1.5 V/m at, etc. The existence of induced e lectric fields is certainly not restricted to wires
in circuits.
Figure shows a long solenoid with radius R and n turns per unit length; its current decreases with ti me according to
. What is the magnitude of the induced electric fie ld at a point a distance r from the central axis of the solenoid (a)
when and (b) when [Figure]. (c) What is the direction of the induced field at both locations? Assume that the
infinite-solenoid approximation is valid throughout the regions of interest.
Figure: (a) The current in a long solenoid is decreasi ng exponentially. (b) A cross-sectional view of the sol enoid from its
left end. The cross-section shown is near the middle of the solenoid. An electric field is induced both inside and outside the
solenoid.
Strategy
Using the formula for the magnetic field inside an in finite solenoid and Faraday’s law, we calculate the ind uced emf. Since
we have cylindrical symmetry, the electric field inte gral reduces to the electric field times the circumfe rence of the
integration path. Then we solve for the electric field.
Solution
1. The magnetic field is confined to the interior of the solenoid whereExample: Electric Field Induced by the Changing Magnetic Field of a Solenoid

7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76617Thus, the magnetic flux through a circular path whose radiu s r is greater than R, the solenoid radius, is
The induced field is tangent to this path, and because o f the cylindrical symmetry of the system, its magnitude i s
constant on the path. Hence, we have
2. For a path of radius r inside the solenoid,, so
and the induced field is
3. The magnetic field points into the page as shown in p art (b) and is decreasing. If either of the circular paths wer e
occupied by conducting rings, the currents induced in the m would circulate as shown, in conformity with Lenz’s
law. The induced electric field must be so directed as we ll.
Significance
In part (b), note that increases with r inside and decreases as 1/ r outside the solenoid, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The electric field vs. distance r. When, the electric field rises linearly, whereas wh en, the
electric field falls of proportional to 1/ r.
Suppose that the coil of Example 13.3.1A is a square rather than circular. Can Equation be used to calculate (a) the
induced emf and (b) the induced electric field?
Answer
a. yes; b. Yes; however there is a lack of symmetry b etween the electric field and coil, making a more c omplicated
relationship that can’t be simplified as shown in the exa mple.
What is the magnitude of the induced electric field in Example at if,, turns per meter,
, and?
AnswerExercise
Exercise

7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76617The magnetic field shown below is confined to the cyl indrical region shown and is changing with time. Iden tify those paths for
which.
Answer
A long solenoid of cross-sectional area is wound with 25 turns of wire per centimeter. It is placed in the middle of a
closely wrapped coil of 10 turns and radius 25 cm, as shown below. (a) What is the emf induced in the coil when the current
through the solenoid is decreasing at a rate? (b) What is the electric field induced in the coil?
Answer
a.; b.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.3: Induced Electric Fields is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.5: Induced Electric Fields by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.Exercise
Exercise

7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/930007.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the magnitude and direction of an induced eddy current, and the effect this will have on the object it is induced in.
Describe several applications of magnetic damping.
Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
Eddy currents can produce significant drag, called magnetic damping, on the motion involved. Consider the apparatus sho wn in
Figure, which swings a pendulum bob between the poles o f a strong magnet. (This is another favorite physics demonstration.)
If the bob is metal, significant drag acts on the bo b as it enters and leaves the field, quickly damping the motion. If, however, the
bob is a slotted metal plate, as shown in part (b) of the figure, the magnet produces a much smaller effe ct. There is no discernible
effect on a bob made of an insulator. Why does drag occu r in both directions, and are there any uses for magnetic d rag?
Figure: A common physics demonstration device for expl oring eddy currents and magnetic damping. (a) The mo tion of a
metal pendulum bob swinging between the poles of a ma gnet is quickly damped by the action of eddy current s. (b) There is little
effect on the motion of a slotted metal bob, implyin g that eddy currents are made less effective. (c) Ther e is also no magnetic
damping on a nonconducting bob, since the eddy curre nts are extremely small.
Figure shows what happens to the metal plate as it ent ers and leaves the magnetic field. In both cases, it experiences a force
opposing its motion. As it enters from the left, flux i ncreases, setting up an eddy current (Faraday’s law) i n the counterclockwise
direction (Lenz’s law), as shown. Only the right-hand sid e of the current loop is in the field, so an unopposed force acts on it to the
left (RHR-1). When the metal plate is completely insi de the field, there is no eddy current if the field is uniform, since the flux
remains constant in this region. But when the plate l eaves the field on the right, flux decreases, causin g an eddy current in the
clockwise direction that, again, experiences a force to the left, further slowing the motion. A similar ana lysis of what happens when
the plate swings from the right toward the left shows that its motion is also damped when entering and leaving the field.Learning Objectives

7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93000
Figure: A more detailed look at the conducting plat e passing between the poles of a magnet. As it enters an d leaves the field,
the change in flux produces an eddy current. Magneti c force on the current loop opposes the motion. There is no current and no
magnetic drag when the plate is completely inside the uniform field.
When a slotted metal plate enters the field (Figure), an emf is induced by the change in flux, but it is less effective because the
slots limit the size of the current loops. Moreover, adjacent loops have currents in opposite directio ns, and their effects cancel.
When an insulating material is used, the eddy curre nt is extremely small, so magnetic damping on insula tors is negligible. If eddy
currents are to be avoided in conductors, then they m ust be slotted or constructed of thin layers of conduc ting material separated by
insulating sheets.
Figure: Eddy currents induced in a slotted metal plat e entering a magnetic field form small loops, and the forces on them tend
to cancel, thereby making magnetic drag almost zero.

Applications of Magnetic Damping
One use of magnetic damping is found in sensitive lab oratory balances. To have maximum sensitivity and a ccuracy, the balance
must be as friction-free as possible. But if it is friction-free, then it will oscillate for a very long time. Magnetic damping is a simple
and ideal solution. With magnetic damping, drag is pr oportional to speed and becomes zero at zero veloci ty. Thus, the oscillations
are quickly damped, after which the damping force di sappears, allowing the balance to be very sensitive (Fi gure). In most
balances, magnetic damping is accomplished with a conduct ing disc that rotates in a fixed field.

7.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93000
Figure: Magnetic damping of this sensitive balance slow s its oscillations. Since Faraday’s law of induction give s the greatest
effect for the most rapid change, damping is greatest for large oscillations and goes to zero as the motion st ops.
Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors, recycling centers can use magnets to s eparate metals from
other materials. Trash is dumped in batches down a r amp, beneath which lies a powerful magnet. Conductors in the trash are
slowed by magnetic damping while nonmetals in the tras h move on, separating from the metals (Figure). This works for all
metals, not just ferromagnetic ones. A magnet can separa te out the ferromagnetic materials alone by acting on st ationary trash.
Figure: Metals can be separated from other trash by mag netic drag. Eddy currents and magnetic drag are crea ted in the metals
sent down this ramp by the powerful magnet beneath it. Nonmetals move on.
Other major applications of eddy currents appear in metal detectors and braking systems in trains and roller coasters. Portable
metal detectors (Figure) consist of a primary coil carrying an alternating current and a secondary coi l in which a current is
induced. An eddy current is induced in a piece of met al close to the detector, causing a change in the ind uced current within the
secondary coil. This can trigger some sort of signal, such as a shrill noise.

7.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93000
Figure: A soldier in Iraq uses a metal detector to sear ch for explosives and weapons. (credit: U.S. Army)
Braking using eddy currents is safer because factors such as rain do not affect the braking and the brak ing is smoother. However,
eddy currents cannot bring the motion to a complete stop, since the braking force produced decreases as speed is reduced. Thus,
speed can be reduced from say 20 m/s to 5 m/s, but a nother form of braking is needed to completely stop t he vehicle. Generally,
powerful rare-earth magnets such as neodymium magnets are used in roller coasters. Figure shows rows of magne ts in such an
application. The vehicle has metal fins (normally co ntaining copper) that pass through the magnetic fiel d, slowing the vehicle down
in much the same way as with the pendulum bob shown in Figure.
Figure: The rows of rare-earth magnets (protruding ho rizontally) are used for magnetic braking in roller coasters. (credit:
Stefan Scheer)
Induction cooktops have electromagnets under their s urface. The magnetic field is varied rapidly, produ cing eddy currents in the
base of the pot, causing the pot and its contents to in crease in temperature. Induction cooktops have high efficiencies and good
response times but the base of the pot needs to be conduc tors, such as iron or steel, for induction to work.
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

7.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93000Summary
Current loops induced in moving conductors are called e ddy currents.
They can create significant drag, called magnetic dampin g.
Glossary
eddy current
a current loop in a conductor caused by motional emf
magnetic damping
the drag produced by eddy currents
This page titled 7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.7: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
13.6: Eddy Currents by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

7.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766197.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how an electric generator works
Determine the induced emf in a loop at any time interval, rotating at a constant rate in a magnetic field
Show that rotating coils have an induced emf; in motors thi s is called back emf because it opposes the emf input to the
motor
A variety of important phenomena and devices can be und erstood with Faraday’s law. In this section, we examine two of the se.
Electric Generators
Electric generators induce an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic fie ld, as briefly discussed in Motional Emf. We now explore
generators in more detail. Consider the following examp le.
The generator coil shown in Figure is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution (from to) in 15.0 ms. Th e
200-turn circular coil has a 5.00-cm radius and is in a unif orm 0.80-T magnetic field. What is the emf induced?
Figure: When this generator coil is rotated through o ne-fourth of a revolution, the magnetic flux chang es from its
maximum to zero, inducing an emf.
Strategy
Faraday’s law of induction is used to find the emf induced:
According to the diagram, the projection of the surfa ce normal vector to the magnetic field is initiall y and this is
inserted by the definition of the dot product. The magnitude of the magnetic field and area of the loo p are fixed over time,
which makes the integration simplify quickly. The induce d emf is written out using Faraday’s law:Learning Objectives
Calculating the Emf Induced in a Generator Coil

7.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76619Solution
Entering this value gives
Significance
This is a practical average value, similar to the 120 V used in household power.
The emf calculated in Example is the average over one-fourth of a revolution. What is the emf at any g iven instant? It varies
with the angle between the magnetic field and a perpe ndicular to the coil. We can get an expression for em f as a function of time by
considering the motional emf on a rotating rectangu lar coil of width w and height l in a uniform magnetic field, as illustrated in
Figure.
Figure: A generator with a single rectangular coil r otated at constant angular velocity in a uniform mag netic field produces an
emf that varies sinusoidally in time. Note the generat or is similar to a motor, except the shaft is rotated t o produce a current rather
than the other way around.
Charges in the wires of the loop experience the magnet ic force, because they are moving in a magnetic fiel d. Charges in the vertical
wires experience forces parallel to the wire, causing c urrents. But those in the top and bottom segments fe el a force perpendicular
to the wire, which does not cause a current. We can thu s find the induced emf by considering only the side wires. Motional emf is
given to be, where the velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field B. Here the velocity is at an angle with B, so that
its component perpendicular to B is v sin (see Figure). Thus, in this case, the emf induced o n each side is and
they are in the same direction. The total emf around the l oop is then
This expression is valid, but it does not give emf as a function of time. To find the time dependence of e mf, we assume the coil
rotates at a constant angular velocity. The angle is related to angular velocity by, so that
Now, linear velocity v is related to angular velocity by. Here,, so that, a nd
Noting that the area of the loop is, and allowing for N loops, we find that
This is the emf induced in a generator coil of N turns and area A rotating at a constant angular velocity in a unif orm magnetic
field B. This can also be expressed as

7.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76619where
is the peak emf, since the maximum value of. Note th at the frequency of the oscillation is and the per iod is
. Figure shows a graph of emf as a function of time, and it now seems reasonable that ac voltage is sinusoidal.
Figure: The emf of a generator is sent to a light bul b with the system of rings and brushes shown. The graph g ives the emf of
the generator as a function of time, where is the pe ak emf. The period is, where f is the frequency.
The fact that the peak emf is makes good sense. The greater the number of coils, the larger their area, a nd the stronger
the field, the greater the output voltage. It is int eresting that the faster the generator is spun (great er), the greater the emf. This is
noticeable on bicycle generators—at least the cheaper var ieties.
Figure shows a scheme by which a generator can be made to produce pulsed dc. More elaborate arrangements o f multiple
coils and split rings can produce smoother dc, althoug h electronic rather than mechanical means are usually used to make ripplefree dc.
Figure: Split rings, called commutators, produce a pul sed dc emf output in this configuration.
In real life, electric generators look a lot differe nt from the figures in this section, but the princi ples are the same. The source of
mechanical energy that turns the coil can be fallin g water (hydropower), steam produced by the burning of fossil fuels, or the
kinetic energy of wind. Figure shows a cutaway view of a steam turbine; steam moves over the blades connecte d to the shaft,
which rotates the coil within the generator. The gener ation of electrical energy from mechanical energy i s the basic principle of all
power that is sent through our electrical grids to our ho mes.

7.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76619
Figure: Steam turbine/generator. The steam produced b y burning coal impacts the turbine blades, turning th e shaft, which is
connected to the generator.
Generators illustrated in this section look very much like the motors illustrated previously. This is not c oincidental. In fact, a motor
becomes a generator when its shaft rotates. Certain ea rly automobiles used their starter motor as a gener ator. In the next section, we
further explore the action of a motor as a generator.
Back Emf
Generators convert mechanical energy into electrical energy, whereas motors convert electrical energy int o mechanical energy.
Thus, it is not surprising that motors and generators ha ve the same general construction. A motor works by sen ding a current
through a loop of wire located in a magnetic field. As a result, the magnetic field exerts torque on the lo op. This rotates a shaft,
thereby extracting mechanical work out of the electr ical current sent in initially. (Refer to Force and T orque on a Current Loop for a
discussion on motors that will help you understand more abou t them before proceeding.)
When the coil of a motor is turned, magnetic flux c hanges through the coil, and an emf (consistent with Faraday’s law) is induced.
The motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil ro tates. This happens whether the shaft is turned by an external input, like a
belt drive, or by the action of the motor itself. Th at is, when a motor is doing work and its shaft is turn ing, an emf is generated.
Lenz’s law tells us the emf opposes any change, so that the input emf that powers the motor is opposed by t he motor’s selfgenerated emf, called the back emf of the motor (Figure).
Figure: The coil of a dc motor is represented as a resi stor in this schematic. The back emf is represented as a variable emf that
opposes the emf driving the motor. Back emf is zero wh en the motor is not turning and increases proportional ly to the motor’s
angular velocity.
The generator output of a motor is the difference be tween the supply voltage and the back emf. The back e mf is zero when the
motor is first turned on, meaning that the coil rec eives the full driving voltage and the motor draws m aximum current when it is on
but not turning. As the motor turns faster, the back e mf grows, always opposing the driving emf, and reduces both the voltage
across the coil and the amount of current it draws. Thi s effect is noticeable in many common situations. Wh en a vacuum cleaner,
refrigerator, or washing machine is first turned on, l ights in the same circuit dim briefly due to the IR drop produced in feeder lines
by the large current drawn by the motor.
When a motor first comes on, it draws more current than when it runs at its normal operating speed. When a m echanical load is
placed on the motor, like an electric wheelchair goi ng up a hill, the motor slows, the back emf drops, more c urrent flows, and more
work can be done. If the motor runs at too low a speed, the larger current can overheat it (via resistive power in the coil,,

7.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76619perhaps even burning it out. On the other hand, if ther e is no mechanical load on the motor, it increases i ts angular velocity until
the back emf is nearly equal to the driving emf. Then the motor uses only enough energy to overcome friction.
Eddy currents in iron cores of motors can cause tro ublesome energy losses. These are usually minimized b y constructing the cores
out of thin, electrically insulated sheets of iron. T he magnetic properties of the core are hardly affect ed by the lamination of the
insulating sheet, while the resistive heating is reduce d considerably. Consider, for example, the motor coil s represented in Figure
. The coils have an equivalent resistance of and a re driven by an emf of 48.0 V. Shortly after being tu rned on, they draw
a current
and thus dissipate of energy as heat transfer. Under normal operating conditions for this motor, suppose the
back emf is 40.0 V. Then at operating speed, the total voltage across the coils is 8.0 V (48.0 V minus the 40.0 V back emf), and the
current drawn is
Under normal load, then, the power dissipated is. Thi s does not cause a problem for this motor,
whereas the former 5.76 kW would burn out the coils if su stained.
The total resistance of a series-wound dc motor is (Figure). When connected to a 120-V source, the
motor draws 10 A while running at constant angular vel ocity. (a) What is the back emf induced in the rotat ing coil,? (b) What
is the mechanical power output of the motor? (c) How m uch power is dissipated in the resistance of the coil s? (d) What is the
power output of the 120-V source? (e) Suppose the loa d on the motor increases, causing it to slow down to t he point where it
draws 20 A. Answer parts (a) through (d) for this situation.
Figure: Circuit representation of a series-wound direc t current motor.
Strategy
The back emf is calculated based on the difference b etween the supplied voltage and the loss from the cur rent through the
resistance. The power from each device is calculated fro m one of the power formulas based on the given informati on.
Solution
1. The back emf is
2. Since the potential across the armature is 100 V when th e current through it is 10 A, the power output of the motor is
3. A 10-A current flows through coils whose combined resi stance is, so the power dissipated in the coils is
4. Since 10 A is drawn from the 120-V source, its power out put isA Series-Wound Motor in Operation

7.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766195. Repeating the same calculations with, we find
The motor is turning more slowly in this case, so its power o utput and the power of the source are larger.
Significance Notice that we have an energy balance in par t (d):
This page titled 7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.7: Electric Generators and Back Emf by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

7.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/930017.6: Inductance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the inductance of an inductor.
Calculate the energy stored in an inductor.
Calculate the emf generated in an inductor.
Inductors
Induction is the process in which an emf is induced b y changing magnetic flux. Many examples have been di scussed so far, some
more effective than others. Transformers, for example, a re designed to be particularly effective at inducin g a desired voltage and
current with very little loss of energy to other for ms. Is there a useful physical quantity related to h ow “effective” a given device is?
The answer is yes, and that physical quantity is called indu ctance.
Mutual inductance is the effect of Faraday’s law of ind uction for one device upon another, such as the prima ry coil in transmitting
energy to the secondary in a transformer. See Figure, where simple coils induce emfs in one another.
Figure: These coils can induce emfs in one another lik e an inefficient transformer. Their mutual inductanc e M indicates the
effectiveness of the coupling between them. Here a ch ange in current in coil 1 is seen to induce an emf in coil 2. (Note that "
induced" represents the induced emf in coil 2.)
In the many cases where the geometry of the devices is f ixed, flux is changed by varying current. We therefore concentrate on the
rate of change of current,, as the cause of inductio n. A change in the current in one device, coil 1 in the figure, induces an
in the other. We express this in equation form as
where is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices. The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law. The larger
the mutual inductance, the more effective the coup ling. For example, the coils in Figure have a small compared with the
transformer coils in [link]. Units for are (V\cdot s)/A = \Omega \cdot s\), which is named a henry (H), after Joseph Henry. That
is,.
Nature is symmetric here. If we change the current in coil 2, we induce an in coil 1, which is given by
where is the same as for the reverse process. Transformer s run backward with the same effectiveness, or mutual induc tance.
A large mutual inductance may or may not be desirab le. We want a transformer to have a large mutual ind uctance. But an
appliance, such as an electric clothes dryer, can in duce a dangerous emf on its case if the mutual induct ance between its coils andLearning Objectives

7.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93001the case is large. One way to reduce mutual inductance is to counterwind coils to cancel the magnetic field produced. (See
Figure.)
Figure: The heating coils of an electric clothes dryer can be counter-wound so that their magnetic fields c ancel one another,
greatly reducing the mutual inductance with the case of the dryer.
Self-inductance, the effect of Faraday’s law of induct ion of a device on itself, also exists. When, for exa mple, current through a coil
is increased, the magnetic field and flux also increa se, inducing a counter emf, as required by Lenz’s law. Conversely, if the current
is decreased, an emf is induced that opposes the decre ase. Most devices have a fixed geometry, and so the cha nge in flux is due
entirely to the change in current through the devi ce. The induced emf is related to the physical geome try of the device and the
rate of change of current. It is given by
where is the self-inductance of the device. A device that exhibits significant self-inductance is called an inductor, and given the
symbol in Figure.
Figure:
The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law, indi cating that emf opposes the change in current. Units of self-inductance are
henries (H) just as for mutual inductance. The larger the self-inductance of a device, the greater its o pposition to any change in
current through it. For example, a large coil with ma ny turns and an iron core has a large and will not a llow current to change
quickly. To avoid this effect, a smal must be achieved, such as by counterwinding coils as in Figure.
A 1 H inductor is a large inductor. To illustrate th is, consider a device with that has a 10 A current fl owing through it.
What happens if we try to shut off the current rapidl y, perhaps in only 1.0 ms? An emf, given by, will oppose
the change. Thus an emf will be induced given by. The positive sign
means this large voltage is in the same direction as the current, opposing its decrease. Such large emfs ca n cause arcs, damaging
switching equipment, and so it may be necessary to chan ge current more slowly.
There are uses for such a large induced voltage. Cam era flashes use a battery, two inductors that functio n as a transformer, and a
switching system or oscillator to induce large voltag es. (Remember that we need a changing magnetic field, brought about by a
changing current, to induce a voltage in another co il.) The oscillator system will do this many times as the battery voltage is
boosted to over one thousand volts. (You may hear the high pitched whine from the transformer as the capa citor is being charged.)
A capacitor stores the high voltage for later use in power ing the flash. (See Figure.)

7.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93001
Figure: Through rapid switching of an inductor, 1.5 V batteries can be used to induce emfs of several thousa nd volts. This
voltage can be used to store charge in a capacitor fo r later use, such as in a camera flash attachment.
It is possible to calculate for an inductor given i ts geometry (size and shape) and knowing the magnetic f ield that it produces.
This is difficult in most cases, because of the comp lexity of the field created. So in this text the indu ctance is usually a given
quantity. One exception is the solenoid, because it ha s a very uniform field inside, a nearly zero field outside, and a simple shape. It
is instructive to derive an equation for its inducta nce. We start by noting that the induced emf is give n by Faraday’s law of
induction as and, by the definition of self-inductance, as. Equating these yields
Solving for gives
This equation for the self-inductance of a device i s always valid. It means that self-inductance depend s on how effective the
current is in creating flux; the more effective, the gre ater is.
Let us use this last equation to find an expression fo r the inductance of a solenoid. Since the area of a solenoid is fixed, the
change in flux is. To find, we note that the magne tic field of a solenoid is given by.
(Here, where is the number of coils and is the solen oid’s length.) Only the current changes, so that
. Substituting into gives
This simplifies to
This is the self-inductance of a solenoid of cross-sect ional area and length. Note that the inductance de pends only on the
physical characteristics of the solenoid, consistent with its de finition.
Calculate the self-inductance of a 10.0 cm long, 4.00 cm diameter solenoid that has 200 coils.
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of, since all quant ities in the equation except are known.
Solution
Use the following expression for the self-inductance of a solenoid:Example: Calculating the Self-inductance of a Moderate Size Solenoid

7.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93001The cross-sectional area in this example is, is given to be 200, and the
length is 0.100 m. We know the permeability of free space is. Substituting these into the
expression for gives
Discussion
This solenoid is moderate in size. Its inductance of nearly a m illihenry is also considered moderate.
One common application of inductance is used in traff ic lights that can tell when vehicles are waiting at the intersection. An
electrical circuit with an inductor is placed in the road under the place a waiting car will stop over. Th e body of the car increases the
inductance and the circuit changes sending a signal to the traffic lights to change colors. Similarly, meta l detectors used for airport
security employ the same technique. A coil or induct or in the metal detector frame acts as both a transm itter and a receiver. The
pulsed signal in the transmitter coil induces a sign al in the receiver. The self-inductance of the circui t is affected by any metal
object in the path. Such detectors can be adjusted for sensitivity and also can indicate the approximate loc ation of metal found on a
person. (But they will not be able to detect any plastic explosive such as that found on the “underwear bomber.”) See Figure.
Figure: The familiar security gate at an airport can not only detect metals but also indicate their appro ximate height above the
floor. (credit: Alexbuirds, Wikimedia Commons)
Energy Stored in an Inductor
We know from Lenz’s law that inductances oppose chang es in current. There is an alternative way to look at this opposition that is
based on energy. Energy is stored in a magnetic field. It takes time to build up energy, and it also takes time to deplete energy;
hence, there is an opposition to rapid change. In an i nductor, the magnetic field is directly proportional to current and to the
inductance of the device. It can be shown that the energy stored in an inductor is given by
This expression is similar to that for the energy stored i n a capacitor.

7.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93001How much energy is stored in the 0.632 mH inductor of the preced ing example when a 30.0 A current flows through it?
Strategy
The energy is given by the equation, and all quantities e xcept are known.
Solution
Substituting the value for found in the previous example a nd the given current into gives
Discussion
This amount of energy is certainly enough to cause a spark if the current is suddenly switched off. It ca nnot be built up
instantaneously unless the power input is infinite.
Summary
Inductance is the property of a device that tells how effect ively it induces an emf in another device.
Mutual inductance is the effect of two devices in inducin g emfs in each other.
A change in current in one induces an in the second:
where is defined to be the mutual inductance between t he two devices, and the minus sign is due to Lenz’s law.
Symmetrically, a change in current through the second d evice induces an in the first:
where is the same mutual inductance as in the reverse process.
Current changes in a device induce an emf in the devic e itself.
Self-inductance is the effect of the device inducing emf i n itself.
The device is called an inductor, and the emf induced in i t by a change in current through it is
where is the self-inductance of the inductor, and is the rate of change of current through it. The minus sign i ndicates
that emf opposes the change in current, as required by Lenz’ s law.
The unit of self- and mutual inductance is the henry (H), whe re
The self-inductance of an inductor is proportional to ho w much flux changes with current. For an N-turn inductor,
The self-inductance of a solenoid is
where is its number of turns in the solenoid, is its cro ss-sectional area, is its length, and is the
permeability of free space.
The energy stored in an inductor isExample: Calculating the Energy Stored in the Field of a Solenoid

7.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93001Glossary
inductance
a property of a device describing how efficient it is at in ducing emf in another device
mutual inductance
how effective a pair of devices are at inducing emfs in each other
henry
the unit of inductance;
self-inductance
how effective a device is at inducing emf in itself
inductor
a device that exhibits significant self-inductance
energy stored in an inductor
self-explanatory; calculated by
Contributors
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State Un iversity, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State Universit y of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univers ity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.6: Inductance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
23.12: Inductance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766207.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how a transformer works.
Calculate voltage, current, and/or number of turns given th e other quantities.
Explain how computer hard drives and graphic tablets opera te using magnetic induction
Explain how hybrid/electric vehicles and transcranial ma gnetic stimulation use magnetic induction to their adva ntage
Transformers
Transformers do what their name implies—they transform voltages from one value to another (The term voltage is used rather
than emf, because transformers have internal resist ance). For example, many cell phones, laptops, video g ames, and power tools
and small appliances have a transformer built into t heir plug-in unit (like that in Figure) that change s 120 V or 240 V AC into
whatever voltage the device uses.
Figure: The plug-in transformer has become increasingl y familiar with the proliferation of electronic dev ices that operate on
voltages other than common 120 V AC. Most are in the 3 to 12 V range. (credit: Shop Xtreme)
Transformers are also used at several points in the po wer distribution systems, such as illustrated in Figure. Power is sent long
distances at high voltages, because less current is r equired for a given amount of power, and this means les s line loss, as was
discussed previously. But high voltages pose greater hazards, so that transformers are employed to produce lower voltage at the
user’s location.
Figure: Transformers change voltages at several points i n a power distribution system. Electric power is usually generated at
greater than 10 kV, and transmitted long distances at voltages over 200 kV—sometimes as great as 700 kV—to lim it energy losses.
Local power distribution to neighborhoods or industrie s goes through a substation and is sent short distances at v oltages ranging
from 5 to 13 kV. This is reduced to 120, 240, or 480 V for safety at the individual user site.
The type of transformer considered in this text (Figu re) is based on Faraday’s law of induction and is ver y similar in
construction to the apparatus Faraday used to demonstr ate magnetic fields could cause currents. The two co ils are called the
primary and secondary coils. In normal use, the input voltage is placed on the primary, and the secondary produces the transformed
output voltage. Not only does the iron core trap the magnetic field created by the primary coil, its mag netization increases the field
strength. Since the input voltage is AC, a time-varying ma gnetic flux is sent to the secondary, inducing its AC output voltage.Learning Objectives

7.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620
Figure: A typical construction of a simple transformer has two coils wound on a ferromagnetic core that is l aminated to
minimize eddy currents. The magnetic field created b y the primary is mostly confined to and increased by t he core, which transmits
it to the secondary coil. Any change in current in t he primary induces a current in the secondary.
For the simple transformer shown in Figure, the outpu t voltage depends almost entirely on the input vol tage and the ratio
of the number of loops in the primary and secondary coils. Faraday’s law of induction for the secondary coi l gives its induced
output voltage to be
where is the number of loops in the secondary coil and is the rate of change of magnetic flux. Note tha t the output
voltage equals the induced emf (), provided coil res istance is small (a reasonable assumption for transform ers). The
cross-sectional area of the coils is the same on eith er side, as is the magnetic field strength, and so i s the same on either
side. The input primary voltage is also related to chan ging flux by
The reason for this is a little more subtle. Lenz’s law tells us that the primary coil opposes the chan ge in flux caused by the input
voltage, hence the minus sign (This is an example o f self-inductance, a topic to be explored in some detail in later se ctions).
Assuming negligible coil resistance, Kirchhoff’s loop ru le tells us that the induced emf exactly equals the input voltage. Taking the
ratio of these last two equations yields a useful relationshi p:
This is known as the transformer equation, and it simply states that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer
equals the ratio of the number of loops in their coils.
The output voltage of a transformer can be less than, greater than, or equal to the input voltage, dependi ng on the ratio of the
number of loops in their coils. Some transformers ev en provide a variable output by allowing connection to be made at different
points on the secondary coil. A step-up transformer is one that increases voltage, whereas a step-down transformer decreases
voltage. Assuming, as we have, that resistance is negligibl e, the electrical power output of a transformer equal s its input. This is
nearly true in practice—transformer efficiency often ex ceeds 99%. Equating the power input and output,
Rearranging terms gives
Combining this with Equation, we find that

7.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620is the relationship between the output and input curr ents of a transformer. So if voltage increases, current decreases. Conversely, if
voltage decreases, current increases.
A portable x-ray unit has a step-up transformer, the 120 V input of which is transformed to the 100 kV out put needed by the xray tube. The primary has 50 loops and draws a curren t of 10.00 A when in use. (a) What is the number of lo ops in the
secondary? (b) Find the current output of the secondary.
Solution
a) We solve Equation for, the number of loops in the secondary, and enter the known values. This gives
Discussion: A large number of loops in the secondary (compared with t he primary) is required to produce such a large
voltage. This would be true for neon sign transformers an d those supplying high voltage inside TVs and CRTs.
b) We can similarly find the output current of the secondary by solving Equation and and entering kno wn values.
This gives
Discussion: As expected, the current output is significantly less than the input. In certain spectacular demonstration s, very
large voltages are used to produce long arcs, but th ey are relatively safe because the transformer outpu t does not supply a
large current. Note that the power input here is
This equals the power output
as we assumed in the derivation of the equations used.
The fact that transformers are based on Faraday’s law o f induction makes it clear why we cannot use transforme rs to change DC
voltages. If there is no change in primary voltage, t here is no voltage induced in the secondary. One possibi lity is to connect DC to
the primary coil through a switch. As the switch is open ed and closed, the secondary produces a voltage like that in Figure.
This is not really a practical alternative, and AC is in c ommon use wherever it is necessary to increase or decrease voltages.Example: Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Up Transformer

7.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620
Figure: Transformers do not work for pure DC voltage input, but if it is switched on and off as on the top graph, the output
will look something like that on the bottom graph. T his is not the sinusoidal AC most AC appliances need.
A battery charger meant for a series connection of t en nickel-cadmium batteries (total emf of 12.5 V DC) needs to have a 15.0
V output to charge the batteries. It uses a step-down transformer with a 200-loop primary and a 120 V inpu t. (a) How many
loops should there be in the secondary coil? (b) If the ch arging current is 16.0 A, what is the input current?
Solution
a) You would expect the secondary to have a small num ber of loops. Solving Equation for and entering known
values gives
b) The current input can be obtained by solving Equation for and entering known values. This gives
Discussion:
The number of loops in the secondary is small, as exp ected for a step-down transformer. We also see that a small input
current produces a larger output current in a step-do wn transformer. When transformers are used to operate large magnets,
they sometimes have a small number of very heavy lo ops in the secondary. This allows the secondary to ha ve low internal
resistance and produce large currents. Note again tha t this solution is based on the assumption of 100% eff iciency—or
power out equals power in ()-- reasonable for good tra nsformers. In this case the primary and secondary power is
240 W. (Verify this for yourself as a consistency ch eck.) Note that the Ni-Cd batteries need to be charge d from a DC power
source (as would a 12 V battery). So the AC output of t he secondary coil needs to be converted into DC. This is done using
something called a rectifier, which uses devices called diode s that allow only a one-way flow of current.
Transformers have many applications in electrical safet y systems.
Other Applications
Modern society has numerous applications of Faraday’s law of induction, as we will explore in this chapter and others. At this
juncture, let us mention several that involve recording information using magnetic fields.Example: Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Down Transformer

7.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620Some computer hard drives apply the principle of magnetic induction. Recorde d data are made on a coated, spinning disk.
Historically, reading these data was made to work on th e principle of induction. However, most input informati on today is carried
in digital rather than analog form—a series of 0s or 1s are written upon the spinning hard drive. Therefo re, most hard drive readout
devices do not work on the principle of induction, b ut use a technique known as giant magnetoresistance. Giant
magnetoresistance is the effect of a large change of electrical resistance induced by an applied magneti c field to thin films of
alternating ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic layers. This is one of the first large successes of nanotechnology.
Graphics tablets, or tablet computers where a specially designed pen is used to draw digit al images, also applies induction
principles. The tablets discussed here are labeled as p assive tablets, since there are other designs that u se either a battery-operated
pen or optical signals to write with. The passive tab lets are different than the touch tablets and phones many of us use regularly, but
may still be found when signing your signature at a c ash register. Underneath the screen, shown in Figure, a re tiny wires
running across the length and width of the screen. The pen has a tiny magnetic field coming from the tip. As the tip brushes across
the screen, a changing magnetic field is felt in th e wires which translates into an induced emf that is con verted into the line you just
drew.
Figure: A tablet with a specially designed pen to wri te with is another application of magnetic induction.
Another application of induction is the magnetic strip e on the back of your personal credit card as used at the grocery store or the
ATM machine. This works on the same principle as the au dio or video tape, in which a playback head reads pe rsonal information
from your card.
Check out this video to see how flashlights can use magnetic induction.
A magnet moves by your mechanical work through a wire. The induced current charges a capacitor that store s the charge that will
light the lightbulb even while you are not doing this mecha nical work.
Electric and hybrid vehicles also take advantage of electromagnetic induction. On e limiting factor that inhibits widespread
acceptance of 100% electric vehicles is that the li fetime of the battery is not as long as the time you get to drive on a full tank of
gas. To increase the amount of charge in the battery during driving, the motor can act as a generator whe never the car is braking,Video
Magnetism: InductionMagnetism: Induction

7.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620taking advantage of the back emf produced. This extr a emf can be newly acquired stored energy in the car ’s battery, prolonging the
life of the battery.
Another contemporary area of research in which electr omagnetic induction is being successfully implemente d is transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS). A host of disorders, including depression and hall ucinations, can be traced to irregular localized
electrical activity in the brain. In transcranial m agnetic stimulation, a rapidly varying and very loca lized magnetic field is placed
close to certain sites identified in the brain. The usage of TMS as a diagnostic technique is well established.
Check out this Youtube video to see how rock-and-roll instruments like electric guitars use electromagnetic induction to get
those strong beats.
Summary
Transformers use induction to transform voltages from on e value to another.
For a transformer, the voltages across the primary and seco ndary coils are related by
where and are the voltages across primary and seconda ry coils having and turns.
The currents and in the primary and secondary coils are related by
A step-up transformer increases voltage and decreases current, whereas a step-down transformer decreases voltage a nd
increases current.
Glossary
transformer
a device that transforms voltages from one value to anoth er using induction
transformer equation
the equation showing that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer equals the ratio of the number of loops
in their coils;
step-up transformer
a transformer that increases voltage
step-down transformer
a transformer that decreases voltageVideo
Deconstructed: Electric GuitarsDeconstructed: Electric Guitars

7.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76620This page titled 7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.8: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
23.10: Transformers by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/930037.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
Explain the differences and similarities between AC and DC c urrent.
Describe rms voltage, current, and average power.
Explain why AC current is used for power transmission.
Explain how various modern safety features in electric circ uits work, with an emphasis on how induction is employed.
Alternating Current
Most of the examples in electric circuits, and particul arly those utilizing batteries, have constant volta ge sources. Once the current
is established, it is thus also a constant. Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric charge in only one direc tion. It is the steady
state of a constant-voltage circuit. Many well-known app lications, however, use a time-varying voltage source. Alternating
current (AC) is the flow of electric charge that periodicall y reverses direction. If the source varies periodica lly, particularly
sinusoidally, the circuit is known as an alternating c urrent circuit. Examples include the commercial and residential power that
serves so many of our needs. Figure shows graphs of voltage and current versus time for typical DC and AC power. The AC
voltages and frequencies commonly used in homes and businesses vary around the world. The AC voltages ran ge from 100 V to
240 V; the frequencies range from 50 Hz to 60 Hz.
Figure: (a) DC voltage and current are constant in time, o nce the current is established. (b) A graph of voltage and current
versus time for 60-Hz AC power. The voltage and curre nt are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistanc e circuit. The
frequencies and peak voltages of AC sources differ grea tly.
Figure: The potential difference between the terminals of an AC voltage source fluctuates as shown.
Figure shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an AC vol tage source. The voltage between the terminals fluctua tes as
shown. For this example, the voltage and current are said t o be in phase, as seen in Figure (b).
Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage, since. If the resistor is a fluorescent light
bulb, for example, it brightens and dims 120 times p er second as the current repeatedly goes through zer o. A 120-Hz flicker is too
rapid for your eyes to detect, but if you wave your h and back and forth between your face and a fluorescen t light, you will see a
stroboscopic effect evidencing AC. The fact that the light output fluctuates means that the power is fluct uating. The power supplied
is.Learning Objectives

7.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003Wave your hand back and forth between your face and a fluorescent light bulb. Do you observe the same th ing with the
headlights on your car? Explain what you observe. Warning: Do not look directly at very bright light.
Figure: AC power as a function of time.
We are most often concerned with average power rather than its fluctuations—that 60-W light bulb in your desk lamp has an
average power consumption of 60 W, for example. As illu strated in Figure. One common way to express an average is "rootmean-square," or " rms." For example, rms voltage of an AC voltage source is found by first squaring the voltage ("square"), taking
an average of this value over one period of oscillation ("mean"), and taking the square root ("root").
It is standard practice to quote,, and rather tha n the peak values. For example, most household electr icity is 120 V
AC, which means that is 120 V. The common 10-A circui t breaker will interrupt a sustained greater than 10 A. Your 1.0kW microwave oven consumes, and so on. You can thin k of these rms and average values as the equivalent DC
values for a simple resistive circuit.
To summarize, when dealing with AC, Ohm’s law and the equat ions for power are completely analogous to those for DC, but rms
and average values are used for AC. Thus, for AC, Ohm’s law is wr itten
The various expressions for AC power are
and
Why Use AC for Power Distribution?
Most large power-distribution systems are AC. Moreover, th e power is transmitted at much higher voltages than t he 120-V AC (240
V in most parts of the world) we use in homes and on t he job. Economies of scale make it cheaper to build a few very large electric
power-generation plants than to build numerous small o nes. This necessitates sending power long distances, and it is obviously
important that energy losses en route be minimized. Hig h voltages can be transmitted with much smaller power losses than low
voltages, as we shall show below. (See Figure.) For safety reasons, the voltage at the user is reduced to familiar values. The
crucial factor is that AC voltages can be increased and decreased efficiently with transformers (which us es electromagnetic
induction to produce time-varying voltages), while i t is more difficult to change DC voltages without powe r losses. So AC is used
in most large power distribution systems.MAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT—AC/DC LIGHTS

7.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003
Figure: Power is distributed over large distances at high vol tage to reduce power loss in the transmission lines. The voltages
generated at the power plant are stepped up by passive devices called transformers to 330,000 volts (or more in some places
worldwide). At the point of use, the transformers redu ce the voltage transmitted for safe residential and co mmercial use. (Credit:
GeorgHH, Wikimedia Commons)
(a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of powe r at 200 kV? (b) What is the power dissipated by the tra nsmission lines
if they have a resistance of? (c) What percentage of the power is lost in the transmission lines?
Strategy
We are given,, and the resistance of the lines is. Using these givens, we can find
the current flowing (from) and then the power dissipa ted in the lines (), and we take the ratio to the tota l
power transmitted.
Solution
a) To find the current, we rearrange the relationship a nd substitute known values. This gives
b) Knowing the current and given the resistance of the lines, the power dissipated in them is found from.
Substituting the known values gives
c) The percent loss is the ratio of this lost power to the t otal or input power, multiplied by 100:
Discussion
One-fourth of a percent is an acceptable loss. Note t hat if 100 MW of power had been transmitted at 25 kV, t hen a
current of 4000 A would have been needed. This would r esult in a power loss in the lines of 16.0 MW, or 16.0% r ather
than 0.250%. The lower the voltage, the more current is needed, and the greater the power loss in the fixe d-resistance
transmission lines. Of course, lower-resistance lines can be built, but this requires larger and more expensive wires. If
superconducting lines could be economically produced, there would be no loss in the transmission lines at all. But, as
we shall see in a later chapter, there is a limit to c urrent in superconductors, too. In short, high voltage s are more
economical for transmitting power, and AC voltage is much easier to raise and lower, so that AC is used in most largescale power distribution systems.
Electrical Safety
Electricity has two hazards. A thermal hazard occurs when there is electrical overheating. A shock hazard occurs when electric
current passes through a person. Both hazards have already been discussed. Here we will concentrate on syst ems and devices that
prevent electrical hazards.
Figure 1 shows the schematic for a simple AC circuit wit h no safety features. This is not how power is distribute d in practice.
Modern household and industrial wiring requires the three-wire system, shown schematically in Figure 2, which has several safet y
features. First is the familiar circuit breaker (or fuse) to prevent thermal overload. Second, there is a prot ective case around theExample: Power Losses Are Less for High-Voltage Transmission

7.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003appliance, such as a toaster or refrigerator. The cas e’s safety feature is that it prevents a person from touching exposed wires and
coming into electrical contact with the circuit, helping p revent shocks.
Figure: Schematic of a simple AC circuit with a volt age source and a single appliance represented by the r esistance There
are no safety features in this circuit.
Figure: The three-wire system connects the neutral wir e to the earth at the voltage source and user locatio n, forcing it to be at
zero volts and supplying an alternative return path f or the current through the earth. Also grounded to z ero volts is the case of the
appliance. A circuit breaker or fuse protects against thermal overload and is in series on the active (live/ hot) wire. Note that wire
insulation colors vary with region and it is essential t o check locally to determine which color codes are i n use (and even if they
were followed in the particular installation).
There are three connections to earth or ground (hereafter referred to as “earth/ground”) shown in Fig ure 2. Recall that an
earth/ground connection is a low-resistance path dir ectly to the earth. The two earth/ground connections on the neutral wire force it
to be at zero volts relative to the earth, giving t he wire its name. This wire is therefore safe to touch e ven if its insulation, usually
white, is missing. The neutral wire is the return pat h for the current to follow to complete the circuit. Furthermore, the two
earth/ground connections supply an alternative path through the earth, a good conductor, to complete t he circuit. The earth/ground
connection closest to the power source could be at t he generating plant, while the other is at the user’s location. The third
earth/ground is to the case of the appliance, throug h the green earth/ground wire, forcing the case, too, to be at zero volts. The live
or hot wire (hereafter referred to as “live/hot”) supplies volta ge and current to operate the appliance. Figure 3 sho ws a more
pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connect ed through a three-prong plug to an appliance.
Figure: The standard three-prong plug can only be in serted in one way, to assure proper function of the th ree-wire system.
A note on insulation color-coding: Insulating plast ic is color-coded to identify live/hot, neutral and ground wires but these codes
vary around the world. Live/hot wires may be brown, red, black, blue or grey. Neutral wire may be blue, black o r white. Since the
same color may be used for live/hot or neutral in d ifferent parts of the world, it is essential to determ ine the color code in your
region. The only exception is the earth/ground wire which is often green but may be yellow or just bare wir e. Striped coatings are
sometimes used for the benefit of those who are colorblind.
The three-wire system replaced the older two-wire syste m, which lacks an earth/ground wire. Under ordinary circu mstances,
insulation on the live/hot and neutral wires prevents the case from being directly in the circuit, so that the earth/ground wire may
seem like double protection. Grounding the case solv es more than one problem, however. The simplest problem is worn insulation
on the live/hot wire that allows it to contact the case, as shown in Figure 4 Lacking an earth/ground connect ion (some people cut

7.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003the third prong off the plug because they only have outdated two hole receptacles), a severe shock is pos sible. This is particularly
dangerous in the kitchen, where a good connection to e arth/ground is available through water on the floor or a water faucet. With
the earth/ground connection intact, the circuit bre aker will trip, forcing repair of the appliance. Why are some appliances still sold
with two-prong plugs? These have nonconducting cases, such as power tools with impact resistant plastic cases, an d are called
doubly insulated. Modern two-prong plugs can be inserted into the asym metric standard outlet in only one way, to ensure pro per
connection of live/hot and neutral wires.
Figure: Worn insulation allows the live/hot wire to c ome into direct contact with the metal case of this a ppliance. (a) The
earth/ground connection being broken, the person is se verely shocked. The appliance may operate normally i n this situation. (b)
With a proper earth/ground, the circuit breaker tri ps, forcing repair of the appliance.
Electromagnetic induction causes a more subtle prob lem that is solved by grounding the case. The AC curr ent in appliances can
induce an emf on the case. If grounded, the case volt age is kept near zero, but if the case is not ground ed, a shock can occur as
pictured in Figure 5 Current driven by the induced c ase emf is called a leakage current, although current does not necessarily pass
from the resistor to the case.
Figure: AC currents can induce an emf on the case of an appliance. The voltage can be large enough to ca use a shock. If the
case is grounded, the induced emf is kept near zero.
A ground fault interrupter (GFI) is a safety device found in updated kitchen an d bathroom wiring that works based on
electromagnetic induction. GFIs compare the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires. When live/hot and neu tral currents are not
equal, it is almost always because current in the neu tral is less than in the live/hot wire. Then some of t he current, again called a
leakage current, is returning to the voltage source by a path other than through the neutral wire. It is assumed that this path presents
a hazard, such as shown in Figure 6. GFIs are usually set t o interrupt the circuit if the leakage current is gr eater than 5 mA, the
accepted maximum harmless shock. Even if the leakage current goes safely to earth/ground through an intac t earth/ground wire, the
GFI will trip, forcing repair of the leakage.

7.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003
Figure: A ground fault interrupter (GFI) compares the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires and will trip if their difference
exceeds a safe value. The leakage current here follow s a hazardous path that could have been prevented by an intact earth/ground
wire.
Figure 7 shows how a GFI works. If the currents in the liv e/hot and neutral wires are equal, then they induce e qual and opposite
emfs in the coil. If not, then the circuit breaker will tr ip.
Figure:A GFI compares currents by using both to induce an emf in the same coil. If the currents are equal, they will induce
equal but opposite emfs.
Another induction-based safety device is the isolation transformer, shown in Figure 8. Most isolation transformers have equal input
and output voltages. Their function is to put a large resistance between the original voltage source and t he device being operated.
This prevents a complete circuit between them, even i n the circumstance shown. There is a complete circuit th rough the appliance.
But there is not a complete circuit for current to flow through the person in the figure, who is touchin g only one of the
transformer’s output wires, and neither output wire is grounded. The appliance is isolated from the origina l voltage source by the
high resistance of the material between the transfor mer coils, hence the name isolation transformer. For current to flow through the
person, it must pass through the high-resistance mate rial between the coils, through the wire, the person, and back through the earth
—a path with such a large resistance that the current is ne gligible.
Figure: An isolation transformer puts a large resistance between the original voltage source and the device, preventing a
complete circuit between them.
The basics of electrical safety presented here help p revent many electrical hazards. Electrical safety can b e pursued to greater
depths. There are, for example, problems related to d ifferent earth/ground connections for appliances in cl ose proximity. Many
other examples are found in hospitals. Microshock-sensit ive patients, for instance, require special protecti on. For these people,
currents as low as 0.1 mA may cause ventricular fibr illation. The interested reader can use the materia l presented here as a basis for
further study.
Summary
Ohm’s law for AC is.

7.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93003Expressions for the average power of an AC circuit are,, and, analogous to the
expressions for DC circuits.
Electrical safety systems and devices are employed to preve nt thermal and shock hazards.
Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive current s to prevent thermal hazards.
The three-wire system guards against thermal and shock h azards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and earth/ground wires, and
grounding the neutral wire and case of the appliance.
A ground fault interrupter (GFI) prevents shock by detect ing the loss of current to unintentional paths.
An isolation transformer insulates the device being power ed from the original source, also to prevent shock.
Many of these devices use induction to perform their basi c function.
Glossary
direct current
(DC) the flow of electric charge in only one direction
alternating current
(AC) the flow of electric charge that periodically reve rses direction
AC voltage
voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with time.
AC current
current that fluctuates sinusoidally with time.
rms
a type of average taken for a time-varying quantity by s quaring it, taking the mean of the square, and then taki ng the square-root
of the mean.
thermal hazard
the term for electrical hazards due to overheating
shock hazard
the term for electrical hazards due to current passing th rough a human
three-wire system
the wiring system used at present for safety reasons, with li ve, neutral, and ground wire

This page titled 7.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.
23.11: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766217.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
13.1. 1.1 T/s
13.2. To the observer shown, the current flows clockwise as th e magnet approaches, decreases to zero when the magne t is
centered in the plane of the coil, and then flows counterc lockwise as the magnet leaves the coil.
13.4., with O at a higher potential than S
13.5. 1.5 V
13.6. a. yes;
b. Yes; however there is a lack of symmetry between th e electric field and coil, making a more complicat ed
relationship that can’t be simplified as shown in the exa mple.
13.7.
13.8.
13.9. a.
b.
Conceptual Questions
1. The emf depends on the rate of change of the magnetic fi eld.
3. Both have the same induced electric fields; however, the copper ring has a much higher induced emf beca use it conducts
electricity better than the wooden ring.
5. a. no; b. yes
7. As long as the magnetic flux is changing from positive to n egative or negative to positive, there could be an induc ed emf.
9. Position the loop so that the field lines run perpendicula r to the area vector or parallel to the surface.
11. a. CW as viewed from the circuit; b. CCW as viewed from the ci rcuit
13. As the loop enters, the induced emf creates a CCW curr ent while as the loop leaves the induced emf creates a CW
current. While the loop is fully inside the magnetic field, there is no flux change and therefore no induced current.
15. a. CCW viewed from the magnet;
b. CW viewed from the magnet;
c. CW viewed from the magnet;
d. CCW viewed from the magnet;
e. CW viewed from the magnet;

7.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621f. no current
17. Positive charges on the wings would be to the west, or to the left of the pilot while negative charges would be pulled east
or to the right of the pilot. Thus, the left hand tips of t he wings would be positive and the right hand tips would be n egative.
19. The work is greater than the kinetic energy because it ta kes energy to counteract the induced emf.
21. The conducting sheet is shielded from the changing m agnetic fields by creating an induced emf. This ind uced emf creates
an induced magnetic field that opposes any changes i n magnetic fields from the field underneath. Therefo re, there is no net
magnetic field in the region above this sheet. If the field were due to a static magnetic field, no induce d emf will be created
since you need a changing magnetic flux to induce an emf. Therefore, this static magnetic field will not be shie lded.
23. a. zero induced current, zero force; b. clockwise induc ed current, force is to the left; c. zero induced cur rent, zero force; d.
counterclockwise induced current, force is to the left; e. zero induced current, zero force.
Problems
25. a. 3.8 V;
b. 2.2 V;
c. 0 V
27.
29. Each answer is 20 times the previously given answers.
31.
33. a.;
b. CCW from the same view as the magnetic field
35. a. 150 A downward through the resistor;

7.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621b. 232 A upward through the resistor;
c. 0.093 A downward through the resistor
37. 0.0015 V
39.
41.
43. a.;
b. 1.25 V/m;
c. 0.3125 V;
d. 16 m/s
45. 0.018 A, CW as seen in the diagram
47. 9.375 V/m
49. Inside, so, (inside). Outside,, so,
(outside)
51. a.;
b.;
c. 0 J;
d.
53.
55. Three turns with an area of
57. a.;
b.;
c.
59. a. B is proportional to Q;
b. If the coin turns easily, the magnetic field is perpen dicular. If the coin is at an equilibrium position, it is pa rallel.
61. a. 1.33 A;
b. 0.50 A;
c. 60 W;
d. 22.5 W;
e. 2.5W
Additional Problems
63. A/s
65., the direction as follows for increasing magnetic field:

7.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662167. 0.375 V
69. a. 0.94 V;
b. 0.70 N;
c. 3.52 J/s;
d. 3.52 W
71.
73. a., so;
b.;
c.
Challenge Problems
75. N is a maximum number of turns allowed.
77. 5.3 V
79., so
81. a.;
b.;
c. 0 V
83. a.;

b.;
c.;
d. current would reverse direction but bar would still slid e at the same speed
85. a.,
b.;
c.
d.;
e. no, because there is no cylindrical symmetry
87. a.;
b. This angular velocity is unreasonably high, higher th an can be obtained for any mechanical system.
c. The assumption that a voltage as great as 12.0 kV could b e obtained is unreasonable.
89.
91.

7.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621Conceptual Questions
13.2 Faraday’s Law
1. A stationary coil is in a magnetic field that is ch anging with time. Does the emf induced in the coil de pend on the actual
values of the magnetic field?
2. In Faraday’s experiments, what would be the advantage of u sing coils with many turns?
3. A copper ring and a wooden ring of the same dimensions are placed in magnetic fields so that there is the same change in
magnetic flux through them. Compare the induced electri c fields and currents in the rings.
4. Discuss the factors determining the induced emf in a closed loop of wire.
5. (a) Does the induced emf in a circuit depend on the resista nce of the circuit?
(b) Does the induced current depend on the resistance of th e circuit?
6. How would changing the radius of loop D shown below affect its emf, assuming C and D are much closer together
compared to their radii?
7. Can there be an induced emf in a circuit at an instant when t he magnetic flux through the circuit is zero?
8. Does the induced emf always act to decrease the magnetic flux through a circuit?
9. How would you position a flat loop of wire in a changing magne tic field so that there is no induced emf in the loop?
10. The normal to the plane of a single-turn conducting loop is directed at an angle θ to a spatially uniform magnetic field
. It has a fixed area and orientation relative to th e magnetic field. Show that the emf induced in the lo op is given by
,where A is the area of the loop.
13.3 Lenz's Law
11. The circular conducting loops shown in the accompany ing figure are parallel, perpendicular to the plane of the page, and
coaxial.
(a) When the switch S is closed, what is the direction of t he current induced in D?
(b) When the switch is opened, what is the direction of the c urrent induced in loop D?
12. The north pole of a magnet is moved toward a copper loop, as shown below. If you are looking at the loop f rom above the
magnet, will you say the induced current is circulating cl ockwise or counterclockwise?

7.A.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621
13. The accompanying figure shows a conducting ring at v arious positions as it moves through a magnetic fie ld. What is the
sense of the induced emf for each of those positions?
14. Show that ε and have the same units.
15. State the direction of the induced current for each case sh own below, observing from the side of the magnet.
13.4 Motional Emf
16. A bar magnet falls under the influence of gravity al ong the axis of a long copper tube. If air resistanc e is negligible, will
there be a force to oppose the descent of the magnet? I f so, will the magnet reach a terminal velocity?

7.A.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662117. Around the geographic North Pole (or magnetic South Pole), Earth’s magnetic field is almost vertical. If an airplane is
flying northward in this region, which side of the wing is p ositively charged and which is negatively charged?
18. A wire loop moves translationally (no rotation) in a uni form magnetic field. Is there an emf induced in the loop?
13.5 Induced Electric Fields
19. Is the work required to accelerate a rod from rest to a speed v in a magnetic field greater than the final kinetic energy of
the rod? Why?
20. The copper sheet shown below is partially in a magnetic field. When it is pulled to the right, a resisting f orce pulls it to
the left. Explain. What happen if the sheet is pushed to the left?
13.6 Eddy Currents
21. A conducting sheet lies in a plane perpendicular to a magnetic field that is below the sheet. If oscil lates at a high
frequency and the conductor is made of a material of low resistivity, the region above the sheet is effec tively shielded from
. Explain why. Will the conductor shield this region fro m static magnetic fields?
22. Electromagnetic braking can be achieved by applying a stro ng magnetic field to a spinning metal disk attached to a shaft.
(a) How can a magnetic field slow the spinning of a disk?
(b) Would the brakes work if the disk was made of plastic instead of metal?
23. A coil is moved through a magnetic field as shown be low. The field is uniform inside the rectangle and ze ro outside.
What is the direction of the induced current and wha t is the direction of the magnetic force on the coil at each position
shown?
Problems
13.2 Faraday’s Law
24. A 50-turn coil has a diameter of 15 cm. The coil is p laced in a spatially uniform magnetic field of magn itude 0.50 T so
that the face of the coil and the magnetic field ar e perpendicular. Find the magnitude of the emf induce d in the coil if the
magnetic field is reduced to zero uniformly in
(a) 0.10 s,
(b) 1.0 s, and
(c) 60 s.
25. Repeat your calculations of the preceding problem’s ti me of 0.1 s with the plane of the coil making an angle of
(a) 30°,

7.A.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621(b) 60°, and
(c) 90° with the magnetic field.
26. A square loop whose sides are 6.0-cm long is made with copper wire of radius 1.0 mm. If a magnetic field perp endicular
to the loop is changing at a rate of 5.0 mT/s, what is the current in the loop?
27. The magnetic field through a circular loop of radiu s 10.0 cm varies with time as shown below. The field is perpendicular
to the loop. Plot the magnitude of the induced emf in th e loop as a function of time.
28. The accompanying figure shows a single-turn rectangu lar coil that has a resistance of 2.0Ω.2.0Ω. The magnet ic field at
all points inside the coil varies according to where and α=200Hz. What is the current induced in the
coil at
(a) t=0.001s,
(b) 0.002 s,
(c) 2.0 s?
29. How would the answers to the preceding problem change if the coil consisted of 20 closely spaced turns?
30. A long solenoid with n=10 turns per centimeter has a cross-sectional area of a nd carries a current of 0.25 A. A coil
with five turns encircles the solenoid. When the curr ent through the solenoid is turned off, it decreases to zero in 0.050 s.
What is the average emf induced in the coil?
31. A rectangular wire loop with length a and width b lies in the xy-plane, as shown below. Within the loop there is a timedependent magnetic field given by, with in tesla. Determine the emf induced in the loop
as a function of time.
32. The magnetic field perpendicular to a single wire lo op of diameter 10.0 cm decreases from 0.50 T to zer o. The wire is
made of copper and has a diameter of 2.0 mm and len gth 1.0 cm. How much charge moves through the wire while t he field is
changing?
13.3 Lenz's Law
33. A single-turn circular loop of wire of radius 50 mm lies in a plane perpendicular to a spatially uniform magnetic field.
During a 0.10-s time interval, the magnitude of the field i ncreases uniformly from 200 to 300 mT.

7.A.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621(a) Determine the emf induced in the loop.
(b) If the magnetic field is directed out of the page, what is the direction of the current induced in the loop?
34. When a magnetic field is first turned on, the flux t hrough a 20-turn loop varies with time according to,
where is in milliwebers, t is in seconds, and the loop is i n the plane of the page with the unit normal pointing outwar d.
(a) What is the emf induced in the loop as a function of t ime? What is the direction of the induced current at
(b) t = 0,
(c) 0.10,
(d) 1.0, and
(e) 2.0 s?
35. The magnetic flux through the loop shown in the acco mpanying figure varies with time according to
,where is in milliwebers. What are the direction and m agnitude of the current through the 5.00-Ω
resistor at (a) t=0t=0; (b), and (c) t=3.00s?
36. Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced curr ent in each case.
13.4 Motional Emf
37. An automobile with a radio antenna 1.0 m long travels at 100.0 km/h in a location where the Earth’s horizon tal magnetic
field is. What is the maximum possible emf induced in t he antenna due to this motion?
38. The rectangular loop of N turns shown below moves to t he right with a constant velocity while leaving the p oles of a
large electromagnet. (a) Assuming that the magnetic f ield is uniform between the pole faces and negligibl e elsewhere,
determine the induced emf in the loop. (b) What is the sour ce of work that produces this emf?

7.A.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621
39. Suppose the magnetic field of the preceding problem o scillates with time according to. What then is the e mf
induced in the loop when its trailing side is a distance fr om the right edge of the magnetic field region?
40. A coil of 1000 turns encloses an area of. It is rota ted in 0.010 s from a position where its plane is perp endicular to
Earth’s magnetic field to one where its plane is par allel to the field. If the strength of the field is, what is the
average emf induced in the coil?
41. In the circuit shown in the accompanying figure, the rod slides along the conducting rails at a constant velocity. The
velocity is in the same plane as the rails and direct ed at an angle θθ to them. A uniform magnetic field is directed out of the
page. What is the emf induced in the rod?
42. The rod shown in the accompanying figure is moving thr ough a uniform magnetic field of strength with a
constant velocity of magnitude. What is the potent ial difference between the ends of the rod? Which en d of the
rod is at a higher potential?
43. A 25-cm rod moves at 5.0 m/s in a plane perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength 0.25 T. The rod, vel ocity vector,
and magnetic field vector are mutually perpendicular, as i ndicated in the accompanying figure. Calculate
(a) the magnetic force on an electron in the rod,
(b) the electric field in the rod, and
(c) the potential difference between the ends of the rod.
(d) What is the speed of the rod if the potential differenc e is 1.0 V?

7.A.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662144. In the accompanying figure, the rails, connecting e nd piece, and rod all have a resistance per unit lengt h of 2.0Ω/cm. The
rod moves to the left at v=3.0m/s. If B=0.75T everywhere in the region, what is the current in the cir cuit
(a) when a=8.0cm?
(b) when a=5.0cm? Specify also the sense of the current flow.
45. The rod shown below moves to the right on essentially zero-resistance rails at a speed of v=3.0m/ s. If B=0.75T
everywhere in the region, what is the current through the 5.0-Ω resistor? Does the current circulate clockwise or
counterclockwise?
46. Shown below is a conducting rod that slides along metal rails. The apparatus is in a uniform magnetic field of strength
0.25 T, which is directly into the page. The rod is pulled to the right at a constant speed of 5.0 m/s by a force. The only
significant resistance in the circuit comes from the 2.0-Ω resistor shown.
(a) What is the emf induced in the circuit?
(b) What is the induced current? Does it circulate clock wise or counter clockwise?
(c) What is the magnitude of?
(d) What are the power output of and the power dissipa ted in the resistor?
13.5 Induced Electric Fields
47. Calculate the induced electric field in a 50-turn coil with a diameter of 15 cm that is placed in a sp atially uniform
magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T so that the face of the coil and the magnetic field are perpendicula r. This magnetic field is
reduced to zero in 0.10 seconds. Assume that the magne tic field is cylindrically symmetric with respect to the central axis of
the coil.
48. The magnetic field through a circular loop of radiu s 10.0 cm varies with time as shown in the accompanying figure. The
field is perpendicular to the loop. Assuming cylindri cal symmetry with respect to the central axis of the loop, plot the
induced electric field in the loop as a function of tim e.
49. The current I through a long solenoid with n turns per meter and radius R is changing with time as given by dI/dt.
Calculate the induced electric field as a function of dist ance r from the central axis of the solenoid.
50. Calculate the electric field induced both inside and outside the solenoid of the preceding problem if.
51. Over a region of radius R, there is a spatially unifor m magnetic field. (See below.) At t=0, B=1.0T, after which it
decreases at a constant rate to zero in 30 s.
(a) What is the electric field in the regions where and during that 30-s interval?
(b) Assume that R=10.0cm. How much work is done by the electric field on a pro ton that is carried once clock wise
around a circular path of radius 5.0 cm?

7.A.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621(c) How much work is done by the electric field on a p roton that is carried once counterclockwise around a c ircular
path of any radius?
(d) At the instant when B=0.50T, a proton enters the magnetic field at A, moving a v elocity as
shown. What are the electric and magnetic forces on the proton at that instant?
52. The magnetic field at all points within the cylindri cal region whose cross-section is indicated in the acc ompanying figure
starts at 1.0 T and decreases uniformly to zero in 20 s. What is the electric field (both magnitude and dire ction) as a function
of r, the distance from the geometric center of the region?
53. The current in a long solenoid of radius 3 cm is var ied with time at a rate of 2 A/s. A circular loop of wi re of radius 5 cm
and resistance 2Ω surrounds the solenoid. Find the electrical current induc ed in the loop.
54. The current in a long solenoid of radius 3 cm and 20 turns/cm is varied with time at a rate of 2 A/s. Find the electric field
at a distance of 4 cm from the center of the solenoid.
13.7 Electric Generators and Back Emf
55. Design a current loop that, when rotated in a uniform magnetic field of strength 0.10 T, will produce an em f,
where and.
56. A flat, square coil of 20 turns that has sides of le ngth 15.0 cm is rotating in a magnetic field of stre ngth 0.050 T. If the
maximum emf produced in the coil is 30.0 mV, what is the an gular velocity of the coil?
57. A 50-turn rectangular coil with dimensions 0.15m×0.40m rotates in a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 0.75 T at
3600 rev/min.

7.A.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621(a) Determine the emf induced in the coil as a function o f time.
(b) If the coil is connected to a 1000-Ω resistor, what is the power as a function of time requi red to keep the coil
turning at 3600 rpm?
(c) Answer part (b) if the coil is connected to a 2000-Ω resistor.
58. The square armature coil of an alternating current generator has 200 turns and is 20.0 cm on side. When i t rotates at 3600
rpm, its peak output voltage is 120 V.
(a) What is the frequency of the output voltage?
(b) What is the strength of the magnetic field in which the c oil is turning?
59. A flip coil is a relatively simple device used to mea sure a magnetic field. It consists of a circular coil of N turns wound
with fine conducting wire. The coil is attached to a b allistic galvanometer, a device that measures the to tal charge that passes
through it. The coil is placed in a magnetic field such that its face is perpendicular to the field. It is then flipped through
180°,180°, and the total chargeQ that flows through the galv anometer is measured.
(a) If the total resistance of the coil and galvano meter is R, what is the relationship between B and Q? Be cause the coil
is very small, you can assume that is uniform over it.
(b) How can you determine whether or not the magnetic fiel d is perpendicular to the face of the coil?
60. The flip coil of the preceding problem has a radius of 3.0 cm and is wound with 40 turns of copper wire. The total
resistance of the coil and ballistic galvanometer is 0.20Ω. When the coil is flipped through 180° in a magnetic field, a
change of 0.090 C flows through the ballistic galvanometer.
(a) Assuming that and the face of the coil are initially perpendicular, what is the magnetic field?
(b) If the coil is flipped through 90°, what is the reading of the galvanometer?
61. A 120-V, series-wound motor has a field resistance of 80 Ω and an armature resistance of 10 Ω. When it is operating at
full speed, a back emf of 75 V is generated.
(a) What is the initial current drawn by the motor? When the motor is operating at full speed, where are
(b) the current drawn by the motor,
(c) the power output of the source,
(d) the power output of the motor, and
(e) the power dissipated in the two resistances?
62. A small series-wound dc motor is operated from a 12-V car battery. Under a normal load, the motor draws 4.0 A, and
when the armature is clamped so that it cannot turn, the motor draws 24 A. What is the back emf when the mot or is operating
normally?
Additional Problems
63. Shown in the following figure is a long, straight wire and a single-turn rectangular loop, both of which lie i n the plane of
the page. The wire is parallel to the long sides of th e loop and is 0.50 m away from the closer side. At an i nstant when the
emf induced in the loop is 2.0 V, what is the time rate of c hange of the current in the wire?
64. A metal bar of mass 500 g slides outward at a const ant speed of 1.5 cm/s over two parallel rails separat ed by a distance of
30 cm which are part of a U-shaped conductor. There is a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 2 T pointing o ut of the page

7.A.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621over the entire area. The railings and metal bar have an equi valent resistance of 150Ω.
(a) Determine the induced current, both magnitude and dir ection.
(b) Find the direction of the induced current if the ma gnetic field is pointing into the page.
(c) Find the direction of the induced current if the magneti c field is pointed into the page and the bar moves inward s.
65. A current is induced in a circular loop of radius 1. 5 cm between two poles of a horseshoe electromagnet whe n the current
in the electromagnet is varied. The magnetic field in the area of the loop is perpendicular to the area a nd has a uniform
magnitude. If the rate of change of magnetic field is 10 T/s, find the magnitude and direction of the induced current if
resistance of the loop is 25Ω.
66. A metal bar of length 25 cm is placed perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field of strength 3 T.
(a) Determine the induced emf between the ends of the rod wh en it is not moving.
(b) Determine the emf when the rod is moving perpendicular to its length and magnetic field with a speed of 50 cm/s.
67. A coil with 50 turns and area 10 is oriented with it s plane perpendicular to a 0.75-T magnetic field. I f the coil is
flipped over (rotated through 180°) in 0.20 s, what is the average emf induced in it?
68. A 2-turn planer loop of flexible wire is placed insid e a long solenoid of n turns per meter that carries a constant current.
The areaA of the loop is changed by pulling on its s ides while ensuring that the plane of the loop always remains
perpendicular to the axis of the solenoid. If n=500turns per meter, and, what is the emf induced in the
loop when dA/dt=100?
69. The conducting rod shown in the accompanying figure m oves along parallel metal rails that are 25-cm apar t. The system
is in a uniform magnetic field of strength 0.75 T, wh ich is directed into the page. The resistances of th e rod and the rails are
negligible, but the section PQ has a resistance of 0.25Ω.
(a) What is the emf (including its sense) induced in t he rod when it is moving to the right with a speed of 5. 0 m/s?
(b) What force is required to keep the rod moving at t his speed?
(c) What is the rate at which work is done by this force?
(d) What is the power dissipated in the resistor?
70. A circular loop of wire of radius 10 cm is mounted on a vertical shaft and rotated at a frequency of 5 cycles per second in
a region of uniform magnetic field of 2 Gauss perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
(a) Find an expression for the time-dependent flux throug h the ring.
(b) Determine the time-dependent current through the ring i f it has a resistance of 10 Ω.

7.A.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662171. The magnetic field between the poles of a horseshoe ele ctromagnet is uniform and has a cylindrical symmetry about an
axis from the middle of the South Pole to the middle o f the North Pole. The magnitude of the magnetic field changes as a rate
of dB/dt due to the changing current through the electrom agnet. Determine the electric field at a distance r from the center.
72. A long solenoid of radius a with n turns per unit leng th is carrying a time-dependent current, where
and ω are constants. The solenoid is surrounded by a wire of resistance R that has two circular loops of radius b with b>a
(see the following figure). Find the magnitude and directio n of current induced in the outer loops at time t=0.
73. A 120-V, series-wound dc motor draws 0.50 A from its po wer source when operating at full speed, and it draws 2.0 A
when it starts. The resistance of the armature coils is 10Ω.
(a) What is the resistance of the field coils?
(b) What is the back emf of the motor when it is running at full speed?
(c) The motor operates at a different speed and draws 1.0 A fr om the source. What is the back emf in this case?
74. The armature and field coils of a series-wound motor have a total resistance of 3.0Ω. When connected to a 120-V source
and running at normal speed, the motor draws 4.0 A.
(a) How large is the back emf?
(b) What current will the motor draw just after it is turned on? Can you suggest a way to avoid this large initial
current?
Challenge Problems
75. A copper wire of length L is fashioned into a circular coil with N turns. When the magnetic field through the coil chan ges
with time, for what value of N is the induced emf a maximum?
76. A 0.50-kg copper sheet drops through a uniform horizo ntal magnetic field of 1.5 T, and it reaches a termi nal velocity of
2.0 m/s.
(a) What is the net magnetic force on the sheet after it r eaches terminal velocity?
(b) Describe the mechanism responsible for this force.
(c) How much power is dissipated as Joule heating while the she et moves at terminal velocity?
77. A circular copper disk of radius 7.5 cm rotates at 24 00 rpm around the axis through its center and perpe ndicular to its
face. The disk is in a uniform magnetic field of str ength 1.2 T that is directed along the axis. What is the potential
difference between the rim and the axis of the disk?
78. A short rod of length a moves with its velocity par allel to an infinite wire carrying a current I (see below). If the end of
the rod nearer the wire is a distance b from the wire, what is the emf induced in the rod?

7.A.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621
79. A rectangular circuit containing a resistance R is pulled at a constant velocity away from a long, str aight wire carrying a
current (see below). Derive an equation that gives the current induced in the circuit as a function of the distance x between
the near side of the circuit and the wire.
80. Two infinite solenoids cross the plane of the circuit as shown below. The radii of the solenoids are 0.10 an d 0.20 m,
respectively, and the current in each solenoid is chan ging such that dB/dt=50.0T/s. What are the currents in the resistors of
the circuit?

7.A.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76621
81. An eight-turn coil is tightly wrapped around the out side of the long solenoid as shown below. The radius of the solenoid
is 2.0 cm and it has 10 turns per centimeter. The cu rrent through the solenoid increases according to, where
and. What is the emf induced in the coil when (a), (b), and (c)?
82. Shown below is a long rectangular loop of width w, length l, mass m, and resistance R. The loop starts from rest at the
edge of a uniform magnetic field and is pushed int o the field by a constant force. Calculate the spee d of the loop as a
function of time.

7.A.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662183. A square bar of mass m and resistance R is sliding without friction down very long, parallel c onducting rails of negligible
resistance (see below). The two rails are a distance l apart and are connected to each other at the botto m of the incline by a
zero-resistance wire. The rails are inclined at an a ngle θ, and there is a uniform vertical magnetic field t hroughout the
region.
(a) Show that the bar acquires a terminal velocity given by.
(b) Calculate the work per unit time done by the force of gr avity.
(c) Compare this with the power dissipated in the Joule heating of the bar.
(d) What would happen if were reversed?
84. The accompanying figure shows a metal disk of inner ra dius and other radius rotating at an angular veloci ty while
in a uniform magnetic field directed parallel to th e rotational axis. The brush leads of a voltmeter a re connected to the dark’s
inner and outer surfaces as shown. What is the reading of the voltmeter?
85. A long solenoid with 10 turns per centimeter is place d inside a copper ring such that both objects have th e same central
axis. The radius of the ring is 10.0 cm, and the radius of the solenoid is 5.0 cm.
(a) What is the emf induced in the ring when the curr ent I through the solenoid is 5.0 A and changing at a rate of 100
A/s?
(b) What is the emf induced in the ring when I=2.0A and dI/dt=100A/s?
(c) What is the electric field inside the ring for these two cases?
(d) Suppose the ring is moved so that its central axi s and the central axis of the solenoid are still para llel but no longer
coincide. (You should assume that the solenoid is still i nside the ring.) Now what is the emf induced in the ring?
(e) Can you calculate the electric field in the ring as you did in part (c)?

7.A.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662186. The current in the long, straight wire shown in the ac companying figure is given by where and
. What is the current induced in the rectangular loo p at (a) t=0 and (b)? The resistance of the loop
is 2.0Ω.
87. A 500-turn coil with a area is spun in Earth’s magne tic field, producing a 12.0-kV maximum
emf.
(a) At what angular velocity must the coil be spun?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
88. A circular loop of wire of radius 10 cm is mounted o n a vertical shaft and rotated at a frequency of 5 c ycles per second in
a region of uniform magnetic field of perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
(a) Find an expression for the time-dependent flux throug h the ring
(b) Determine the time-dependent current through the ring i f it has a resistance of 10Ω.
89. A long solenoid of radius aa with nn turns per unit l ength is carrying a time-dependent current where
and ωω are constants. The solenoid is surrounded by a wire of resistance R that has two circular loops of rad ius b with b>a.
Find the magnitude and direction of current induced in the outer loops at time t=0.
90. A rectangular copper loop of mass 100 g and resistan ce 0.2Ω is in a region of uniform magnetic field that is
perpendicular to the area enclosed by the ring and horizontal to Earth’s surface (see below). The loop i s let go from rest when
it is at the edge of the nonzero magnetic field region.
(a) Find an expression for the speed when the loop just exi ts the region of uniform magnetic field.
(b) If it was let go at t=0t=0, what is the time when i t exits the region of magnetic field for the followi ng values:
? Assume that the magnetic field of the induced curre nt is negligible compared
to 3 T.

7.A.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662191. A metal bar of mass m slides without friction over two rails a distance D apart in the region that has a uniform magnetic
field of magnitude and direction perpendicular to the rails (see below). The two rails are connected at one end to a resistor
whose resistance is much larger than the resistance of the rails and the bar. The bar is given an initial speed of. It is found
to slow down. How far does the bar go before coming to r est? Assume that the magnetic field of the induced cur rent is
negligible compared to.
92. A time-dependent uniform magnetic field of magnitud e B(t) is confined in a cylindrical region of radius R. A conducting
rod of length 2D is placed in the region, as shown below. Show that the e mf between the ends of the rod is given by
. (Hint: To find the emf between the ends, we need to integr ate the electric field from one end to the other. To
find the electric field, use Faraday’s law as “Ampère’s law f or E.”)
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.11: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
13.10: Electromagnetic Induction (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

7.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/930027.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies (Exercise)
Conceptual Questions
23.1 Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
1. How do the multiple-loop coils and iron ring in the version of Faraday’s apparatus shown in Figure enhance the
observation of induced emf?
2. When a magnet is thrust into a coil as in Figure(a), what is the direction of the force exerted by the c oil on the magnet?
Draw a diagram showing the direction of the current in duced in the coil and the magnetic field it produce s, to justify your
response. How does the magnitude of the force depend on the r esistance of the galvanometer?
3. Explain how magnetic flux can be zero when the magnetic field is not zero.
4. Is an emf induced in the coil in Figure when it is stretched? If so, state why and give the direction of the induced cu rrent.
A circular coil of wire is stretched in a magnetic field.
23.2 Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
5. A person who works with large magnets sometimes places her head inside a strong field. She reports feeling di zzy as she
quickly turns her head. How might this be associated with induc tion?
6. A particle accelerator sends high-velocity charged particles down an evacuated pipe. Explain how a coil of wire wrapped
around the pipe could detect the passage of individu al particles. Sketch a graph of the voltage output of the coil as a single
particle passes through it.
23.3 Motional Emf
7. Why must part of the circuit be moving relative to other parts, to have usable motional emf? Consider, f or example, that
the rails in Figure are stationary relative to the magn etic field, while the rod moves.

7.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002
8. A powerful induction cannon can be made by placing a metal cylinder inside a solenoid coil. The cylinder is forcefully
expelled when solenoid current is turned on rapidly. Use Faraday’s and Lenz’s laws to explain how this works. W hy might
the cylinder get live/hot when the cannon is fired?
9. An induction stove heats a pot with a coil carrying a n alternating current located beneath the pot (and wi thout a hot
surface). Can the stove surface be a conductor? Why won’t a coi l carrying a direct current work?
10. Explain how you could thaw out a frozen water pipe b y wrapping a coil carrying an alternating current ar ound it. Does it
matter whether or not the pipe is a conductor? Explain.
23.4 Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
11. Explain why magnetic damping might not be effective on an object made of several thin conducting layers separated by
insulation.
12. Explain how electromagnetic induction can be used to detect metals? This technique is particularly import ant in detecting
buried landmines for disposal, geophysical prospecting a nd at airports.
23.5 Electric Generators
13. Using RHR-1, show that the emfs in the sides of the generator loop in Figure are in the same sense and thus add.
14. The source of a generator’s electrical energy outpu t is the work done to turn its coils. How is the work nee ded to turn the
generator related to Lenz’s law?
23.6 Back Emf
15. Suppose you find that the belt drive connecting a po werful motor to an air conditioning unit is broken a nd the motor is
running freely. Should you be worried that the motor is consuming a great deal of energy for no useful pur pose? Explain why
or why not.

7.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9300223.7 Transformers
16. Explain what causes physical vibrations in transformers at twice the frequency of the AC power involved.
23.8 Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
17. Does plastic insulation on live/hot wires prevent shock haz ards, thermal hazards, or both?
18. Why are ordinary circuit breakers and fuses ineffective in p reventing shocks?
19. A GFI may trip just because the live/hot and neutral wires connected to it are significantly different i n length. Explain
why.
23.9 Inductance
20. How would you place two identical flat coils in contact so th at they had the greatest mutual inductance? The least?
21. How would you shape a given length of wire to give it th e greatest self-inductance? The least?
22. Verify, as was concluded without proof in Example, that u nits of.
23.11 Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
23. Presbycusis is a hearing loss due to age that progre ssively affects higher frequencies. A hearing aid am plifier is designed
to amplify all frequencies equally. To adjust its o utput for presbycusis, would you put a capacitor in series or parallel with the
hearing aid’s speaker? Explain.
24. Would you use a large inductance or a large capacit ance in series with a system to filter out low frequen cies, such as the
100 Hz hum in a sound system? Explain.
25. High-frequency noise in AC power can damage computers. Does the plug-in unit designed to prevent this dama ge use a
large inductance or a large capacitance (in series with the computer) to filter out such high frequencies? Explai n.
26. Does inductance depend on current, frequency, or both? Wh at about inductive reactance?
27. Explain why the capacitor in Figure(a) acts as a low-fr equency filter between the two circuits, whereas that in Figure(b)
acts as a high-frequency filter.
Capacitors and inductors. Capacitor with high frequenc y and low frequency.
28. If the capacitors in Figure are replaced by inductor s, which acts as a low-frequency filter and which as a hi gh-frequency
filter?
23.12 RLC Series AC Circuits
29. Does the resonant frequency of an AC circuit depend on th e peak voltage of the AC source? Explain why or why not.
30. Suppose you have a motor with a power factor significan tly less than 1. Explain why it would be better to im prove the
power factor as a method of improving the motor’s outpu t, rather than to increase the voltage input.

7.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002Problems & Exercises
23.1 Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
31. What is the value of the magnetic flux at coil 2 in Figure due to coil 1?
(a) The planes of the two coils are perpendicular. (b) The wi re is perpendicular to the plane of the coil.
Solution
Zero
32. What is the value of the magnetic flux through the coi l in Figure(b) due to the wire?
23.2 Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
33. Referring to Figure(a), what is the direction of the cu rrent induced in coil 2:
(a) If the current in coil 1 increases?
(b) If the current in coil 1 decreases?
(c) If the current in coil 1 is constant? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Stra tegy for
Lenz's Law.
(a) The coils lie in the same plane. (b) The wire is in the plane of the coil
Solution
(a) CCW
(b) CW
(c) No current induced
34. Referring to Figure(b), what is the direction of the curren t induced in the coil:
(a) If the current in the wire increases?
(b) If the current in the wire decreases?

7.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(c) If the current in the wire suddenly changes dire ction? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Pr oblemSolving Strategy for Lenz’s Law.
35. Referring to Figure, what are the directions of the cur rents in coils 1, 2, and 3 (assume that the coils are lying in the plane
of the circuit):
(a) When the switch is first closed?
(b) When the switch has been closed for a long time?
(c) Just after the switch is opened?
Solution
(a) 1 CCW, 2 CCW, 3 CW
(b) 1, 2, and 3 no current induced
(c) 1 CW, 2 CW, 3 CCW
36. Repeat the previous problem with the battery reversed.
37. Verify that the units of are volts. That is, show that.
38. Suppose a 50-turn coil lies in the plane of the page in a uniform magnetic field that is directed into th e page. The coil
originally has an area of. It is stretched to have n o area in 0.100 s. What is the direction and magnitud e of the
induced emf if the uniform magnetic field has a strength of 1.50 T?
39. (a) An MRI technician moves his hand from a region o f very low magnetic field strength into an MRI scanner ’s 2.00 T
field with his fingers pointing in the direction of the field. Find the average emf induced in his weddin g ring, given its
diameter is 2.20 cm and assuming it takes 0.250 s to move it into the field. (b) Discuss whether this curre nt would
significantly change the temperature of the ring.
Solution
(a) 3.04 mV
(b) As a lower limit on the ring, estimate R = 1.00 mΩ. T he heat transferred will be 2.31 mJ. This is not a si gnificant
amount of heat.
40. Integrated Concepts
Referring to the situation in the previous problem:
(a) What current is induced in the ring if its resistanc e is 0.0100?
(b) What average power is dissipated?
(c) What magnetic field is induced at the center of the ring? (d) What is the direction of the induced magnetic
field relative to the MRI’s field?
41. An emf is induced by rotating a 1000-turn, 20.0 cm di ameter coil in the Earth’s magnetic field. What
average emf is induced, given the plane of the coil i s originally perpendicular to the Earth’s field and is rotated to be parallel

7.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002to the field in 10.0 ms?
Solution
0.157 V
42. A 0.250 m radius, 500-turn coil is rotated one-fourt h of a revolution in 4.17 ms, originally having its pl ane perpendicular
to a uniform magnetic field. (This is 60 rev/s.) Find the m agnetic field strength needed to induce an average emf of 10,000 V.
43. Integrated Concepts
Approximately how does the emf induced in the loop in Figure(b) depend on the distance of the center of the loop
from the wire?
Solution
proportional to
44. Integrated Concepts
(a) A lightning bolt produces a rapidly varying magn etic field. If the bolt strikes the earth vertically and acts like a
current in a long straight wire, it will induce a volt age in a loop aligned like that in Figure(b). What vo ltage is induced
in a 1.00 m diameter loop 50.0 m from a lightning strike, if the current falls to zero in?
(b) Discuss circumstances under which such a voltage would pro duce noticeable consequences.
23.3 Motional Emf
45. Use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show that t he magnetic force on the current in the moving rod i n Figure is
in the opposite direction of its velocity.
46. If a current flows in the Satellite Tether shown in Fi gure, use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show t hat there is
a magnetic force on the tether in the direction opposit e to its velocity.

7.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9300247. (a) A jet airplane with a 75.0 m wingspan is flying at 280 m/s. What emf is induced between wing tips if t he vertical
component of the Earth’s field is?
(b) Is an emf of this magnitude likely to have any conseq uences? Explain.
Solution
(a) 0.630 V
(b) No, this is a very small emf.
48. (a) A nonferrous screwdriver is being used in a 2.00 T magnetic field. What maximum emf can be induced al ong its 12.0
cm length when it moves at 6.00 m/s?
(b) Is it likely that this emf will have any consequences or even be noticed?
49. At what speed must the sliding rod in Figure move to pr oduce an emf of 1.00 V in a 1.50 T field, given the rod’s length is
30.0 cm?
Solution
2.22 m/s
50. The 12.0 cm long rod in Figure moves at 4.00 m/s. What is the st rength of the magnetic field if a 95.0 V emf is induced?
51. Prove that when and are not mutually perpendicular, motional emf is given by. If is perpendicular
to, then is the angle between and. If is perpendic ular to, then is the angle between and.
52. In the August 1992 space shuttle flight, only 250 m of the conducting tether considered in Example coul d be let out. A
40.0 V motional emf was generated in the Earth’s fie ld, while moving at. What was the angle
between the shuttle’s velocity and the Earth’s field, assu ming the conductor was perpendicular to the field?
53. Integrated Concepts
Derive an expression for the current in a system like that in Figure, under the following conditions. The r esistance
between the rails is, the rails and the moving rod ar e identical in cross section and have the same resist ivity. The
distance between the rails is, and the rod moves at constant speed perpendicular to the uniform field. At time ze ro,
the moving rod is next to the resistance.
54. Integrated Concepts
The Tethered Satellite in Figure has a mass of 525 kg and is at the end of a 20.0 km long, 2.50 mm diamet er cable with
the tensile strength of steel.

7.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(a) How much does the cable stretch if a 100 N force i s exerted to pull the satellite in? (Assume the satell ite and
shuttle are at the same altitude above the Earth.)
(b) What is the effective force constant of the cable?
(c) How much energy is stored in it when stretched by the 100 N force?
55. Integrated Concepts
The Tethered Satellite discussed in this module is producin g 5.00 kV, and a current of 10.0 A flows.
(a) What magnetic drag force does this produce if the syst em is moving at 7.80 km/s?
(b) How much kinetic energy is removed from the system in 1.00 h, neglecting any change in altitude or vel ocity
during that time?
(c) What is the change in velocity if the mass of the system is 100,000 kg?
(d) Discuss the long term consequences (say, a week-lon g mission) on the space shuttle’s orbit, noting what
effect a decrease in velocity has and assessing the magnit ude of the effect.
Solution
(a) 10.0 N
(b)
(c) 0.36 m/s
(d) For a week-long mission (168 hours), the change i n velocity will be 60 m/s, or approximately 1%. In g eneral, a
decrease in velocity would cause the orbit to start spiraling inward because the velocity would no longer be sufficient
to keep the circular orbit. The long-term consequen ces are that the shuttle would require a little more fuel to maintain
the desired speed, otherwise the orbit would spiral sligh tly inward.
23.4 Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
56. Make a drawing similar to Figure, but with the pendulum moving in the opposite direction. Then use Faraday’ s law,
Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show that magnetic force opposes mo tion.
A coil is moved into and out of a region of uniform magnetic fi eld.
57. A coil is moved through a magnetic field as shown in Figure. The field is uniform inside the rectangle an d zero outside.
What is the direction of the induced current and wha t is the direction of the magnetic force on the coil at each position
shown?
23.5 Electric Generators
58. Calculate the peak voltage of a generator that rotates its 200-turn, 0.100 m diameter coil at 3600 rpm in a 0.800 T field.
Solution
474 V
59. At what angular velocity in rpm will the peak voltage of a generator be 480 V, if its 500-turn, 8.00 cm d iameter coil
rotates in a 0.250 T field?
60. What is the peak emf generated by rotating a 1000- turn, 20.0 cm diameter coil in the Earth’s magnetic field,
given the plane of the coil is originally perpendicular t o the Earth’s field and is rotated to be parallel to the fie ld in 10.0 ms?
Solution
0.247 V

7.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9300261. What is the peak emf generated by a 0.250 m radius, 5 00-turn coil is rotated one-fourth of a revolution i n 4.17 ms,
originally having its plane perpendicular to a unifo rm magnetic field. (This is 60 rev/s.)
62. (a) A bicycle generator rotates at 1875 rad/s, prod ucing an 18.0 V peak emf. It has a 1.00 by 3.00 cm rec tangular coil in a
0.640 T field. How many turns are in the coil?
(b) Is this number of turns of wire practical for a 1.00 by 3. 00 cm coil?
Solution
(a) 50
(b) yes
63. Integrated Concepts
This problem refers to the bicycle generator consider ed in the previous problem. It is driven by a 1.60 c m diameter
wheel that rolls on the outside rim of the bicycle tire.
(a) What is the velocity of the bicycle if the generat or’s angular velocity is 1875 rad/s?
(b) What is the maximum emf of the generator when the bicycle moves at 10.0 m/s, noting that it was 18.0 V
under the original conditions?
(c) If the sophisticated generator can vary its own magnetic field, what field strength will it need at 5.00 m/s to
produce a 9.00 V maximum emf?
64. (a) A car generator turns at 400 rpm when the engin e is idling. Its 300-turn, 5.00 by 8.00 cm rectangula r coil rotates in an
adjustable magnetic field so that it can produce suff icient voltage even at low rpms. What is the field str ength needed to
produce a 24.0 V peak emf?
(b) Discuss how this required field strength compares to tho se available in permanent and electromagnets.
Solution
(a) 0.477 T
(b) This field strength is small enough that it can be ob tained using either a permanent magnet or an electromagn et.
65. Show that if a coil rotates at an angular velocity, the per iod of its AC output is.
66. A 75-turn, 10.0 cm diameter coil rotates at an angu lar velocity of 8.00 rad/s in a 1.25 T field, starting with the plane of the
coil parallel to the field.
(a) What is the peak emf?
(b) At what time is the peak emf first reached?
(c) At what time is the emf first at its most negative?
(d) What is the period of the AC voltage output?
Solution
(a) 5.89 V
(b) At t=0
(c) 0.393 s
(d) 0.785 s
67. (a) If the emf of a coil rotating in a magnetic fi eld is zero at, and increases to its first peak at, wha t is
the angular velocity of the coil?
(b) At what time will its next maximum occur?
(c) What is the period of the output?
(d) When is the output first one-fourth of its maximum?
(e) When is it next one-fourth of its maximum?

7.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9300268. Unreasonable Results
A 500-turn coil with a area is spun in the Earth’s field, producing a 12.0 kV maximum emf.
(a) At what angular velocity must the coil be spun?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) This angular velocity is unreasonably high, higher t han can be obtained for any mechanical system.
(c) The assumption that a voltage as great as 12.0 kV co uld be obtained is unreasonable.
23.6 Back Emf
69. Suppose a motor connected to a 120 V source draws 10.0 A when it first starts.
(a) What is its resistance?
(b) What current does it draw at its normal operating sp eed when it develops a 100 V back emf?
Solution
(a) 12.00 Ω
(b) 1.67 A
70. A motor operating on 240 V electricity has a 180 V back emf at operating speed and draws a 12.0 A curren t. (a) What is
its resistance? (b) What current does it draw when it is fi rst started?
71. What is the back emf of a 120 V motor that draws 8.00 A at its normal speed and 20.0 A when first starting?
Solution
72.0 V
72. The motor in a toy car operates on 6.00 V, developin g a 4.50 V back emf at normal speed. If it draws 3.0 0 A at normal
speed, what current does it draw when starting?
73. Integrated Concepts
The motor in a toy car is powered by four batteries i n series, which produce a total emf of 6.00 V. The mot or draws
3.00 A and develops a 4.50 V back emf at normal spee d. Each battery has a internal resistance. What is th e
resistance of the motor?
Solution
0.100 Ω
23.7 Transformers
74. A plug-in transformer, like that in Figure, supplies 9.00 V to a video game system.
(a) How many turns are in its secondary coil, if its input v oltage is 120 V and the primary coil has 400 turns?
(b) What is its input current when its output is 1.30 A?
Solution
(a) 30.0
(b)
75. An American traveler in New Zealand carries a transforme r to convert New Zealand’s standard 240 V to 120 V so that
she can use some small appliances on her trip.
(a) What is the ratio of turns in the primary and secondar y coils of her transformer?
(b) What is the ratio of input to output current?

7.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(c) How could a New Zealander traveling in the United Sta tes use this same transformer to power her 240 V applia nces
from 120 V?
76. A cassette recorder uses a plug-in transformer to conv ert 120 V to 12.0 V, with a maximum current output of 200 mA.
(a) What is the current input?
(b) What is the power input?
(c) Is this amount of power reasonable for a small applianc e?
Solution
(a) 20.0 mA
(b) 2.40 W
(c) Yes, this amount of power is quite reasonable for a s mall appliance.
77. (a) What is the voltage output of a transformer used for rechargeable flashlight batteries, if its prima ry has 500 turns, its
secondary 4 turns, and the input voltage is 120 V?
(b) What input current is required to produce a 4.00 A ou tput? (c) What is the power input?
78. (a) The plug-in transformer for a laptop computer p uts out 7.50 V and can supply a maximum current of 2.00 A. What is
the maximum input current if the input voltage is 240 V? Assume 100% efficiency.
(b) If the actual efficiency is less than 100%, would t he input current need to be greater or smaller? Explain.
Solution
(a) 0.063 A
(b) Greater input current needed.
79. A multipurpose transformer has a secondary coil with se veral points at which a voltage can be extracted, giv ing outputs
of 5.60, 12.0, and 480 V.
(a) The input voltage is 240 V to a primary coil of 280 turns. What are the numbers of turns in the part s of the
secondary used to produce the output voltages?
(b) If the maximum input current is 5.00 A, what are the max imum output currents (each used alone)?
80. A large power plant generates electricity at 12.0 kV. I ts old transformer once converted the voltage to 335 kV. The
secondary of this transformer is being replaced so that its output can be 750 kV for more efficient cro ss-country transmission
on upgraded transmission lines.
(a) What is the ratio of turns in the new secondary compared with the old secondary?
(b) What is the ratio of new current output to old output (at 335 kV) for the same power?
(c) If the upgraded transmission lines have the same resis tance, what is the ratio of new line power loss to old?
Solution
(a) 2.2
(b) 0.45
(c) 0.20, or 20.0%
81. If the power output in the previous problem is 1000 MW and line resistance is, what were the old and ne w line
losses?
82. Unreasonable Results
The 335 kV AC electricity from a power transmission li ne is fed into the primary coil of a transformer. T he ratio of the
number of turns in the secondary to the number in the pri mary is.
(a) What voltage is induced in the secondary?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?

7.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
Solution
(a) 335 MV
(b) way too high, well beyond the breakdown voltage of air o ver reasonable distances
(c) input voltage is too high
83. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a double transformer to be used to create v ery large voltages. The device consists of two stages. The first is a
transformer that produces a much larger output voltag e than its input. The output of the first transform er is used as
input to a second transformer that further increase s the voltage. Construct a problem in which you calcu late the output
voltage of the final stage based on the input volta ge of the first stage and the number of turns or lo ops in both parts of
both transformers (four coils in all). Also calculate the maximum output current of the final stage based o n the input
current. Discuss the possibility of power losses in the dev ices and the effect on the output current and power.
23.8 Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
84. Integrated Concepts
A short circuit to the grounded metal case of an app liance occurs as shown in Figure. The person touching the case is
wet and only has a resistance to earth/ground.
(a) What is the voltage on the case if 5.00 mA flows through the person?
(b) What is the current in the short circuit if the resi stance of the earth/ground wire is?
(c) Will this trigger the 20.0 A circuit breaker supplyi ng the appliance?
A person can be shocked even when the case of an appliance i s grounded. The large short circuit current produces a volta ge
on the case of the appliance, since the resistance of the earth/ground wire is not zero.
Solution
(a) 15.0 V
(b) 75.0 A
(c) yes
23.9 Inductance
85. Two coils are placed close together in a physics lab to demonstrate Faraday’s law of induction. A current of 5.00 A in one
is switched off in 1.00 ms, inducing a 9.00 V emf in the other. What is their mutual inductance?
Solution
1.80 mH

7.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9300286. If two coils placed next to one another have a mutu al inductance of 5.00 mH, what voltage is induced in o ne when the
2.00 A current in the other is switched off in 30.0 ms?
87. The 4.00 A current through a 7.50 mH inductor is switched of f in 8.33 ms. What is the emf induced opposing this?
Solution
3.60 V
88. A device is turned on and 3.00 A flows through it 0.1 00 ms later. What is the self-inductance of the devic e if an induced
150 V emf opposes this?
89. Starting with, show that the units of inductance are.
90. Camera flashes charge a capacitor to high voltage by switching the current through an inductor on and off rapidly. In
what time must the 0.100 A current through a 2.00 mH inducto r be switched on or off to induce a 500 V emf?
91. A large research solenoid has a self-inductance of 25.0 H.
(a) What induced emf opposes shutting it off when 100 A o f current through it is switched off in 80.0 ms?
(b) How much energy is stored in the inductor at full curre nt?
(c) At what rate in watts must energy be dissipated to switch the current off in 80.0 ms?
(d) In view of the answer to the last part, is it surprising that shutting it down this quickly is difficult?
Solution
(a) 31.3 kV
(b) 125 kJ
(c) 1.56 MW
(d) No, it is not surprising since this power is very high.
92. (a) Calculate the self-inductance of a 50.0 cm long, 10.0 c m diameter solenoid having 1000 loops.
(b) How much energy is stored in this inductor when 20.0 A o f current flows through it?
(c) How fast can it be turned off if the induced emf cannot ex ceed 3.00 V?
93. A precision laboratory resistor is made of a coil of wire 1.50 cm in diameter and 4.00 cm long, and it has 500 turns.
(a) What is its self-inductance?
(b) What average emf is induced if the 12.0 A current through it is turned on in 5.00 ms (one-fourth of a cycle for 50
Hz AC)?
(c) What is its inductance if it is shortened to hal f its length and counter-wound (two layers of 250 turn s in opposite
directions)?
Solution
(a) 1.39 mH
(b) 3.33 V
(c) Zero
94. The heating coils in a hair dryer are 0.800 cm i n diameter, have a combined length of 1.00 m, and a total of 400 turns.
(a) What is their total self-inductance assuming they act like a single solenoid?
(b) How much energy is stored in them when 6.00 A flows?
(c) What average emf opposes shutting them off if this is don e in 5.00 ms (one-fourth of a cycle for 50 Hz AC)?
95. When the 20.0 A current through an inductor is turn ed off in 1.50 ms, an 800 V emf is induced, opposing the change.
What is the value of the self-inductance?

7.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002Solution
60.0 mH
96. How fast can the 150 A current through a 0.250 H inductor be shut off if the induced emf cannot exceed 75.0 V?
97. Integrated Concepts
A very large, superconducting solenoid such as one u sed in MRI scans, stores 1.00 MJ of energy in its mag netic field
when 100 A flows.
(a) Find its self-inductance.
(b) If the coils “go normal,” they gain resistance an d start to dissipate thermal energy. What temperatur e increase
is produced if all the stored energy goes into heat ing the 1000 kg magnet, given its average specific he at is
Solution
(a) 200 H
(b) 5.00ºC
98. Unreasonable Results
A 25.0 H inductor has 100 A of current turned off in 1.00 ms.
(a) What voltage is induced to oppose this?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
23.10 RL Circuits
99. If you want a characteristic time constant of 1.00 s, and you have a 500 Ω resistor, what value of self-inductance is
needed?
Solution
500 H
100. Your circuit has a characteristic time constant of 20. 0 ns, and a resistance of.
(a) What is the inductance of the circuit?
(b) What resistance would give you a 1.00 ns time const ant, perhaps needed for quick response in an oscilloscop e?
101. A large superconducting magnet, used for magnetic r esonance imaging, has a 50.0 H inductance. If you want cu rrent
through it to be adjustable with a 1.00 s characteristic time constant, what is the minimum resistance of system?
Solution
50.0 Ω
102. Verify that after a time of 10.0 ms, the current for the situation considered in Example will be 0.183 A as stated.
103. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging from 1.00 nH to 10.0 H, and resistors ranging from to.
What is the range of characteristic time constants you can produce by connecting a single resistor to a sing le inductor?
Solution
to 0.100 s
104. (a) What is the characteristic time constant of a 25.0 mH in ductor that has a resistance of?
(b) If it is connected to a 12.0 V battery, what is the curren t after 12.5 ms?
105. What percentage of the final current flows through an inductor in series with a resistor, three time co nstants after
the circuit is completed?

7.E.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002Solution
95.0%
106. The 5.00 A current through a 1.50 H inductor is dissi pated by a resistor in a circuit like that in Figure with the
switch in position 2.
(a) What is the initial energy in the inductor?
(b) How long will it take the current to decline to 5.00% of its initial value?
(c) Calculate the average power dissipated, and compare it with the initial power dissipated by the resistor.
107. (a) Use the exact exponential treatment to find how m uch time is required to bring the current through an 80.0 mH
inductor in series with a resistor to 99.0% of its final value, starting from zero.
(b) Compare your answer to the approximate treatment using integral numbers of τ.
(c) Discuss how significant the difference is.
Solution
(a) 24.6 ms
(b) 26.7 ms
(c) 9% difference, which is greater than the inherent uncer tainty in the given parameters.
108. (a) Using the exact exponential treatment, find the time required for the current through a 2.00 H induct or in series with
a 0.500 Ω resistor to be reduced to 0.100% of its original value.
(b) Compare your answer to the approximate treatment using integral numbers of.
(c) Discuss how significant the difference is.
23.11 Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
109. At what frequency will a 30.0 mH inductor have a reactance of 100 Ω?
Solution
531 Hz
110. What value of inductance should be used if a reactance is n eeded at a frequency of 500 Hz?
111. What capacitance should be used to produce a reactance at 60.0 Hz?
Solution
1.33 nF
112. At what frequency will an 80.0 mF capacitor have a reactanc e of?
113. (a) Find the current through a 0.500 H inductor connecte d to a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC source.
(b) What would the current be at 100 kHz?
Solution
(a) 2.55 A
(b) 1.53 mA
114. (a) What current flows when a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC source is c onnected to a 0.250 μF capacitor?
(b) What would the current be at 25.0 kHz?
115. A 20.0 kHz, 16.0 V source connected to an inductor produce s a 2.00 A current. What is the inductance?
Solution
63.7 µH
116. A 20.0 Hz, 16.0 V source produces a 2.00 mA current when conn ected to a capacitor. What is the capacitance?

7.E.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002117. (a) An inductor designed to filter high-frequency no ise from power supplied to a personal computer is pl aced in series
with the computer. What minimum inductance should it hav e to produce a reactance for 15.0 kHz noise?
(b) What is its reactance at 60.0 Hz?
Solution
(a) 21.2 mH
(b) 8.00 Ω
118. The capacitor in Figure(a) is designed to filter low-fre quency signals, impeding their transmission between cir cuits.
(a) What capacitance is needed to produce a reactance at a frequency of 120 Hz?
(b) What would its reactance be at 1.00 MHz?
(c) Discuss the implications of your answers to (a) and (b).
119. The capacitor in Figure(b) will filter high-frequency signal s by shorting them to earth/ground.
(a) What capacitance is needed to produce a reactance of for a 5.00 kHz signal?
(b) What would its reactance be at 3.00 Hz? (c) Discuss the implications of your answers to (a) and (b).
Solution
(a) 3.18 mF
(b) 16.7 Ω
120. Unreasonable Results
In a recording of voltages due to brain activity (an EEG), a 10.0 mV signal with a 0.500 Hz frequency is appl ied to a
capacitor, producing a current of 100 mA. Resistance is n egligible.
(a) What is the capacitance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
121. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider the use of an inductor in series with a comp uter operating on 60 Hz electricity. Construct a pro blem in which
you calculate the relative reduction in voltage of incoming high frequency noise compared to 60 Hz volta ge. Among
the things to consider are the acceptable series rea ctance of the inductor for 60 Hz power and the likely frequencies of
noise coming through the power lines.
23.12 RLC Series AC Circuits
122. An circuit consists of a resistor and a 3.00 mH inducto r.
(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example i n which there was also a capacitor.
Solution
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) At 60 Hz, with a capacitor,, over 13 times as hig h as without the capacitor. The capacitor makes a la rge
difference at low frequencies. At 10 kHz, with a capaci tor, about the same as without the capacitor. The
capacitor has a smaller effect at high frequencies.
123. An circuit consists of a resistor and a capacitor.
(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example, in which there was also an inductor.
124. An circuit consists of a inductor and a capacitor.

7.E.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example i n which there was also a resistor.
Solution
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) These values are close to those obtained in Exa mple because at low frequency the capacitor dominate s and at high
frequency the inductor dominates. So in both cases the resis tor makes little contribution to the total impedance.
125. What is the resonant frequency of a 0.500 mH inductor con nected to a capacitor?
126. To receive AM radio, you want an circuit that can be made to resonate at any frequency between 500 and 16 50
kHz. This is accomplished with a fixed inductor connec ted to a variable capacitor. What range of capacitan ce is
needed?
Solution
9.30 nF to 101 nF
127. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging from 1.0 0 nH to 10.0 H, and capacitors ranging from 1.00 pF to 0.100
F. What is the range of resonant frequencies that can be achieved from combinations of a single inductor and a single
capacitor?
128. What capacitance do you need to produce a resonant freq uency of 1.00 GHz, when using an 8.00 nH inductor?
Solution
3.17 pF
129. What inductance do you need to produce a resonant frequ ency of 60.0 Hz, when using a capacitor?
130. The lowest frequency in the FM radio band is 88.0 MHz.
(a) What inductance is needed to produce this resonant frequency if it is connected to a 2.50 pF capacitor?
(b) The capacitor is variable, to allow the resonant frequency to be adjusted to as high as 108 MHz. What m ust the
capacitance be at this frequency?
Solution
(a)
(b)
131. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and an capacitor.
(a) Find the circuit’s impedance at 120 Hz.
(b) Find the circuit’s impedance at 5.00 kHz.
(c) If the voltage source has, what is at each frequency?
(d) What is the resonant frequency of the circuit?
(e) What is at resonance?
132. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor.
(a) Find the circuit’s impedance at 500 Hz.
(b) Find the circuit’s impedance at 7.50 kHz.
(c) If the voltage source has, what is at each frequency?
(d) What is the resonant frequency of the circuit?
(e) What is at resonance?
Solution
(a) 12.8 kΩ

7.E.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/93002(b) 1.31 kΩ
(c) 31.9 mA at 500 Hz, 312 mA at 7.50 kHz
(d) 82.2 kHz
(e) 0.408 A
133. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a n capacitor.
(a) Find the power factor at f=120 Hz.
(b) What is the phase angle at 120 Hz?
(c) What is the average power at 120 Hz?
(d) Find the average power at the circuit’s resonant frequ ency.
134. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor
(a) Find the power factor at f=7.50 Hz.
(b) What is the phase angle at this frequency?
(c) What is the average power at this frequency?
(d) Find the average power at the circuit’s resonant frequ ency.
Solution
(a) 0.159
(b) 80.9º
(c) 26.4 W
(d) 166 W
135. An series circuit has a resistor and a 25.0 mH inducto r. At 8000 Hz, the phase angle is.
(a) What is the impedance?
(b) Find the circuit’s capacitance.
(c) If is applied, what is the average power supplied?
136. Referring to Example, find the average power at 10.0 kHz.
Solution
16.0 W
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
7.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Ele ctrical Technologies (Exercise) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
23: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electric al Technologies (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source:
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicat ions-spring-2009.

7.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766237.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary)
Key Terms
back emfemf generated by a running motor, because it consists o f a coil
turning in a magnetic field; it opposes the voltage p owering the
motor
eddy current current loop in a conductor caused by motional emf
electric generatordevice for converting mechanical work into electric energy; it
induces an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic fiel d
Faraday’s lawinduced emf is created in a closed loop due to a chan ge in
magnetic flux through the loop
induced electric field created based on the changing magnetic flux with time
induced emfshort-lived voltage generated by a conductor or coil moving in a
magnetic field
Lenz’s lawdirection of an induced emf opposes the change in mag netic flux
that produced it; this is the negative sign in Faraday’ s law
magnetic damping drag produced by eddy currents
magnetic fluxmeasurement of the amount of magnetic field lines thr ough a given
area
motionally induced emfvoltage produced by the movement of a conducting wir e in a
magnetic field
peak emf maximum emf produced by a generator
Key Equations
Magnetic flux
Faraday’s law
Motionally induced emf
Motional emf around a circuit
Emf produced by an electric generator
Summary
13.2 Faraday’s Law
The magnetic flux through an enclosed area is defined a s the amount of field lines cutting through a surface area A defined by
the unit area vector.
The units for magnetic flux are webers, where.
The induced emf in a closed loop due to a change in magnetic flux through the loop is known as Faraday’s law. If there is no
change in magnetic flux, no induced emf is created.
13.3 Lenz's Law
We can use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of indu ced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs.
The direction of an induced emf always opposes the change in magnetic flux that causes the emf, a result known as Lenz’s law.

7.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662313.4 Motional Emf
The relationship between an induced emf εε in a wire movin g at a constant speed v through a magnetic field B is given by
An induced emf from Faraday’s law is created from a motional emf that opposes the change in flux.
13.5 Induced Electric Fields
A changing magnetic flux induces an electric field.
Both the changing magnetic flux and the induced electri c field are related to the induced emf from Faraday’s l aw.
13.6 Eddy Currents
Current loops induced in moving conductors are called e ddy currents. They can create significant drag, called magnetic
damping.
Manipulation of eddy currents has resulted in applications such as metal detectors, braking in trains or roller coa sters, and
induction cooktops.
13.7 Electric Generators and Back Emf
An electric generator rotates a coil in a magnetic fiel d, inducing an emf given as a function of time by where
A is the area of an N-turn coil rotated at a constant angular velocity in a uniform magnetic field.
The peak emf of a generator is.
Any rotating coil produces an induced emf. In motors, thi s is called back emf because it opposes the emf input to t he motor.
13.8 Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
Hard drives utilize magnetic induction to read/write inf ormation.
Other applications of magnetic induction can be found in gr aphics tablets, electric and hybrid vehicles, and in tr anscranial
magnetic stimulation.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
13.9: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Electromagnetic Waves
In this chapter, we explain Maxwell’s theory and show h ow it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves. We use his theory
to examine what electromagnetic waves are, how they are produced, and how they transport energy and momentum. We conclude
by summarizing some of the many practical applications o f electromagnetic waves.
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
8.3: Polarization
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
8.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
8.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
8.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)
This page titled 8: Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766268.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain Maxwell’s correction of Ampère’s law by including th e displacement current
State and apply Maxwell’s equations in integral form
Describe how the symmetry between changing electric and c hanging magnetic fields explains Maxwell’s prediction of
electromagnetic waves
Describe how Hertz confirmed Maxwell’s prediction of electr omagnetic waves
Our view of objects in the sky at night, the warm radianc e of sunshine, the sting of sunburn, our cell phone conversations, and the
X-rays revealing a broken bone—all are brought to us by electromagnetic waves. It would be hard to oversta te the practical
importance of electromagnetic waves, through their rol e in vision, through countless technological applica tions, and through their
ability to transport the energy from the Sun through space t o sustain life and almost all of its activities on Earth.
Figure: The pressure from sunlight predicted by Maxwel l’s equations helped produce the tail of Comet McNaug ht. (credit:
modification of work by Sebastian Deiries—ESO)
Theory predicted the general phenomenon of electrom agnetic waves before anyone realized that light is a form of an
electromagnetic wave. In the mid-nineteenth century, James Clerk Maxwell formulated a single theory combini ng all the electric
and magnetic effects known at that time. Maxwell’s equ ations, summarizing this theory, predicted the existenc e of electromagnetic
waves that travel at the speed of light. His theory als o predicted how these waves behave, and how they carry b oth energy and
momentum. The tails of comets, such as Comet McNaught in Figure 16.1, provide a spectacular example. Energ y carried by light
from the Sun warms the comet to release dust and gas. The momentum carried by the light exerts a weak forc e that shapes the dust
into a tail of the kind seen here. The flux of parti cles emitted by the Sun, called the solar wind, typical ly produces an additional,
second tail, as described in detail in this chapter.
In this chapter, we explain Maxwell’s theory and show h ow it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves. We use his theory
to examine what electromagnetic waves are, how they are produced, and how they transport energy and momentum. We conclude
by summarizing some of the many practical applications o f electromagnetic waves.
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) was one of the major contributors to ph ysics in the nineteenth century (Figure). Although
he died young, he made major contributions to the d evelopment of the kinetic theory of gases, to the unde rstanding of color vision,
and to the nature of Saturn’s rings. He is probably be st known for having combined existing knowledge of the laws of electricity
and of magnetism with insights of his own into a comple te overarching electromagnetic theory, represented by Maxwell’s
equations.Learning Objectives

8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626
Figure: James Clerk Maxwell, a nineteenth-century phy sicist, developed a theory that explained the relatio nship between
electricity and magnetism, and correctly predicted t hat visible light consists of electromagnetic waves.
Maxwell’s Correction to the Laws of Electricity and Magnetism
The four basic laws of electricity and magnetism had been discovered experimentally through the work of physicists such as
Oersted, Coulomb, Gauss, and Faraday. Maxwell discovered logic al inconsistencies in these earlier results and ide ntified the
incompleteness of Ampère’s law as their cause.
Recall that according to Ampère’s law, the integral o f the magnetic field around a closed loop C is proportional to the current I
passing through any surface whose boundary is loop C itself:
There are infinitely many surfaces that can be attac hed to any loop, and Ampère’s law stated in Equation is independent of the
choice of surface.
Consider the set-up in Figure. A source of emf is ab ruptly connected across a parallel-plate capacitor s o that a time-dependent
current I develops in the wire. Suppose we apply Ampère’s law to l oop C shown at a time before the capacitor is fully charge d, so
that. Surface gives a nonzero value for the enclos ed current I, whereas surface gives zero for the enclosed current
because no current passes through it:
Clearly, Ampère’s law in its usual form does not work he re. This may not be surprising, because Ampère’s law as a pplied in earlier
chapters required a steady current, whereas the current in this experiment is changing with time and is not steady a t all.

8.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626
Figure: The currents through surface and surface are unequal, despite having the same boundary loop C.
How can Ampère’s law be modified so that it works in all si tuations? Maxwell suggested including an additional contribution,
called the displacement current, to the real current I,
where the displacement current is defined to be
Here is the permittivity of free space and is the electric flux, defined as
The displacement current is analogous to a real current in Ampère’s law, ente ring into Ampère’s law in the same way. It is
produced, however, by a changing electric field. It a ccounts for a changing electric field producing a m agnetic field, just as a real
current does, but the displacement current can produ ce a magnetic field even where no real current is pr esent. When this extra term
is included, the modified Ampère’s law equation becomes
and is independent of the surface S through which the current I is measured.
We can now examine this modified version of Ampère’s la w to confirm that it holds independent of whether the surface or the
surface in Figure is chosen. The electric field co rresponding to the flux in Equation is between the capacitor
plates. Therefore, the field and the displacement cur rent through the surface are both zero, and Equation tak es the form
We must now show that for surface, through which no ac tual current flows, the displacement current leads to th e same value
for the right side of the Ampère’s law equation. For surface the equation becomes
Gauss’s law for electric charge requires a closed surf ace and cannot ordinarily be applied to a surface l ike alone or alone. But
the two surfaces and form a closed surface in Figur e and can be used in Gauss’s law. Because the electr ic field is zero on
, the flux contribution through is zero. This gives us

8.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626Therefore, we can replace the integral over in Equat ion with the closed Gaussian surface and apply Gauss’ s law to
obtain
Thus, the modified Ampère’s law equation is the same u sing surface, where the right-hand side results from the displacement
current, as it is for the surface, where the contribution comes from the actual flow of electric charge.
A parallel-plate capacitor with capacitance C whose plates have area A and separation distance d is connected to a resistor R
and a battery of voltage V. The current starts to flow at.
a. Find the displacement current between the capacitor plat es at time t.
b. From the properties of the capacitor, find the correspondin g real current, and compare the answer to the expected
current in the wires of the corresponding RC circuit.
Strategy
We can use the equations from the analysis of an RC circuit (Alternating-Current Circuits) plus Maxwell’s v ersion of Ampère’s
law.
Solution
a. The voltage between the plates at time t is given by
Let the z-axis point from the positive plate to the negative plate. Then the z-component of the electric field between the
plates as a function of time t is
Therefore, the z-component of the displacement current between the plates is
where we have used for the capacitance.
b. From the expression for the charge on the capacitor is
The current into the capacitor after the circuit is clos ed, is therefore
This current is the same as found in (a).Displacement current in a charging capacitor

8.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626Maxwell’s Equations
With the correction for the displacement current, Maxwell’ s equations take the form
Once the fields have been calculated using these four equ ations, the Lorentz force equation
gives the force that the fields exert on a particle with charge q moving with velocity. The Lorentz force equation c ombines the
force of the electric field and of the magnetic fie ld on the moving charge. The magnetic and electric forces have been examined in
earlier modules. These four Maxwell’s equations are, res pectively:
1. Gauss’s law
The electric flux through any closed surface is equa l to the electric charge enclosed by the surface. Gauss ’s law (Equation
) describes the relation between an electric charge a nd the electric field it produces. This is often pict ured in terms of
electric field lines originating from positive char ges and terminating on negative charges, and indica ting the direction of the
electric field at each point in space.
2. Gauss’s law for magnetism
The magnetic field flux through any closed surface i s zero (Equation). This is equivalent to the stateme nt that magnetic
field lines are continuous, having no beginning or e nd. Any magnetic field line entering the region encl osed by the surface
must also leave it. No magnetic monopoles, where magn etic field lines would terminate, are known to exist (se e section on
Magnetic Fields and Lines).
3. Faraday’s law
A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive force (emf) and, hence, an electric field. The directi on of the emf opposes
the change. Equation is Faraday’s law of induction and includes Lenz’s law. The electric field from a cha nging magnetic
field has field lines that form closed loops, without any b eginning or end.
4. Ampère-Maxwell law
Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields. This fourth of Maxwell’s e quations, Equation
, encompasses Ampère’s law and adds another source of mag netic fields, namely changing electric fields.
Maxwell’s equations and the Lorentz force law together encompass all the laws of electricity and magnetism. T he symmetry that
Maxwell introduced into his mathematical framework may not be immediately apparent. Faraday’s law describes ho w changing
magnetic fields produce electric fields. The displaceme nt current introduced by Maxwell results instead fro m a changing electric
field and accounts for a changing electric field pro ducing a magnetic field. The equations for the effe cts of both changing electric
fields and changing magnetic fields differ in form only where the absence of magnetic monopoles leads to missing terms. This
symmetry between the effects of changing magnetic an d electric fields is essential in explaining the nat ure of electromagnetic
waves.
Later application of Einstein’s theory of relativity to Maxwell’s complete and symmetric theory showed that electric and magnetic
forces are not separate but are different manifestatio ns of the same thing—the electromagnetic force. The e lectromagnetic force and
weak nuclear force are similarly unified as the elec troweak force. This unification of forces has been on e motivation for attempts toMaxwell's Equations

8.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626unify all of the four basic forces in nature—the gra vitational, electrical, strong, and weak nuclear forces (see Particle Physics and
Cosmology).
The Mechanism of Electromagnetic Wave Propagation
To see how the symmetry introduced by Maxwell accounts for the existence of combined electric and magneti c waves that
propagate through space, imagine a time-varying magne tic field produced by the high-frequency alternati ng current seen in
Figure. We represent in the diagram by one of its f ield lines. From Faraday’s law, the changing magnetic fie ld through a
surface induces a time-varying electric field at t he boundary of that surface. The displacement current source for the electric
field, like the Faraday’s law source for the magnetic field, produces only closed loops of field lines, be cause of the mathematical
symmetry involved in the equations for the induced electric and induced magnetic fields. A field line representation of is
shown. In turn, the changing electric field creates a magnetic field according to the modified Ampère’s l aw. This
changing field induces which induces and so on. We then have a self-continuing process that leads to t he creation of
time-varying electric and magnetic fields in region s farther and farther away from O. This process may be visualized as the
propagation of an electromagnetic wave through space.
Figure: How changing and fields propagate through space.
In the next section, we show in more precise mathemati cal terms how Maxwell’s equations lead to the predict ion of
electromagnetic waves that can travel through space without a material medium, implying a speed of elect romagnetic waves equal
to the speed of light.
Prior to Maxwell’s work, experiments had already indicat ed that light was a wave phenomenon, although the nat ure of the waves
was yet unknown. In 1801, Thomas Young (1773–1829) showe d that when a light beam was separated by two narrow sl its and then
recombined, a pattern made up of bright and dark fr inges was formed on a screen. Young explained this beha vior by assuming that
light was composed of waves that added constructively at some points and destructively at others. Subsequently, Jean Foucault
(1819–1868), with measurements of the speed of light in various media, and Augustin Fresnel (1788–1827), with detailed
experiments involving interference and diffraction of light, provided further conclusive evidence that light was a wave. So, light
was known to be a wave, and Maxwell had predicted the ex istence of electromagnetic waves that traveled at the speed of light. The
conclusion seemed inescapable: Light must be a form o f electromagnetic radiation. But Maxwell’s theory showed that other
wavelengths and frequencies than those of light were possible for electromagnetic waves. He showed that elect romagnetic radiation
with the same fundamental properties as visible ligh t should exist at any frequency. It remained for ot hers to test, and confirm, this
prediction.
When the emf across a capacitor is turned on and the capacitor is allowed to charge, when does the magneti c field induced by
the displacement current have the greatest magnitude?
Solution
It is greatest immediately after the current is switche d on. The displacement current and the magnetic fie ld from it are proportional
to the rate of change of electric field between the plat es, which is greatest when the plates first begin to charg e.Exercise

8.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626Hertz’s Observations
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) was the f irst to generate and detect certain types of electrom agnetic waves in
the laboratory. Starting in 1887, he performed a ser ies of experiments that not only confirmed the exist ence of electromagnetic
waves but also verified that they travel at the speed of light.
Hertz used an alternating-current RLC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) circuit that resonate s at a known frequency and
connected it to a loop of wire, as shown in Figure. Hi gh voltages induced across the gap in the loop prod uced sparks that were
visible evidence of the current in the circuit and help ed generate electromagnetic waves.
Across the laboratory, Hertz placed another loop attach ed to another RLC circuit, which could be tuned (as the dial on a rad io) to
the same resonant frequency as the first and could th us be made to receive electromagnetic waves. This loo p also had a gap across
which sparks were generated, giving solid evidence that ele ctromagnetic waves had been received.
Figure: The apparatus used by Hertz in 1887 to genera te and detect electromagnetic waves.
Hertz also studied the reflection, refraction, and int erference patterns of the electromagnetic waves he gen erated, confirming their
wave character. He was able to determine the wavelengths from the interference patterns, and knowing their fr equencies, he could
calculate the propagation speed using the equation, where v is the speed of a wave, f is its frequency, and is its
wavelength. Hertz was thus able to prove that electromag netic waves travel at the speed of light. The SI unit for frequency, the
hertz, is named in his honor.
Could a purely electric field propagate as a wave through a vacuum without a magnetic field? Justify your answer.
Solution
No. The changing electric field according to the mod ified version of Ampère’s law would necessarily induce a changing magnetic
field.
Another Look at Maxwell's Equations
Ampére's Law is Broken
As far as the EM theory had come, a 19th-century Scottish physicist named James Clerk Maxwell felt something had to be missing.
To get an idea of what was nagging him, consider Ampére ’s law. Recall we said that it only worked for closed loops and infinitelylong wires, because the current had to pierce a surface bounded by the Ampérian circuit. Maxwell felt that the re had to be some
way to modify Ampére’s law to take care of this shortcoming, and came up with the following thought experiment.
Suppose we have a long-straight wire with a current in i t. We can employ Ampére's law for this situation, becaus e if we construct
an Ampérian circuit around this wire, every surface – wh atever its shape – that is bounded by that closed pa th must be pierced by
that wire. Now suppose the wire includes a single capacit or. Now it is possible to construct a surface bounded b y the Ampérian
circuit such that the current does not pierce it. Maxwell felt that maybe maybe Ampére's law c ould be modified such that surfaces
not pierced by the current can also be related to the l ine integral of the magnetic field around the same circui t.
Figure 5.5.1 – Maxwell's Extension of Ampére's lawExercise

8.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626
The current piercing surface #1 can be expressed in a manner that transports (or "displaces") the calculat ion over to the capacitor's
electric field. The current passing through surface #1 is the rate at which the charge is building up on the capacitor plate, and this is
related to the rate at which the field between the two cap acitor plates is growing. Specifically:
The time rate of change of the electric field flux which accounts for the enclosed current for a surfac e that is displaced was called
the displacement current by Maxwell. It accounts for the fact that while charge does not pass through a particular surface over tim e,
an equivalent about of "current" in the form of inc reasing (or decreasing) electric field flux takes i ts place. So in general, in cases
where there is both a current piercing a surface and a change in the electric flux through that surface, the line integral of the
magnetic field around a closed path that borders that sur face is:
This is Ampére's law modified with Maxwell's displacement current in integral form. We found earlier that Amp ére's law could be
written in local (differential) form using Stoke's the orem, and since the integral of the electric field flux is over a surface bounded
by the same closed path, we can include the second term in thi s equation:
Notice that in fact we will get a nonzero magnetic fie ld line integral even if there is no moving charge, if there is a time-varying
electric field present. What Maxwell had discovered was, not only did Faraday's law tell us that a time-vary ing magnetic field
causes an electric field to circulate around it, but it worked in the other direction as well: a time-vary ing electric field gives rise to a
magnetic field as well.
Summary of Field Equations
We can now put all of the field equations together, in both integral an d local form, to construct a complete theory of
electromagnetism. It is summarized in four equations, no w known as Maxwell's equations:
Figure 5.5.2 – Maxwell's EquationsMisplaced '#'

8.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76626
Charge Conservation
Electric charge conservation is a fundamental elemen t of the theory of electromagnetism, which we first ad dressed at the end of
Section 3.1, culminating in Equation 3.1.8. Electric charges as sources of both fields are inclu ded in Maxwell's equations, so it is
absolutely essential that Maxwell's equations be consi stent with charge conservation. Thanks to MAxwell's contr ibution, charge
conservation can be derived from the field equations. To see this, consider the iden tity we have mentioned previously – that the
divergence of the curl of any vector field vanishes. Appl ying this identity to the Ampére/Maxwell equation gives:
Now applying the local form of Gauss's law for electric fields to the last term gives the continuity equatio n (Equation 3.1.8), which
expresses charge conservation:
So essentially charge conservation is "baked into" th e field equations. The field equations give a compl ete accounting of how fields
are generated from conserved electric charge (and it s motion), and how the two types of field (electric an d magnetic) are generated
from each other. What they do not provide is how elec tric charge is affected by the fields, so we need to add–in the Lorentz forc e
(Equation 4.1.6) to complete the theory:
It turns out that rather than provide the Lorentz f orce, the interactions of charges with fields can be ob tained by knowing the energy
densities of the fields, in a manner similar to deriv ing force from the gradient of potential energy. Tha t is, the theory is also
complete if instead of the Lorentz force, one knows:

This page titled 8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662616.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
16.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
5.5: Maxwell's Equations by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766278.2: Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how Maxwell’s equations predict the relative direc tions of the electric fields and magnetic fields, and the direction
of propagation of plane electromagnetic waves
Explain how Maxwell’s equations predict that the speed o f propagation of electromagnetic waves in free space is exa ctly
the speed of light
Calculate the relative magnitude of the electric and mag netic fields in an electromagnetic plane wave
Describe how electromagnetic waves are produced and detect ed
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a stri ng, water, or air. Perhaps the most significant predict ion of Maxwell’s
equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic (or electromagnetic) fields that propagat e through space as
electromagnetic waves. Because Maxwell’s equations hold in free space, the predicted electromagnetic waves, u nlike mechanical
waves, do not require a medium for their propagation.
The Wave Equation
When Maxwell realized that his new addition to the the ory meant that not only can changing magnetic field s induce electric fields
(Faraday), but changing electric fields can also ind uce magnetic fields, it occurred to him that it mig ht be possible for propagation
to occur: A changing magnetic field creates a changing electric field, which creates a changing magnetic field, and so on.
It was not hard for a mathematician such as Maxwell to express this propagation mathematically. To see how it comes about, let's
simplify our physical situation by considering a region f ree of charges. This results in a simplified set of Maxwell's eq uations:
Let's start by taking a derivative of the equation of t he Maxwell equation with respect to time:
Now plug the equation of Faraday into the derivative of the ma gnetic field:
Now we have an equation exclusively in terms of the el ectric field (electric field induces magnetic field which induces electric field
again). The double curl looks quite daunting to simpl ify, but it turns out that there is a useful identity from vector calculus to save
the day:
Plugging the electric Gauss equation into this and then plugg ing this equation in for the double curl gives:
Perhaps you recognize this differential equation from Physics 9B? It is the wave equation – not surprising, really, g iven that a
changing electric field seems to propagate another e lectric field (using the changing magnetic field as an intermediate step).LEARNING OBJECTIVES

8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627Naturally Maxwell recognized the wave equation as well, a nd asked the most obvious question, "How fast is this wave?" Given
that the velocity of a wave can be taken directly fr om the wave equation, this is not hard to calculate. Th e coefficient of the second
time derivative term is the inverse of the square of the wa ve speed, so the speed of this wave is:
Well of course Maxwell recognized this number immediat ely (as should you!) – it is the speed of light,. Ma xwell has shown that
light is an electromagnetic phenomenon that exists bec ause electric and magnetic fields can propagate by induci ng each other.
If one begins the derivation above by taking a deri vative of the Faraday equation with respect to time a nd follows the same steps,
one finds that the very same wave equation applies to the magnetic field – both fields propagate together as a single light
("electromagnetic") wave.
Figure 5.6.1 – Electromagnetic Wave
EM Wave Properties
Let’s see what we can find out about these waves by lo oking at a specific example. Suppose we have a harmon ic plane wave of
electric field polarized in the - plane. Recall from 9B t hat this is expressed mathematically by:
This represents a wave that propagates along the dire ction, the "displacement" direction (polarization d irection of the electric field
vectors) along the direction, has an amplitude of, a wavelength of, and period of. We have chosen t he starting time such
that the phase constant is zero.
Let's plug this field into Faraday's equation by taking its curl:
Performing the derivative, we get:

8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627
Now that we know the curl of the electric field, we can plug th e result into Faraday's law:
We can now integrate to find the wave function for th e magnetic field of this wave (for simplicity, we will assume that the electric
and magnetic fields are in phase with each other, which will m ean the arbitrary constant from the integral is just ze ro):
We see that the magnetic field wave function has the same frequency and wavelength as the electric field wave function, and since
the ratio is just the inverse of the speed of the wave, which means that the amplitudes of the electri c and magnetic parts of the
wave are related by:
We can also see a how the various directions are relate d. The velocity is in the direction, the electric fie ld in the direction, and
the magnetic field in the direction – all three of these vectors are mutually orthogonal. In fact, the direction of the wave's velocity
vector is the same direction as the vector.
Example
We know that electric and magnetic fields store energ y in the space in which they exist. As a light wave passes through a region
of space, the fluctuating fields cause the energy densi ty in that space to fluctuate. Is more of the wave's energy a result of the
electric field or the magnetic field? More specificall y, compute the ratio of the maximum energy densities of the two fields within
a single EM wave traveling through a vacuum.
Solution
The energy densities for electric and magnetic fields in a vacuum are given by:
The maximum energy densities come about when the fields equal their amplitudes, so taking the ratio of these energies giv es:
Now plugging in Equation 5.6.6 and Equation 5.6.12, we get the simple result:
Both fields contribute equally to the energy density in t he space through which the wave passes.

Electromagnetic Waves in One Direction
An electromagnetic wave consists of an electric field, d efined as usual in terms of the force per charge on a stationary charge, and a
magnetic field, defined in terms of the force per cha rge on a moving charge. The electromagnetic field i s assumed to be a function
of only the x-coordinate and time. The y-component of the electric field is then written as, the z-component of the magnetic
field as, etc. Because we are assuming free space, ther e are no free charges or currents, so we can set and in
Maxwell’s equations.

8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627The transverse nature of electromagnetic waves
We examine first what Gauss’s law for electric fields im plies about the relative directions of the electric f ield and the propagation
direction in an electromagnetic wave. Assume the Gaussi an surface to be the surface of a rectangular box whos e cross-section is a
square of side l and whose third side has length, as shown in Figure. Because the electric field is a function only of x and t,
the y-component of the electric field is the same on bot h the top (labeled Side 2) and bottom (labeled Side 1) of the box, so that
these two contributions to the flux cancel. The corres ponding argument also holds for the net flux from t he z-component of the
electric field through Sides 3 and 4. Any net flux th rough the surface therefore comes entirely from the x-component of the electric
field. Because the electric field has no y- or z-dependence, is constant over the face of the box wi th area A and has a
possibly different value that is constant over the opp osite face of the box.
Applying Gauss’s law gives
where is the area of the front and back faces of the rectangular surface. But the charge enclosed is, so t his
component’s net flux is also zero, and Equation imp lies for any. Therefore, if there is an xcomponent of the electric field, it cannot vary with x. A uniform field of that kind would merely be super posed artificially on the
traveling wave, for example, by having a pair of paral lel-charged plates. Such a component would not be pa rt of an
electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis; so for this wave. Therefore, the only nonzero c omponents of the
electric field are and perpendicular to the directi on of propagation of the wave.
Figure: The surface of a rectangular box of dimension s is our Gaussian surface. The electric field shown is fr om an
electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis.
A similar argument holds by substituting E for B and using Gauss’s law for magnetism instead of Gauss’s law for electric fields.
This shows that the B field is also perpendicular to the direction of pr opagation of the wave. The electromagnetic wave is the refore
a transverse wave, with its oscillating electric and magneti c fields perpendicular to its direction of propagation.
The speed of propagation of electromagnetic waves
We can next apply Maxwell’s equations to the descripti on given in connection with Figure 16.2.3 in the previous section to obtain
an equation for the E field from the changing B field, and for the B field from a changing E field. We then combine the two
equations to show how the changing E and B fields propagate through space at a speed precisely equal to the speed of light.
First, we apply Faraday’s law over Side 3 of the Gaussian s urface, using the path shown in Figure. Because, we
have

8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627Assuming is small and approximating by
we obtain
Figure: We apply Faraday’s law to the front of the re ctangle by evaluating along the rectangular edge o f Side 3 in the
direction indicated, taking the B field crossing the face to be approximately its value in the middle of the area traversed.
Because is small, the magnetic flux through the fac e can be approximated by its value in the center of the area traversed,
namely. The flux of the B field through Face 3 is then the B field times the area,
From Faraday’s law,
Therefore, from Equations and,
Canceling and taking the limit as, we are left with
We could have applied Faraday’s law instead to the top surfac e (numbered 2) in Figure, to obtain the resulting equati on

8.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627This is the equation describing the spatially dependent E field produced by the time-dependent B field.
Next we apply the Ampère-Maxwell law (with) over the sam e two faces (Surface 3 and then Surface 2) of the rect angular box
of Figure. Applying Equation 16.2.16,
to Surface 3, and then to Surface 2, yields the two equation s
and
These equations describe the spatially dependent B field produced by the time-dependent E field.
We next combine the equations showing the changing B field producing an E field with the equation showing the changing E field
producing a B field. Taking the derivative of Equation with respec t to x and using Equation gives
or
This is the form taken by the general wave equation f or our plane wave. Because the equations describe a wav e traveling at some
as-yet-unspecified speed c, we can assume the field components are each functi ons of x – ct for the wave traveling in the + xdirection, that is,
It is left as a mathematical exercise to show, using the chain rule for differentiation, that Equations and imply
The speed of the electromagnetic wave in free space is therefore given in terms of the permeability and the permittivity of free
space by
We could just as easily have assumed an electromagn etic wave with field components and. The same type of
analysis with Equation and would also show that the spe ed of an electromagnetic wave is.
The physics of traveling electromagnetic fields was worked out by Maxwell in 1873. He showed in a more genera l way than our
derivation that electromagnetic waves always travel in free space with a speed given by Equation. If we ev aluate the speed
, we find that
which is the speed of light. Imagine the excitement t hat Maxwell must have felt when he discovered this equ ation! He had found a
fundamental connection between two seemingly unrelated ph enomena: electromagnetic fields and light.

8.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627The wave equation was obtained by (1) finding the E field produced by the changing B field, (2) finding the B field produced
by the changing E field, and combining the two results. Which of Maxwel l’s equations was the basis of step (1) and which of
step (2)?
Answer (step 1)
Faraday’s law
Answer (step 2)
the Ampère-Maxwell law
How the E and B Fields Are Related
So far, we have seen that the rates of change of diffe rent components of the E and B fields are related, that the electromagnetic
wave is transverse, and that the wave propagates at sp eed c. We next show what Maxwell’s equations imply about the ratio of the E
and B field magnitudes and the relative directions of the E and B fields.
We now consider solutions to Equation in the form of plan e waves for the electric field:
We have arbitrarily taken the wave to be traveling i n the +x-direction and chosen its phase so that the maximum f ield strength
occurs at the origin at time. We are justified in c onsidering only sines and cosines in this way, and ge neralizing the results,
because Fourier’s theorem implies we can express any wa ve, including even square step functions, as a superp osition of sines and
cosines.
At any one specific point in space, the E field oscillates sinusoidally at angular frequency between and and similarly,
the B field oscillates between and. The amplitude of the wave is the maximum value of. The period of oscilla tion
T is the time required for a complete oscillation. The frequency f is the number of complete oscillations per unit of time, and is
related to the angular frequency by. The wavelengt h is the distance covered by one complete cycle of the wave, and the
wavenumber k is the number of wavelengths that fit into a distan ce of in the units being used. These quantities are r elated in the
same way as for a mechanical wave:
Given that the solution of has the form shown in Equ ation, we need to determine the field that accompa nies it. From
Equation, the magnetic field component must obey
Because the solution for the B-field pattern of the wave propagates in the + x-direction at the same speed c as the E-field pattern, it
must be a function of. Thus, we conclude from Equation that is
These results may be written asExercise

8.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627Therefore, the peaks of the E and B fields coincide, as do the troughs of the wave, and at each point, the E and B fields are in the
same ratio equal to the speed of light c. The plane wave has the form shown in Figure.
Figure: The plane wave solution of Maxwell’s equation s has the B field directly proportional to the E fiel d at each point, with
the relative directions shown.
What is the maximum strength of the B field in an electromagnetic wave that has a maximum E-field strength of 1000 V/m?
Strategy
To find the B-field strength, we rearrange Equation to solve for, yie lding
Solution We are given E, and c is the speed of light. Entering these into the expressio n for B yields
Significance
The B-field strength is less than a tenth of Earth’s adm ittedly weak magnetic field. This means that a relativ ely strong electric
field of 1000 V/m is accompanied by a relatively weak mag netic field.
Changing electric fields create relatively weak magn etic fields. The combined electric and magnetic field s can be detected in
electromagnetic waves, however, by taking advantage of the phenomenon of resonance, as Hertz did. A system wit h the same
natural frequency as the electromagnetic wave can be made to oscillate. All radio and TV receivers use th is principle to pick up and
then amplify weak electromagnetic waves, while rejecting a ll others not at their resonant frequency.
What conclusions did our analysis of Maxwell’s equations lead to about these properties of a plane electromagnetic wave:
a. the relative directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field,
b. the speed of travel of the wave and how the speed depe nds on frequency, and
c. the relative magnitudes of the E and B fields.
Answer a
The directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field are all mutually perpendicular.
Answer b
The speed of the electromagnetic wave is the speed of ligh t independent of frequency.
Answer cExample: Calculating B-Field Strength in an Electromagnetic Wave
Exercise

8.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627The ratio of electric and magnetic field amplitudes i s.
Production and Detection of Electromagnetic Waves
A steady electric current produces a magnetic field that is constant in time and which does not propagate as a wave. Accelerating
charges, however, produce electromagnetic waves. An elec tric charge oscillating up and down, or an alternati ng current or flow of
charge in a conductor, emit radiation at the frequen cies of their oscillations. The electromagnetic fiel d of a dipole antenna is
shown in Figure. The positive and negative charges on the two conductors are made to reverse at the desired frequency by the
output of a transmitter as the power source. The contin ually changing current accelerates charge in the ant enna, and this results in
an oscillating electric field a distance away from t he antenna. The changing electric fields produce chan ging magnetic fields that in
turn produce changing electric fields, which thereby p ropagate as electromagnetic waves. The frequency of th is radiation is the
same as the frequency of the ac source that is accel erating the electrons in the antenna. The two conduc ting elements of the dipole
antenna are commonly straight wires. The total lengt h of the two wires is typically about one-half of the desired wavelength (hence,
the alternative name half-wave antenna), because this allows standing waves to be set up and enhances the effectiveness of the
radiation.
Figure: The oscillatory motion of the charges in a di pole antenna produces electromagnetic radiation.
The electric field lines in one plane are shown. The m agnetic field is perpendicular to this plane. This ra diation field has cylindrical
symmetry around the axis of the dipole. Field lines ne ar the dipole are not shown. The pattern is not at al l uniform in all directions.
The strongest signal is in directions perpendicular t o the axis of the antenna, which would be horizontal i f the antenna is mounted
vertically. There is zero intensity along the axis of the antenna. The fields detected far from the anten na are from the changing
electric and magnetic fields inducing each other an d traveling as electromagnetic waves. Far from the ant enna, the wave fronts, or
surfaces of equal phase for the electromagnetic wave, are almost spherical. Even farther from the antenna, the radiation propagates
like electromagnetic plane waves.
The electromagnetic waves carry energy away from thei r source, similar to a sound wave carrying energy away f rom a standing
wave on a guitar string. An antenna for receiving ele ctromagnetic signals works in reverse. Incoming elect romagnetic waves induce
oscillating currents in the antenna, each at its own f requency. The radio receiver includes a tuner circu it, whose resonant frequency
can be adjusted. The tuner responds strongly to tshe d esired frequency but not others, allowing the user to tune to the desired
broadcast. Electrical components amplify the signal f ormed by the moving electrons. The signal is then c onverted into an audio
and/or video format.
Use this simulation to broadcast radio waves. Wiggle the transmitter elec tron manually or have it oscillate automatically.
Display the field as a curve or vectors. The strip chart sho ws the electron positions at the transmitter and at the r eceiver.
Note

8.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76627This page titled 8.2: Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
5.6: Electromagnetic Waves by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766428.3: Polarization
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the change in intensity as polarized light passes th rough a polarizing filter
Calculate the effect of polarization by reflection and B rewster’s angle
Describe the effect of polarization by scattering
Explain the use of polarizing materials in devices such a s LCDs
Polarizing sunglasses are familiar to most of us. They have a special ability to cut the glare of light re flected from water or glass
(Figure). They have this ability because of a wave ch aracteristic of light called polarization. What is p olarization? How is it
produced? What are some of its uses? The answers to these q uestions are related to the wave character of light.
Figure: These two photographs of a river show the effe ct of a polarizing filter in reducing glare in ligh t reflected from the
surface of water. Part (b) of this figure was taken wi th a polarizing filter and part (a) was not. As a resu lt, the reflection of clouds
and sky observed in part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizing sunglasses are particularly useful on snow a nd water. (credit a
and credit b: modifications of work by “Amithshs”/Wiki media Commons)
Malus’s Law
Light is one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. EM waves are transverse waves consisting of varying electric and magnetic fields
that oscillate perpendicular to the direction of pro pagation (Figure). However, in general, there are no spe cific directions for
the oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields; they vibrate in any randomly oriented plane perpen dicular to the direction of
propagation. Polarization is the attribute that a wave ’s oscillations do have a definite direction relativ e to the direction of
propagation of the wave. (This is not the same type of polarization as that discussed for the separation of charges.) Waves having
such a direction are said to be polarized. For an EM wave, we define the direction of polarization to be t he direction parallel to the
electric field. Thus, we can think of the electric field ar rows as showing the direction of polarization, as in Figure.
Figure: An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave. The electric and magnetic fields are perpendicula r to the
direction of propagation. The direction of polariza tion of the wave is the direction of the electric fi eld.Learning Objectives

8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642To examine this further, consider the transverse wave s in the ropes shown in Figure. The oscillations in one rope are in a
vertical plane and are said to be vertically polari zed. Those in the other rope are in a horizontal pl ane and are horizontally
polarized. If a vertical slit is placed on the firs t rope, the waves pass through. However, a vertical slit blocks the horizontally
polarized waves. For EM waves, the direction of the electri c field is analogous to the disturbances on the ropes.
Figure: The transverse oscillations in one rope (a) are in a vertical plane, and those in the other rope (b) are in a horizontal
plane. The first is said to be vertically polarized, a nd the other is said to be horizontally polarized. Ve rtical slits pass vertically
polarized waves and block horizontally polarized wav es.
The Sun and many other light sources produce waves tha t have the electric fields in random directions (Figu re). Such light is
said to be unpolarized, because it is composed of many waves with all possible directions of polarization. Pol aroid materials—
which were invented by the founder of the Polaroid Cor poration, Edwin Land—act as a polarizing slit for lig ht, allowing only
polarization in one direction to pass through. Polariz ing filters are composed of long molecules aligned in one direction. If we think
of the molecules as many slits, analogous to those f or the oscillating ropes, we can understand why only l ight with a specific
polarization can get through. The axis of a polariz ing filter is the direction along which the filter pa sses the electric field of an EM
wave.
Figure: The slender arrow represents a ray of unpolari zed light. The bold arrows represent the direction of polarization of the
individual waves composing the ray. (a) If the light is unpolarized, the arrows point in all directions. (b) A polarizing filter has a
polarization axis that acts as a slit passing through ele ctric fields parallel to its direction. The direction of polarization of an EM
wave is defined to be the direction of its electric f ield.
Figure shows the effect of two polarizing filters on o riginally unpolarized light. The first filter polar izes the light along its
axis. When the axes of the first and second filters ar e aligned (parallel), then all of the polarized lig ht passed by the first filter is
also passed by the second filter. If the second polari zing filter is rotated, only the component of the l ight parallel to the second
filter’s axis is passed. When the axes are perpendicular, no light is passed by the second filter.

8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642
Figure: The effect of rotating two polarizing filte rs, where the first polarizes the light. (a) All of th e polarized light is passed
by the second polarizing filter, because its axis is par allel to the first. (b) As the second filter is rotated, only part of the light is
passed. (c) When the second filter is perpendicular to the first, no light is passed. (d) In this photograph, a polarizing filter is placed
above two others. Its axis is perpendicular to the filt er on the right (dark area) and parallel to the fil ter on the left (lighter area).
(credit d: modification of work by P.P. Urone)
Only the component of the EM wave parallel to the axi s of a filter is passed. Let us call the angle between the direction of
polarization and the axis of a filter θ. If the ele ctric field has an amplitude E, then the transmitted part of the wave has an amplit ude
(Figure). Since the intensity of a wave is proportiona l to its amplitude squared, the intensity I of the transmitted wave is
related to the incident wave by
where is the intensity of the polarized wave before pass ing through the filter. This equation is known as Malus’ s law.
Figure: A polarizing filter transmits only the compon ent of the wave parallel to its axis, reducing the in tensity of any light not
polarized parallel to its axis.
This Open Source Physics animation helps you visualize the electric field vectors as l ight encounters a polarizing filter. You
can rotate the filter—note that the angle displayed is in radians. You can also rotate the animation for 3D v isualization.
l l l i i d i b l i i il

8.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642Example: Calculating Intensity Reduction by a Polarizing Fil ter
What angle is needed between the direction of polari zed light and the axis of a polarizing filter to red uce its intensity by
90.0%?
Strategy
When the intensity is reduced by 90.0%, it is 10.0% or 0.100 times its original value. That is, I=0.100I. Using this
information, the equation I=I cos θ can be used to solve for the needed angle.
Solution
Solving Malus's law (Equation) for and substituting with the relationship between I and I gives
Solving for yields
Significance
A fairly large angle between the direction of polari zation and the filter axis is needed to reduce the i ntensity to 10.0% of its
original value. This seems reasonable based on experi menting with polarizing films. It is interesting tha t at an angle of 45°, the
intensity is reduced to 50% of its original value. Not e that 71.6° is 18.4° from reducing the intensity t o zero, and that at an
angle of 18.4°, the intensity is reduced to 90.0% of its or iginal value, giving evidence of symmetry.
Although we did not specify the direction in Example, let’s say the polarizing filter was rotated clockwi se by 71.6° to
reduce the light intensity by 90.0%. What would be th e intensity reduction if the polarizing filter were r otated
counterclockwise by 71.6°?
Answer
also 90.0%
Polarization by Reflection
By now, you can probably guess that polarizing sungla sses cut the glare in reflected light, because that light is polarized. You can
check this for yourself by holding polarizing sungla sses in front of you and rotating them while looking at light reflected from
water or glass. As you rotate the sunglasses, you will notic e the light gets bright and dim, but not completely black. This implies the
reflected light is partially polarized and cannot be com pletely blocked by a polarizing filter.
Figure illustrates what happens when unpolarized light is reflected from a surface. Vertically polarized lig ht is preferentially
refracted at the surface, so the reflected light is l eft more horizontally polarized. The reasons for thi s phenomenon are beyond the
scope of this text, but a convenient mnemonic for rem embering this is to imagine the polarization directi on to be like an arrow.
Vertical polarization is like an arrow perpendicular to the surface and is more likely to stick and not be reflected. Horizontal
polarization is like an arrow bouncing on its side an d is more likely to be reflected. Sunglasses with vert ical axes thus block more
reflected light than unpolarized light from other sour ces.0
Exercise

8.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642
Figure: Polarization by reflection. Unpolarized ligh t has equal amounts of vertical and horizontal polari zation. After
interaction with a surface, the vertical components a re preferentially absorbed or refracted, leaving the reflected light more
horizontally polarized. This is akin to arrows striking on their sides and bouncing off, whereas arrows strikin g on their tips go into
the surface.
Since the part of the light that is not reflected is refracted, the amount of polarization depends on th e indices of refraction of the
media involved. It can be shown that reflected light is compl etely polarized at an angle of reflection θ given by
where n is the medium in which the incident and refle cted light travel and n is the index of refraction of the medium that forms
the interface that reflects the light. This equation is known as Brewster’s law and θ is known as Brewster’s ang le, named after the
nineteenth-century Scottish physicist who discovered them.
This Open Source Physics animation shows incident, reflected, and refracted light as ray s and EM waves. Try rotating the
animation for 3D visualization and also change the a ngle of incidence. Near Brewster’s angle, the reflected light becomes
highly polarized.
Example: Calculating Polarization by Reflection
(a) At what angle will light traveling in air be completely p olarized horizontally when reflected from water? (b) From g lass?
Strategy
All we need to solve these problems are the indices of refraction. Air has n =1.00, water has n =1.333, and crown g lass has
n′ =1.520. The equation can be directly applied to find θ in each case.
Solution
a. Putting the known quantities into the equation
gives
Solving for the angle θ yieldsb
1 2
b
1 2
2 b
b

8.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642b. Similarly, for crown glass and air,
Thus,
Significance
Light reflected at these angles could be completely blocked by a good polarizing filter held with its axi s vertical. Brewster’s
angle for water and air are similar to those for gla ss and air, so that sunglasses are equally effective for light reflected from
either water or glass under similar circumstances. Lig ht that is not reflected is refracted into these med ia. Therefore, at an
incident angle equal to Brewster’s angle, the refract ed light is slightly polarized vertically. It is not completely polarized
vertically, because only a small fraction of the inci dent light is reflected, so a significant amount of horizontally polarized light
is refracted.
What happens at Brewster’s angle if the original incident li ght is already 100% vertically polarized?
Answer
There will be only refraction but no reflection.
Atomic Explanation of Polarizing Filters
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts a s a slit. This slit passes EM waves (often visible lig ht) that have an electric field
parallel to the axis. This is accomplished with long molecul es aligned perpendicular to the axis, as shown in Figure.
Figure: Long molecules are aligned perpendicular to the axis of a polarizing filter. In an EM wave, the component of the
electric field perpendicular to these molecules passes t hrough the filter, whereas the component parallel to the molecules is
absorbed.
Figure illustrates how the component of the electric f ield parallel to the long molecules is absorbed. An E M wave is composed
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. The elec tric field is strong compared with the magnetic field and is more effective in
exerting force on charges in the molecules. The mos t affected charged particles are the electrons, sin ce electron masses are small. If
an electron is forced to oscillate, it can absorb ene rgy from the EM wave. This reduces the field in the wave and, hence, reduces its
intensity. In long molecules, electrons can more eas ily oscillate parallel to the molecule than in the p erpendicular direction. The
electrons are bound to the molecule and are more res tricted in their movement perpendicular to the mole cule. Thus, the electrons
can absorb EM waves that have a component of their el ectric field parallel to the molecule. The electrons are much less responsiveExercise

8.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642to electric fields perpendicular to the molecule and allow these fields to pass. Thus, the axis of the p olarizing filter is perpendicular
to the length of the molecule.
Figure: Diagram of an electron in a long molecule o scillating parallel to the molecule. The oscillation of the electron absorbs
energy and reduces the intensity of the component of the EM wave that is parallel to the molecule.
Polarization by Scattering
If you hold your polarizing sunglasses in front of you and rotate them while looking at blue sky, you will se e the sky get bright and
dim. This is a clear indication that light scattered by air is partially polarized. Figure helps illustra te how this happens. Since
light is a transverse EM wave, it vibrates the electrons of air molecules perpendicular to the direction tha t it is traveling. The
electrons then radiate like small antennae. Since the y are oscillating perpendicular to the direction of the light ray, they produce EM
radiation that is polarized perpendicular to the di rection of the ray. When viewing the light along a l ine perpendicular to the original
ray, as in the figure, there can be no polarization i n the scattered light parallel to the original ray, because that would require the
original ray to be a longitudinal wave. Along other di rections, a component of the other polarization can b e projected along the line
of sight, and the scattered light is only partially polarized. Furthermore, multiple scattering can bri ng light to your eyes from other
directions and can contain different polarizations.

8.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642
Figure: Polarization by scattering. Unpolarized light scattering from air molecules shakes their electrons pe rpendicular to the
direction of the original ray. The scattered light t herefore has a polarization perpendicular to the ori ginal direction and none parallel
to the original direction.
Photographs of the sky can be darkened by polarizing filters, a trick used by many photographers to make clouds brighter by
contrast. Scattering from other particles, such as smo ke or dust, can also polarize light. Detecting polari zation in scattered EM
waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the s cattering source.
A range of optical effects are used in sunglasses. Besi des being polarizing, sunglasses may have colored pig ments embedded in
them, whereas others use either a nonreflective or refl ective coating. A recent development is photochromi c lenses, which darken in
the sunlight and become clear indoors. Photochromic le nses are embedded with organic microcrystalline molecul es that change
their properties when exposed to UV in sunlight, but becom e clear in artificial lighting with no UV.
Liquid Crystals and Other Polarization Effects in Materials
Although you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal di splays (LCDs) found in watches, calculators, computer sc reens, cellphones,
flat screen televisions, and many other places, you m ay not be aware that they are based on polarization. Liquid crystals are so
named because their molecules can be aligned even tho ugh they are in a liquid. Liquid crystals have the pr operty that they can
rotate the polarization of light passing through the m by 90°. Furthermore, this property can be turned of f by the application of a
voltage, as illustrated in Figure. It is possible to manipulate this characteristic quickly and in small, well-defined regions to
create the contrast patterns we see in so many LCD device s.
In flat screen LCD televisions, a large light is generate d at the back of the TV. The light travels to the fr ont screen through millions
of tiny units called pixels (picture elements). One of these is shown in Figure. Each unit has three cells, with red, blue, or
green filters, each controlled independently. When th e voltage across a liquid crystal is switched off, the liquid crystal passes the
light through the particular filter. We can vary the picture contrast by varying the strength of the vo ltage applied to the liquid
crystal.

8.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642
Figure: (a) Polarized light is rotated 90° by a liqu id crystal and then passed by a polarizing filter that has its axis
perpendicular to the direction of the original pola rization. (b) When a voltage is applied to the liqui d crystal, the polarized light is
not rotated and is blocked by the filter, making the region dark in comparison with its surroundings. (c) L CDs can be made color
specific, small, and fast enough to use in laptop compu ters and TVs.
Many crystals and solutions rotate the plane of pola rization of light passing through them. Such substanc es are said to be optically
active. Examples include sugar water, insulin, and coll agen (Figure). In addition to depending on the type of substance, the
amount and direction of rotation depend on several other factors. Among these is the concentration of t he substance, the distance
the light travels through it, and the wavelength of l ight. Optical activity is due to the asymmetrical sh ape of molecules in the
substance, such as being helical. Measurements of the r otation of polarized light passing through substances can thus be used to
measure concentrations, a standard technique for suga rs. It can also give information on the shapes of mole cules, such as proteins,
and factors that affect their shapes, such as temperatur e and pH.
Figure. Optical activity is the ability of some substan ces to rotate the plane of polarization of light passi ng through them. The
rotation is detected with a polarizing filter or ana lyzer.
Glass and plastic become optically active when stressed: the greater the stress, the greater the effect. Optic al stress analysis on
complicated shapes can be performed by making plastic models of them and observing them through crossed f ilters, as seen in
Figure. It is apparent that the effect depends on wa velength as well as stress. The wavelength dependence is sometimes also
used for artistic purposes.

8.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76642
Figure: Optical stress analysis of a plastic lens placed b etween crossed polarizers. (credit: “Infopro”/Wikimedi a Commons)
Another interesting phenomenon associated with polariz ed light is the ability of some crystals to split an unpolarized beam of light
into two polarized beams. This occurs because the cry stal has one value for the index of refraction of po larized light but a different
value for the index of refraction of light polarize d in the perpendicular direction, so that each compon ent has its own angle of
refraction. Such crystals are said to be birefringent, and, when aligned properly, two perpendicularly polari zed beams will emerge
from the crystal (Figure). Birefringent crystals ca n be used to produce polarized beams from unpolarized light. Some
birefringent materials preferentially absorb one of t he polarizations. These materials are called dichroic and can produce
polarization by this preferential absorption. This is fu ndamentally how polarizing filters and other polarizer s work.
Figure: Birefringent materials, such as the common min eral calcite, split unpolarized beams of light into t wo with two
different values of index of refraction.
This page titled 8.3: Polarization is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
1.8: Polarization by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766288.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Express the time-averaged energy density of electromagne tic waves in terms of their electric and magnetic field ampli tudes
Calculate the Poynting vector and the energy intensity of electromagnetic waves
Explain how the energy of an electromagnetic wave depend s on its amplitude, whereas the energy of a photon is
proportional to its frequency
Anyone who has used a microwave oven knows there is ene rgy in electromagnetic waves. Sometimes this energy is obvious, such
as in the warmth of the summer Sun. Other times, it is s ubtle, such as the unfelt energy of gamma rays, which can destroy living
cells.
Electromagnetic waves bring energy into a system by v irtue of their electric and magnetic fields. These fie lds can exert forces and
move charges in the system and, thus, do work on them. However, there is energy in an electromagnetic wave itsel f, whether it is
absorbed or not. Once created, the fields carry energy away from a source. If some energy is later absorbed, the field strengths are
diminished and anything left travels on.
Clearly, the larger the strength of the electric and magnetic fields, the more work they can do and the g reater the energy the
electromagnetic wave carries. In electromagnetic waves, the amplitude is the maximum field strength of the electric and magnetic
fields (Figure). The wave energy is determined by the wa ve amplitude.
Figure: Energy carried by a wave depends on its ampli tude. With electromagnetic waves, doubling the E fields and B fields
quadruples the energy density u and the energy flux uc.
For a plane wave traveling in the direction of the po sitive x-axis with the phase of the wave chosen so that the wave maximum is at
the origin at, the electric and magnetic fields obey the equations
The energy in any part of the electromagnetic wave i s the sum of the energies of the electric and magne tic fields. This energy per
unit volume, or energy density u, is the sum of the energy density from the electric field and the energy density from the magnetic
field. Expressions for both field energy densities were discussed earlier (in Capacitance and in Inductance). Combining these
the contributions, we obtainLearning Objectives

8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76628The expression then shows that the magnetic energy de nsity and electric energy density are equal, desp ite
the fact that changing electric fields generally pr oduce only small magnetic fields. The equality of th e electric and magnetic energy
densities leads to
The energy density moves with the electric and magnetic f ields in a similar manner to the waves themselves.
We can find the rate of transport of energy by consi dering a small time interval. As shown in Figure, the energy contained
in a cylinder of length and cross-sectional area A passes through the cross-sectional plane in the interval.
Figure: The energy contained in the electric and m agnetic fields of the electromagnetic wave in the vo lume
passes through the area in time.
The energy passing through area in time is
The energy per unit area per unit time passing throu gh a plane perpendicular to the wave, called the energy flux and denoted by,
can be calculated by dividing the energy by the area a nd the time interval.
More generally, the flux of energy through any surfac e also depends on the orientation of the surface. To take the direction into
account, we introduce a vector, called the Poynting vector, with the following definition:
The cross-product of and points in the direction perpendicular to both vectors. To confirm that the direction of is that of
wave propagation, and not its negative, return to Figure 16.3.2. Note that Lenz’s and Faraday’s laws imply that when th e magnetic
field shown is increasing in time, the electric field is greater at than at. The electric field is decr easing with increasing at
the given time and location. The proportionality bet ween electric and magnetic fields requires the electr ic field to increase in time
along with the magnetic field. This is possible only if the wave is propagating to the right in the diagr am, in which case, the relative
orientations show that is specifically in the direct ion of propagation of the electromagnetic wave.
The energy flux at any place also varies in time, as can be seen by substituting from Equation 16.3.19 into Equation.
Because the frequency of visible light is very high, of the order of, the energy flux for visible ligh t through any area is an
extremely rapidly varying quantity. Most measuring d evices, including our eyes, detect only an average ov er many cycles. The time
average of the energy flux is the intensity of the electromagnetic wave and is the power per un it area. It can be expressed by
averaging the cosine function in Equation over one complete cycle, which is the same as time-averaging o ver many cycles
(here, is one period):
We can either evaluate the integral, or else note tha t because the sine and cosine differ merely in phase, the average over a complete
cycle for is the same as for, to obtain

8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76628where the angle brackets stand for the time-averagin g operation. The intensity of light moving at speed in vacuum is then
found to be
in terms of the maximum electric field strength, wh ich is also the electric field amplitude. Algebraic manipulation produces the
relationship
where is the magnetic field amplitude, which is the sa me as the maximum magnetic field strength. One more expression for
in terms of both electric and magnetic field strengths is useful. Substituting the fact that, the previous expre ssion becomes
We can use whichever of the three preceding equations is most convenient, because the three equations are r eally just different
versions of the same result: The energy in a wave is r elated to amplitude squared. Furthermore, because the se equations are based
on the assumption that the electromagnetic waves are sinusoi dal, the peak intensity is twice the average intensity; th at is,.
The beam from a small laboratory laser typically ha s an intensity of about. Assuming that the beam is
composed of plane waves, calculate the amplitudes of the ele ctric and magnetic fields in the beam.
Strategy
Use the equation expressing intensity in terms of electr ic field to calculate the electric field from the inte nsity.
Solution
From Equation, the intensity of the laser beam is
The amplitude of the electric field is therefore
The amplitude of the magnetic field can be obtained from:
A light bulb emits 5.00 W of power as visible light. W hat are the average electric and magnetic fields fr om the light at a
distance of 3.0 m?
StrategyExample: A Laser Beam
Light Bulb Fields

8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76628Assume the bulb’s power output P is distributed uniformly over a sphere of radius 3.0 m to calculate the intensity, and from it,
the electric field.
Solution
The power radiated as visible light is then
Significance
The intensity I falls off as the distance squared if the radiation is disper sed uniformly in all directions.
A 60-kW radio transmitter on Earth sends its signal to a satellite 100 km away (Figure). At what distance in the same
direction would the signal have the same maximum field stre ngth if the transmitter’s output power were increased to 90 k W?
Figure: In three dimensions, a signal spreads over a soli d angle as it travels outward from its source.Radio Range

8.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76628Strategy
The area over which the power in a particular directi on is dispersed increases as distance squared, as ill ustrated in Figure.
Change the power output P by a factor of (90 kW/60 kW) and change the area b y the same factor to keep the
same. Then use the proportion of area A in the diagram to distance squared to find the distan ce that produces the calculated
change in area.
Solution
Using the proportionality of the areas to the squares of the distances, and solving, we obtain from the diagram
Significance
The range of a radio signal is the maximum distance between the transmitter and receiver that allows for n ormal operation. In
the absence of complications such as reflections fr om obstacles, the intensity follows an inverse square law, and doubling the
range would require multiplying the power by four.
This page titled 8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766298.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the relationship of the radiation pressure and the energy density of an electromagnetic wave
Explain how the radiation pressure of light, while small, ca n produce observable astronomical effects
Material objects consist of charged particles. An elect romagnetic wave incident on the object exerts forces on the charged particles,
in accordance with the Lorentz force. These forces do work on the particles of the object, increasing its energy, as discussed in the
previous section. The energy that sunlight carries is a familiar part of every warm sunny day. A much less familiar feature of
electromagnetic radiation is the extremely weak pres sure that electromagnetic radiation produces by exert ing a force in the
direction of the wave. This force occurs because electro magnetic waves contain and transport momentum.
To understand the direction of the force for a very specific case, consider a plane electromagnetic wave incident on a metal in
which electron motion, as part of a current, is damped b y the resistance of the metal, so that the average e lectron motion is in phase
with the force causing it. This is comparable to an object moving against friction and stopping as soon as the force pushing it stops
(Figure). When the electric field is in the directi on of the positive y-axis, electrons move in the negative y-direction, with the
magnetic field in the direction of the positive z-axis. By applying the right-hand rule, and accountin g for the negative charge of the
electron, we can see that the force on the electron f rom the magnetic field is in the direction of the p ositive x-axis, which is the
direction of wave propagation. When the field revers es, the field does too, and the force is again in th e same direction.
Maxwell’s equations together with the Lorentz force equa tion imply the existence of radiation pressure much more generally than
this specific example, however.
Figure: Electric and magnetic fields of an electroma gnetic wave can combine to produce a force in the d irection of
propagation, as illustrated for the special case of ele ctrons whose motion is highly damped by the resistance o f a metal.
Maxwell predicted that an electromagnetic wave carries momentum. An object absorbing an electromagnetic wave wo uld
experience a force in the direction of propagation of the wave. The force corresponds to radiation press ure exerted on the object by
the wave. The force would be twice as great if the radiatio n were reflected rather than absorbed.
Maxwell’s prediction was confirmed in 1903 by Nichols an d Hull by precisely measuring radiation pressures with a torsion
balance. The schematic arrangement is shown in Figure. The mirrors suspended from a fiber were housed insid e a glass
container. Nichols and Hull were able to obtain a small measurable deflection of the mirrors from shining light on one of them.
From the measured deflection, they could calculate th e unbalanced force on the mirror, and obtained agreem ent with the predicted
value of the force.Learning Objectives

8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76629
Figure: Simplified diagram of the central part of th e apparatus Nichols and Hull used to precisely measure r adiation pressure
and confirm Maxwell’s prediction.
The radiation pressure applied by an electromagnetic wave on a perfectly absorbing surface turns out to be equal to the
energy density of the wave:
If the material is perfectly reflecting, such as a me tal surface, and if the incidence is along the normal to the surface, then the
pressure exerted is twice as much because the momentum di rection reverses upon reflection:
We can confirm that the units are right:
Equations and give the instantaneous pressure, but because the energy density oscillates ra pidly, we are usually
interested in the time-averaged radiation pressure, whi ch can be written in terms of intensity:
Radiation pressure plays a role in explaining many observed astronomical phenomena, including the appearance of comets. Comets
are basically chunks of icy material in which frozen gases and particles of rock and dust are embedded. Wh en a comet approaches
the Sun, it warms up and its surface begins to evapor ate. The coma of the comet is the hazy area around it from the g ases and dust.
Some of the gases and dust form tails when they leave the comet. Notice in Figure that a comet has two tails. The ion tail (or
gas tail) is composed mainly of ionized gases. These ions int eract electromagnetically with the solar wind, which i s a continuous
stream of charged particles emitted by the Sun. The force of the solar wind on the ionized gases is strong enough that the ion tail
almost always points directly away from the Sun. The se cond tail is composed of dust particles. Because the dust tail is electrically
neutral, it does not interact with the solar wind. Howev er, this tail is affected by the radiation pressure p roduced by the light from
the Sun. Although quite small, this pressure is strong eno ugh to cause the dust tail to be displaced from the path of the comet.

8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76629
Figure: Evaporation of material being warmed by the Sun forms two tails, as shown in this photo of Comet Ison. (credit:
modification of work by E. Slawik—ESO)
On February 9, 1986, Comet Halley was at its closest poin t to the Sun, about from the center of the Sun. The
average power output of the Sun is.
a. Calculate the radiation pressure on the comet at this po int in its orbit. Assume that the comet reflects all the i ncident light.
b. Suppose that a 10-kg chunk of material of cross-sectiona l area breaks loose from the comet. Calculate the
force on this chunk due to the solar radiation. Compar e this force with the gravitational force of the Sun.
Strategy
Calculate the intensity of solar radiation at the gi ven distance from the Sun and use that to calculate t he radiation pressure.
From the pressure and area, calculate the force.
Solution
a. The intensity of the solar radiation is the avera ge solar power per unit area. Hence, at from the cent er of the Sun,
we have
Assuming the comet reflects all the incident radiation, we obtain from Equation
b. The force on the chunk due to the radiation isExample: Halley’s Comet

8.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76629whereas the gravitational force of the Sun is
Significance
The gravitational force of the Sun on the chunk is ther efore much greater than the force of the radiation.
After Maxwell showed that light carried momentum as well as energy, a novel idea eventually emerged, initiall y only as science
fiction. Perhaps a spacecraft with a large reflecting light sail could use radiation pressure for propulsion. Such a v ehicle would not
have to carry fuel. It would experience a constant b ut small force from solar radiation, instead of the sho rt bursts from rocket
propulsion. It would accelerate slowly, but by being a ccelerated continuously, it would eventually reach gr eat speeds. A spacecraft
with small total mass and a sail with a large area would be nece ssary to obtain a usable acceleration.
When the space program began in the 1960s, the idea started to receive serious attention from NASA. The most recent
development in light propelled spacecraft has come from a citizen-funded group, the Planetary Society. It is currently testing the
use of light sails to propel a small vehicle built from CubeSats, tiny satellites that NASA places in orbit for variou s research
projects during space launches intended mainly for oth er purposes.
The LightSail spacecraft shown below (Figure) consists of three CubeSats bundled together. It has a total mass of only about
5 kg and is about the size as a loaf of bread. Its s ails are made of very thin Mylar and open after lau nch to have a surface area of
Figure: Two small CubeSat satellites deployed from the International Space Station in May, 2016. The solar sa ils open out
when the CubeSats are far enough away from the Stati on.
The first LightSail spacecraft was launched in 2015 to test the sail depl oyment system. It was placed in low-earth orbit in 201 5
by hitching a ride on an Atlas 5 rocket launched for an unrelated mission. The test was successful, but the low-earth orbit
allowed too much drag on the spacecraft to accelerat e it by sunlight. Eventually, it burned in the atmos phere, as expected. The
next Planetary Society’s LightSail solar sailing spacecraft is scheduled for 2018.Example: LightSail Acceleration

8.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76629
The Lightsail is based on the on NASA's NanoSail-D project. (Public domain; NASA).
LightSail Acceleration
The intensity of energy from sunlight at a distance o f 1 AU from the Sun is. The LightSail spacecraft has sails with
total area of and a total mass of 5.0 kg. Calculate the maximum acceleration LightSail spacecraft could achieve from
radiation pressure when it is about 1 AU from the Sun.
Strategy
The maximum acceleration can be expected when the sa il is opened directly facing the Sun. Use the light in tensity to calculate
the radiation pressure and from it, the force on the sails. Then use Newton’s second law to calculate the acceleration.
Solution
The radiation pressure is
The resulting acceleration is
Significance
If this small acceleration continued for a year, the cra ft would attain a speed of 1829 m/s, or 6600 km/h.
How would the speed and acceleration of a radiation-pro pelled spacecraft be affected as it moved farther fr om the Sun on an
interplanetary space flight?
Solution
Its acceleration would decrease because the radiation force is proportional to the intensity of light fr om the Sun, which decreases
with distance. Its speed, however, would not change except for the effects of gravity from the Sun and planets.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many
contributing authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics under a Creative Commons Attribution
License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Exercise

8.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7662916.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766308.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how electromagnetic waves are divided into differe nt ranges, depending on wavelength and corresponding
frequency
Describe how electromagnetic waves in different categor ies are produced
Describe some of the many practical everyday application s of electromagnetic waves
Electromagnetic waves have a vast range of practical everyday applications that includes such diverse us es as communication by
cell phone and radio broadcasting, WiFi, cooking, vis ion, medical imaging, and treating cancer. In this mo dule, we discuss how
electromagnetic waves are classified into categories such as radio, infrared, ultraviolet, and so on. We al so summarize some of the
main applications for each range.
The different categories of electromagnetic waves dif fer in their wavelength range, or equivalently, in t heir corresponding
frequency ranges. Their properties change smoothly f rom one frequency range to the next, with different applications in each range.
A brief overview of the production and utilization of el ectromagnetic waves is found in Table.
Table: Electromagnetic Waves
Type of wave Production Applications Issues
Radio Accelerating chargesCommunications, Remote
controls, MRIRequires control for band use
MicrowavesAccelerating charges and
thermal agitationCommunications, Ovens,
Radar, Cell phone use
InfraredThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsThermal imaging, HeatingAbsorbed by atmosphere,
Greenhouse effect
Visible lightThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsPhotosynthesis, Human vision
UltravioletThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsSterilization, Vitamin D
productionOzone depletion, Cancer
causing
X-raysInner electronic transitions and
fast collisionsSecurity, Medical diagnosis,
Cancer therapyCancer causing
Gamma rays Nuclear decayNuclear medicine, Security,
Medical diagnosis, Cancer
therapyCancer causing, Radiation
damage
The relationship between frequency f and wavelength applies to all waves and ensures that greater frequency means
smaller wavelength. Figure shows how the various types of electromagnetic waves are categorized according to t heir
wavelengths and frequencies - that is, it shows the electro magnetic spectrum.Learning Objectives

8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76630
Figure: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the maj or categories of electromagnetic waves.
Radio Waves
The term radio waves refers to electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths greater than about 0.1 m. Radio waves are commonly
used for audio communications (i.e., for radios), bu t the term is used for electromagnetic waves in this ra nge regardless of their
application. Radio waves typically result from an alt ernating current in the wires of a broadcast antenna. They cover a very broad
wavelength range and are divided into many subranges, including microwaves, electromagnetic waves used for AM and FM radio,
cellular telephones, and TV signals.
There is no lowest frequency of radio waves, but ELF wa ves, or “extremely low frequency” are among the lowest frequencies
commonly encountered, from 3 Hz to 3 kHz. The accelera ting charge in the ac currents of electrical power li nes produce
electromagnetic waves in this range. ELF waves are able t o penetrate sea water, which strongly absorbs electrom agnetic waves of
higher frequency, and therefore are useful for submari ne communications.
In order to use an electromagnetic wave to transmit i nformation, the amplitude, frequency, or phase of the wave is modulated, or
varied in a controlled way that encodes the intended information into the wave. In AM radio transmission, the amplitude of the
wave is modulated to mimic the vibrations of the soun d being conveyed. Fourier’s theorem implies that the modulated AM wave
amounts to a superposition of waves covering some narr ow frequency range. Each AM station is assigned a speci fic carrier
frequency that, by international agreement, is allowed to vary by. In FM radio transmission, the frequency of the wave is
modulated to carry this information, as illustrated in Figure, and the frequency of each station is allowed to use 100 kHz on
each side of its carrier frequency. The electromagne tic wave produces a current in a receiving antenna, a nd the radio or television
processes the signal to produce the sound and any im age. The higher the frequency of the radio wave used t o carry the data, the
greater the detailed variation of the wave that can be carried by modulating it over each time unit, an d the more data that can be
transmitted per unit of time. The assigned frequencie s for AM broadcasting are 540 to 1600 kHz, and for FM are 88 MHz to108
MHz.
Figure: Electromagnetic waves are used to carry commu nications signals by varying the wave’s amplitude (AM), its
frequency (FM), or its phase.

8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76630Cell phone conversations, and television voice and video images are commonly transmitted as digital data, by converting the
signal into a sequence of binary ones and zeros. This allows clearer data transmission when the signal is weak, and allows using
computer algorithms to compress the digital data to transmit more data in each frequency range. Compute r data as well is
transmitted as a sequence of binary ones and zeros, each on e or zero constituting one bit of data.
Microwaves
Microwaves are the highest-frequency electromagnetic waves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic circuits a nd
devices. Microwave frequencies range from about to ne arly. Their high frequencies correspond to short wave lengths
compared with other radio waves—hence the name “microwa ve.” Microwaves also occur naturally as the cosmic ba ckground
radiation left over from the origin of the universe. Along with other ranges of electromagnetic waves, the y are part of the radiation
that any object above absolute zero emits and absor bs because of thermal agitation, that is, from the thermal motion of its atoms
and molecules.
Most satellite-transmitted information is carried on microwaves. Radar is a common application of microwaves. By detecting a nd
timing microwave echoes, radar systems can determine the distance to objects as diverse as clouds, aircra ft, or even the surface of
Venus.
Microwaves of 2.45 GHz are commonly used in microwave oven s. The electrons in a water molecule tend to remain clo ser to the
oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei (Figure). Thi s creates two separated centers of equal and opposit e charges, giving
the molecule a dipole moment. The oscillating electric field of the microwaves in side the oven exerts a torque that tends to align
each molecule first in one direction and then in th e other, with the motion of each molecule coupled to others around it. This pumps
energy into the continual thermal motion of the wate r to heat the food. The plate under the food contai ns no water, and remains
relatively unheated.
Figure: The oscillating electric field in a microwav e oven exerts a torque on water molecules because of t heir dipole moment,
and the torque reverses direction times per second. In teractions between the molecules distributes the energy being
pumped into them. The and denote the charge distri bution on the molecules.
The microwaves in a microwave oven reflect off the wal ls of the oven, so that the superposition of waves prod uces standing waves,
similar to the standing waves of a vibrating guitar or violin string (Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave). A rotating fan acts
as a stirrer by reflecting the microwaves in different di rections, and food turntables, help spread out the hot spots.
How far apart are the hotspots in a 2.45-GHz microwave oven?
Strategy
Consider the waves along one direction in the oven, being ref lected at the opposite wall from where they are generated.
Solution
The antinodes, where maximum intensity occurs, are half the wavelength apart, with separationExample: Why Microwave Ovens Heat Unevenly

8.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76630Significance
The distance between the hot spots in a microwave oven are deter mined by the wavelength of the microwaves.
A cell phone has a radio receiver and a weak radio t ransmitter, both of which can quickly tune to hundre ds of specifically assigned
microwave frequencies. The low intensity of the transm itted signal gives it an intentionally limited rang e. A ground-based system
links the phone to only to the broadcast tower assigned to the specific small area, or cell, and smoothly t ransitions its connection to
the next cell when the signal reception there is the str onger one. This enables a cell phone to be used while chang ing location.
Microwaves also provide the WiFi that enables owners of cell phones, laptop computers, an d similar devices to connect wirelessly
to the Internet at home and at coffee shops and airp orts. A wireless WiFi router is a device that exchange s data over the Internet
through the cable or another connection, and uses mic rowaves to exchange the data wirelessly with devices such as cell phones and
computers. The term WiFi itself refers to the standard s followed in modulating and analyzing the microwaves so that wireless
routers and devices from different manufacturers work compatibly with one another. The computer data in e ach direction consist of
sequences of binary zeros and ones, each correspondi ng to a binary bit. The microwaves are in the range o f 2.4 GHz to 5.0 GHz
range.
Other wireless technologies also use microwaves to provi de everyday communications between devices. Bluetooth developed
alongside WiFi as a standard for radio communication in the 2.4-GHz range between nearby devices, for examp le, to link to
headphones and audio earpieces to devices such as r adios, or a driver’s cell phone to a hands-free devic e to allow answering phone
calls without fumbling directly with the cell phone.
Microwaves find use also in radio tagging, using RFID (ra dio frequency identification) technology. Examples a re RFID tags
attached to store merchandize, transponder for toll booths use attached to the windshield of a car, or eve n a chip embedded into a
pet’s skin. The device responds to a microwave signal by emitting a signal of its own with encoded informa tion, allowing stores to
quickly ring up items at their cash registers, drivers to charge tolls to their account without stopping, and lost pets to be reunited
with their owners. NFC (near field communication) works sim ilarly, except it is much shorter range. Its mechanism of interaction is
the induced magnetic field at microwave frequencies b etween two coils. Cell phones that have NFC capability a nd the right
software can supply information for purchases using the cell phone instead of a physical credit card. Th e very short range of the
data transfer is a desired security feature in this case.
Infrared Radiation
The boundary between the microwave and infrared regio ns of the electromagnetic spectrum is not well defined (Figure).
Infrared radiation is generally produced by thermal motion, and the vi bration and rotation of atoms and molecules. Electroni c
transitions in atoms and molecules can also produce infrared radiation. About half of the solar energy arriving at Earth is i n the
infrared region, with most of the rest in the visible pa rt of the spectrum. About 23% of the solar energy is absorbed in the
atmosphere, about 48% is absorbed at Earth’s surface, and ab out 29% is reflected back into space.
The range of infrared frequencies extends up to the lower limit of visible light, just below red. In fac t, infrared means “below red.”
Water molecules rotate and vibrate particularly well at infrared frequencies. Reconnaissance satellites can detect buildings,
vehicles, and even individual humans by their infrare d emissions, whose power radiation is proportional to t he fourth power of the
absolute temperature. More mundanely, we use infrared lamps, including those called quartz heaters, to preferentially warm us
because we absorb infrared better than our surroundings.
The familiar handheld “remotes” for changing channe ls and settings on television sets often transmit thei r signal by modulating an
infrared beam. If you try to use a TV remote without the infrared emitter being in direct line of sight with the infrared detector, you
may find the television not responding. Some remotes use Bluetooth instead and reduce this annoyance.

8.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76630Visible Light
Visible light is the narrow segment of the electromagnetic spectr um between about 400 nm and about 750 nm to which the normal
human eye responds. Visible light is produced by vib rations and rotations of atoms and molecules, as well as by electronic
transitions within atoms and molecules. The receivers or de tectors of light largely utilize electronic transitions.
Red light has the lowest frequencies and longest wave lengths, whereas violet has the highest frequencies an d shortest wavelengths
(Figure). Blackbody radiation from the Sun peaks in t he visible part of the spectrum but is more intense in the red than in the
violet, making the sun yellowish in appearance.
Figure. A small part of the electromagnetic spectrum that includes its visible components. The divisions betwe en infrared,
visible, and ultraviolet are not perfectly distinct, nor are those between the seven rainbow colors.
Living things - plants and animals - have evolved to utilize and respond to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum in which they are
embedded. We enjoy the beauty of nature through visi ble light. Plants are more selective. Photosynthesis uses parts of the visible
spectrum to make sugars.
Ultraviolet Radiation
Ultraviolet means “above violet.” The electromagnetic frequencies of ultraviolet radiation (UV) extend upward from violet, the
highest-frequency visible light. The highest-frequenc y ultraviolet overlaps with the lowest-frequency X-rays. The wavelengths of
ultraviolet extend from 400 nm down to about 10 nm a t its highest frequencies. Ultraviolet is produced by atomic and molecular
motions and electronic transitions.
UV radiation from the Sun is broadly subdivided into t hree wavelength ranges: UV-A (320–400 nm) is the lowest frequency, then
UV-B (290–320 nm) and UV-C (220–290 nm). Most UV-B and all UV-C are absorbed by ozone (molecules in the up per
atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV radiation reac hing Earth’s surface is UV-A.
Sunburn is caused by large exposures to UV-B and UV-C, and repeated exposure can increase the likelihood of skin cancer. The
tanning response is a defense mechanism in which the body produces pigments in inert skin layers to redu ce exposure of the living
cells below.
As examined in a later chapter, the shorter the waveleng th of light, the greater the energy change of an at om or molecule that
absorbs the light in an electronic transition. This makes short-wavelength ultraviolet light damaging to living cells. It also explains
why ultraviolet radiation is better able than visible li ght to cause some materials to glow, or fluoresce.
Besides the adverse effects of ultraviolet radiation, there are also benefits of exposure in nature and u ses in technology. Vitamin D
production in the skin results from exposure to UV-B radiation, generally from sunlight. Several studies su ggest vitamin D
deficiency is associated with the development of a r ange of cancers (prostate, breast, colon), as well as osteoporosis. Low-intensity
ultraviolet has applications such as providing the en ergy to cause certain dyes to fluoresce and emit visi ble light, for example, in
printed money to display hidden watermarks as counterfeit protection.
X-Rays
X-rays have wavelengths from about to. They have shorter wavelengths, and higher frequencies, than ultraviol et, so
that the energy they transfer at an atomic level is greater. As a result, X-rays have adverse effects on li ving cells similar to those of
ultraviolet radiation, but they are more penetratin g. Cancer and genetic defects can be induced by X-ray s. Because of their effect on
rapidly dividing cells, X-rays can also be used to treat a nd even cure cancer.
The widest use of X-rays is for imaging objects that ar e opaque to visible light, such as the human body or aircraft parts. In
humans, the risk of cell damage is weighed carefully again st the benefit of the diagnostic information obtained.

8.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76630Gamma Rays
Soon after nuclear radioactivity was first detected in 1896, it was found that at least three distinct types of radiation were being
emitted, and these were designated as alpha, beta, and gamma rays. The most penetrating nuclear radiation, the gamma ray -ray)
was later found to be an extremely high-frequency elect romagnetic wave.
The lower end of the -ray frequency range overlaps t he upper end of the X-ray range. Gamma rays have charac teristics identical to
X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in sou rce. The name “gamma rays” is generally used for el ectromagnetic radiation
emitted by a nucleus, while X-rays are generally prod uced by bombarding a target with energetic electrons in an X-ray tube. At
higher frequencies, -rays are more penetrating and m ore damaging to living tissue. They have many of th e same uses as X-rays,
including cancer therapy. Gamma radiation from radioactiv e materials is used in nuclear medicine.
Use this simulation to explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmos phere.
Explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmosphere.
Identify that absorption of light depends on the molecu le and the type of light.
Relate the energy of the light to the resulting motion.
Identify that energy increases from microwave to ultraviole t.
Predict the motion of a molecule based on the type of light it absorbs.
How do the electromagnetic waves for the different kinds of electromagnetic radiation differ?
Answer
They fall into different ranges of wavelength, and therefor e also different corresponding ranges of frequency.
This page titled 8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

8.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766318.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
Check Your Understanding
16.1. It is greatest immediately after the current is switch ed on. The displacement current and the magnetic fi eld from it are
proportional to the rate of change of electric field betwee n the plates, which is greatest when the plates first begin to charge.
16.2. No. The changing electric field according to the mod ified version of Ampère’s law would necessarily induce a
changing magnetic field.
16.3. (1) Faraday’s law, (2) the Ampère-Maxwell law
16.4. a. The directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field are all mutually perpendicular.
b. The speed of the electromagnetic wave is the speed of l ight independent of frequency.
c. The ratio of electric and magnetic field amplitudes is.
16.5. Its acceleration would decrease because the radiatio n force is proportional to the intensity of light fr om the Sun, which
decreases with distance. Its speed, however, would not chang e except for the effects of gravity from the Sun and planet s.
16.6. They fall into different ranges of wavelength, and therefor e also different corresponding ranges of frequency.
Conceptual Questions
1. The current into the capacitor to change the electr ic field between the plates is equal to the displacem ent current between
the plates.
3. The first demonstration requires simply observing the current produced in a wire that experiences a changin g magnetic
field. The second demonstration requires moving elec tric charge from one location to another, and theref ore involves electric
currents that generate a changing electric field. Th e magnetic fields from these currents are not easily separated from the
magnetic field that the displacement current produces.
5. in (a), because the electric field is parallel to the wire, accelerating the electrons
7. A steady current in a dc circuit will not produce el ectromagnetic waves. If the magnitude of the current va ries while
remaining in the same direction, the wires will emit el ectromagnetic waves, for example, if the current is turne d on or off.
9. The amount of energy (about) is can quickly produce a considerable change in temperature, but the ligh t
pressure (about) is much too small to notice.
11. It has the magnitude of the energy flux and points i n the direction of wave propagation. It gives the dir ection of energy
flow and the amount of energy per area transported per secon d.
13. The force on a surface acting over time is the mom entum that the force would impart to the object. The momentum
change of the light is doubled if the light is refl ected back compared with when it is absorbed, so the f orce acting on the
object is twice as great.
15. a. According to the right hand rule, the direction of energy propagation would reverse.
b. This would leave the vector, and therefore the propaga tion direction, the same.
17. a. Radio waves are generally produced by alternating cur rent in a wire or an oscillating electric field between two pl ates;
b. Infrared radiation is commonly produced by heate d bodies whose atoms and the charges in them vibrate at about the
right frequency.
19. a. blue;
b. Light of longer wavelengths than blue passes through the air with less scattering, whereas more of the bl ue light is
scattered in different directions in the sky to give i t is blue color.
21. A typical antenna has a stronger response when the wi res forming it are orientated parallel to the electr ic field of the radio
wave.

8.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663123. No, it is very narrow and just a small portion of the overall electromagnetic spectrum.
25. Visible light is typically produced by changes of ene rgies of electrons in randomly oriented atoms and m olecules. Radio
waves are typically emitted by an ac current flowing along a wire, that has fixed orientation and produces electric fields
pointed in particular directions.
27. Radar can observe objects the size of an airplane a nd uses radio waves of about 0.5 cm in wavelength. Visib le light can
be used to view single biological cells and has wavelength s of about.
29. ELF radio waves
31. The frequency of 2.45 GHz of a microwave oven is close to th e specific frequencies in the 2.4 GHz band used for WiFi.
Problems
33. because
35. a.;
b.;
c.; which is the sum of and, consistent with
how the displacement current maintaining the continuity of current.
37.
39.
41. 499 s
43. 25 m
45. a. 5.00 V/m;
b.;
c. 31.4 cm;
d. toward the + x-axis;
e.
47.
49. The magnetic field is downward, and it has magnitude.
51. a.;
b. 394 m
53. 11.5 m
55.
57. a.;
b.
59.
61. a.;
b.
63. a.;
b.;

8.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76631c. 1.12 W
65.
67.
69. a.
b. it is reduced to half the pressure,
71. a.;
b.
73. a.;
b. X-rays
75. a. The wavelength range is 187 m to 556 m.
b. The wavelength range is 2.78 m to 3.41 m.
77.
79. time for 1 bit = s, difference in travel time is s
81. a.;
b.;
c.
83., the non-oscillating geomagnetic field of 25–65 is mu ch larger
85. a.;
b.;
c.
87. a.;
b. radio wave;
c.
Additional Problems
89.
91., which is much greater than Earth’s circumference
93. a. 564 W;
b.;
c.;
d.
95. a.;
b.;
c.

8.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663197. a.;
b.
99. Power into the wire=
101. 0.431
103. a.;
b.;
c. 33 ns
105.
Challenge Problems
107. a.;
b. The radiation pressure is greater than the Sun’s g ravity if the particle size is smaller, because the gr avitational force
varies as the radius cubed while the radiation pressure var ies as the radius squared.
c. The radiation force outward implies that particles smaller than this are less likely to be near the Sun than outside the
range of the Sun’s radiation pressure.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.9: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

8.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766328.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
16.2 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
1. Explain how the displacement current maintains the cont inuity of current in a circuit containing a capacitor.
2. Describe the field lines of the induced magnetic fie ld along the edge of the imaginary horizontal cylin der shown below if
the cylinder is in a spatially uniform electric field t hat is horizontal, pointing to the right, and increasing in magnitude.
3. Why is it much easier to demonstrate in a student lab that a changing magnetic field induces an electric field than it is to
demonstrate that a changing electric field produces a mag netic field?
16.3 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
4. If the electric field of an electromagnetic wave is oscillating along the z-axis and the magnetic field is oscillating along the
x-axis, in what possible direction is the wave traveling?
5. In which situation shown below will the electromagnetic wa ve be more successful in inducing a current in the wire?
Explain.

8.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766326. In which situation shown below will the electromagnetic wave be more successful in inducing a current in the loop?
Explain.
7. Under what conditions might wires in a circuit where the curren t flows in only one direction emit electromagnetic waves?
8. Shown below is the interference pattern of two radio an tennas broadcasting the same signal. Explain how thi s is analogous
to the interference pattern for sound produced by t wo speakers. Could this be used to make a directiona l antenna system that
broadcasts preferentially in certain directions? Expla in.
16.4 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
9. When you stand outdoors in the sunlight, why can you feel the energy that the sunlight carries, but not the momentum it
carries?
10. How does the intensity of an electromagnetic wave depen d on its electric field? How does it depend on its magne tic
field?
11. What is the physical significance of the Poynting vecto r?

8.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663212. A 2.0-mW helium-neon laser transmits a continuous beam of red light of cross-sectional area. If the beam d oes
not diverge appreciably, how would its rms electric field vary with distance from the laser? Explain.
16.5 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
13. Why is the radiation pressure of an electromagnetic wa ve on a perfectly reflecting surface twice as large a s the pressure
on a perfectly absorbing surface?
14. Why did the early Hubble Telescope photos of Comet Is on approaching Earth show it to have merely a fuzzy c oma
around it, and not the pronounced double tail that devel oped later (see below)?
(credit: ESA, Hubble)
15. (a) If the electric field and magnetic field in a si nusoidal plane wave were interchanged, in which directi on relative to
before would the energy propagate?
(b) What if the electric and the magnetic fields were both changed to their negatives?
16.6 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
16. Compare the speed, wavelength, and frequency of radio waves and X-rays traveling in a vacuum.
17. Accelerating electric charge emits electromagnetic r adiation. How does this apply in each case: (a) radio wav es, (b)
infrared radiation.
18. Compare and contrast the meaning of the prefix “micro” in the names of SI units in the term microwaves.
19. Part of the light passing through the air is scattere d in all directions by the molecules comprising the atmosphere. The
wavelengths of visible light are larger than molecul ar sizes, and the scattering is strongest for wavelengt hs of light closest to
sizes of molecules.
(a) Which of the main colors of light is scattered the m ost?
(b) Explain why this would give the sky its familiar back ground color at midday.
20. When a bowl of soup is removed from a microwave oven, t he soup is found to be steaming hot, whereas the bowl is only
warm to the touch. Discuss the temperature changes that have occu rred in terms of energy transfer.
21. Certain orientations of a broadcast television antenna give better reception than others for a particular station. Explain.
22. What property of light corresponds to loudness in sound?
23. Is the visible region a major portion of the electromagn etic spectrum?
24. Can the human body detect electromagnetic radiation tha t is outside the visible region of the spectrum?

8.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663225. Radio waves normally have their E and B fields in specific directions, whereas visible light usually has its E and B fields
in random and rapidly changing directions that are p erpendicular to each other and to the propagation d irection. Can you
explain why?
26. Give an example of resonance in the reception of electrom agnetic waves.
27. Illustrate that the size of details of an object tha t can be detected with electromagnetic waves is relat ed to their
wavelength, by comparing details observable with two differen t types (for example, radar and visible light).
28. In which part of the electromagnetic spectrum are each o f these waves:
(a),
(b),
(c),
(d)
29. In what range of electromagnetic radiation are the e lectromagnetic waves emitted by power lines in a count ry that uses
50-Hz ac current?
30. If a microwave oven could be modified to merely tune the waves generated to be in the infrared range instea d of using
microwaves, how would this affect the uneven heating of the ove n?
31. A leaky microwave oven in a home can sometimes cause inter ference with the homeowner’s WiFi system. Why?
32. When a television news anchor in a studio speaks to a reporter in a distant country, there is sometimes a not iceable lag
between when the anchor speaks in the studio and when t he remote reporter hears it and replies. Explain what c auses this
delay.
Problems
16.2 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
33. Show that the magnetic field at a distance r from the axis of two circular parallel plates, produc ed by placing charge Q(t)
on the plates is
34. Express the displacement current in a capacitor in t erms of the capacitance and the rate of change of th e voltage across
the capacitor.
35. A potential difference is maintained across a para llel-plate capacitor with capacitance C consisting of two
circular parallel plates. A thin wire with resistance R connects the centers of the two plates, allowing char ge to leak between
plates while they are charging.
(a) Obtain expressions for the leakage current in th e thin wire. Use these results to obtain an expression f or the
current in the wires connected to the capacitor.
(b) Find the displacement current in the space between the pla tes from the changing electric field between the plate s.
(c) Compare with the sum of the displacement current and resistor current between the plates, and
explain why the relationship you observe would be expecte d.
36. Suppose the parallel-plate capacitor shown below is accu mulating charge at a rate of 0.010 C/s. What is the i nduced
magnetic field at a distance of 10 cm from the capacit ator?

8.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76632
37. The potential difference V(t) between parallel plates shown above is instantaneously i ncreasing at a rate of. What
is the displacement current between the plates if the separ ation of the plates is 1.00 cm and they have an area of?
38. A parallel-plate capacitor has a plate area of and a separation of 0.0100 m. What must be must be the
angular frequency for a voltage with to produce a maximum displacement induced current of
1.00 A between the plates?
39. The voltage across a parallel-plate capacitor with ar ea and separation varies sinusoidally as
, where t is in seconds. Find the displacement current between the plates.
40. The voltage across a parallel-plate capacitor with ar ea A and separation d varies with time t as, where is a
constant. Find the displacement current between the plates.
16.3 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
41. If the Sun suddenly turned off, we would not know it un til its light stopped coming. How long would that be, gi ven that
the Sun is away?
42. What is the maximum electric field strength in an ele ctromagnetic wave that has a maximum magnetic field strength of
(about 10 times Earth’s magnetic field)?
43. An electromagnetic wave has a frequency of 12 MHz. What is its wavelength in vacuum?
44. If electric and magnetic field strengths vary sinuso idally in time at frequency 1.00 GHz, being zero at, then
and.
(a) When are the field strengths next equal to zero?
(b) When do they reach their most negative value? (c) How much time is needed for them to complete one
cycle?
45. The electric field of an electromagnetic wave traveli ng in vacuum is described by the following wave function:
where k is the wavenumber in rad/m, x is in m, t is in s.
Find the following quantities:
(a) amplitude
(b) frequency
(c) wavelength
(d) the direction of the travel of the wave
(e) the associated magnetic field wave
46. A plane electromagnetic wave of frequency 20 GHz move s in the positive y-axis direction such that its ele ctric field is
pointed along the z-axis. The amplitude of the elect ric field is 10 V/m. The start of time is chosen so t hat at, the electric
field has a value 10 V/m at the origin.
(a) Write the wave function that will describe the electric f ield wave.

8.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76632(b) Find the wave function that will describe the associate d magnetic field wave.
47. The following represents an electromagnetic wave travelin g in the direction of the positive y-axis:
The wave is passing through a wide tube of circular cro ss-section of radius R whose axis is along the y-axis. Find the
expression for the displacement current through the tub e.
16.4 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
48. While outdoors on a sunny day, a student holds a larg e convex lens of radius 4.0 cm above a sheet of paper to produce a
bright spot on the paper that is 1.0 cm in radius, rat her than a sharp focus. By what factor is the electri c field in the bright
spot of light related to the electric field of sunlight le aving the side of the lens facing the paper?
49. A plane electromagnetic wave travels northward. At one instant, its electric field has a magnitude of 6.0 V/m and points
eastward. What are the magnitude and direction of the magne tic field at this instant?
50. The electric field of an electromagnetic wave is given b y
Write the equations for the associated magnetic field a nd Poynting vector.
51. A radio station broadcasts at a frequency of 760 kHz. At a receiver some distance from the antenna, the m aximum
magnetic field of the electromagnetic wave detected is.
(a) What is the maximum electric field?
(b) What is the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave?
52. The filament in a clear incandescent light bulb rad iates visible light at a power of 5.00 W. Model the gl ass part of the bulb
as a sphere of radius and calculate the amount of elect romagnetic energy from visible light inside the bulb.
53. At what distance does a 100-W lightbulb produce the s ame intensity of light as a 75-W lightbulb produces 10 m away?
(Assume both have the same efficiency for converting ele ctrical energy in the circuit into emitted electromagne tic energy.)
54. An incandescent light bulb emits only 2.6 W of its powe r as visible light. What is the rms electric field o f the emitted
light at a distance of 3.0 m from the bulb?
55. A 150-W lightbulb emits 5% of its energy as electroma gnetic radiation. What is the magnitude of the avera ge Poynting
vector 10 m from the bulb?
56. A small helium-neon laser has a power output of 2.5 mW. What is the electromagnetic energy in a 1.0-m le ngth of the
beam?
57. At the top of Earth’s atmosphere, the time-averaged Poynting vector associated with sunlight has a magnitu de of about
(a) What are the maximum values of the electric and magn etic fields for a wave of this intensity?
(b) What is the total power radiated by the sun? Assu me that the Earth is from the Sun and that sunlight is
composed of electromagnetic plane waves.
58. The magnetic field of a plane electromagnetic wave movin g along the z axis is given by
, where and
(a) Write an expression for the electric field associate d with the wave.
(b) What are the frequency and the wavelength of the wav e?
(c) What is its average Poynting vector?
59. What is the intensity of an electromagnetic wave with a pea k electric field strength of 125 V/m?

8.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663260. Assume the helium-neon lasers commonly used in student ph ysics laboratories have power outputs of 0.500 mW.
(a) If such a laser beam is projected onto a circular spo t 1.00 mm in diameter, what is its intensity?
(b) Find the peak magnetic field strength.
(c) Find the peak electric field strength.
61. An AM radio transmitter broadcasts 50.0 kW of power uni formly in all directions. (a) Assuming all of the ra dio waves
that strike the ground are completely absorbed, and that there is no absorption by the atmosphere or other objects, what is the
intensity 30.0 km away? (Hint: Half the power will be spread over the area of a hemi sphere.) (b) What is the maximum
electric field strength at this distance?
62. Suppose the maximum safe intensity of microwaves for human e xposure is taken to be.
(a) If a radar unit leaks 10.0 W of microwaves (other than those sent by its antenna) uniformly in all di rections, how far
away must you be to be exposed to an intensity consid ered to be safe? Assume that the power spreads uniforml y over
the area of a sphere with no complications from absorpti on or reflection.
(b) What is the maximum electric field strength at th e safe intensity? (Note that early radar units leaked more than
modern ones do. This caused identifiable health problem s, such as cataracts, for people who worked near them.)
63. A 2.50-m-diameter university communications satellit e dish receives TV signals that have a maximum elec tric field
strength (for one channel) of 7.50μV/m (see below). (a) What is the intensity of this wave? (b) What is the power received by
the antenna? (c) If the orbiting satellite broadcasts u niformly over an area of (a large fraction of North
America), how much power does it radiate?
64. Lasers can be constructed that produce an extremely h igh intensity electromagnetic wave for a brief time— called pulsed
lasers. They are used to initiate nuclear fusion, for e xample. Such a laser may produce an electromagnetic wav e with a
maximum electric field strength of for a time of 1.00 ns.
(a) What is the maximum magnetic field strength in the wave?
(b) What is the intensity of the beam?
(c) What energy does it deliver on an area?
16.5 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
65. A 150-W lightbulb emits 5% of its energy as electroma gnetic radiation. What is the radiation pressure on a n absorbing
sphere of radius 10 m that surrounds the bulb?

8.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663266. What pressure does light emitted uniformly in all di rections from a 100-W incandescent light bulb exert on a mirror at a
distance of 3.0 m, if 2.6 W of the power is emitted as visib le light?
67. A microscopic spherical dust particle of radius 2μm and mass 10μg is moving in outer space at a constant speed of 30
cm/sec. A wave of light strikes it from the opposite d irection of its motion and gets absorbed. Assuming the particle
decelerates uniformly to zero speed in one second, what is t he average electric field amplitude in the light?
68. A Styrofoam spherical ball of radius 2 mm and mass 20μg is to be suspended by the radiation pressure in a va cuum tube
in a lab. How much intensity will be required if the light is completely absorbed the ball?
69. Suppose that for sunlight at a point on the surface of Earth is.
(a) If sunlight falls perpendicularly on a kite with a reflecting surface of area 0.75m20.75m2, what is the average force
on the kite due to radiation pressure?
(b) How is your answer affected if the kite material is black and absorbs all sunlight?
70. Sunlight reaches the ground with an intensity of abou t. A sunbather has a body surface area of 0.8m20.8m2
facing the sun while reclining on a beach chair on a clear day.
(a) how much energy from direct sunlight reaches the sunbather’s skin per second?
(b) What pressure does the sunlight exert if it is abso rbed?
71. Suppose a spherical particle of mass m and radius R in space absorbs light of intensity I for time t.
(a) How much work does the radiation pressure do to acc elerate the particle from rest in the given time it absorbs the
light?
(b) How much energy carried by the electromagnetic wav es is absorbed by the particle over this time based on the
radiant energy incident on the particle?
16.6 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
72. How many helium atoms, each with a radius of about 31 p m, must be placed end to end to have a length equal t o one
wavelength of 470 nm blue light?
73. If you wish to detect details of the size of atoms (a bout 0.2 nm) with electromagnetic radiation, it must h ave a wavelength
of about this size.
(a) What is its frequency?
(b) What type of electromagnetic radiation might this b e?
74. Find the frequency range of visible light, given that it en compasses wavelengths from 380 to 760 nm.
75. (a) Calculate the wavelength range for AM radio given its frequ ency range is 540 to 1600 kHz.
(b) Do the same for the FM frequency range of 88.0 to 108 MHz.
76. Radio station WWVB, operated by the National Institute o f Standards and Technology (NIST) from Fort Collins,
Colorado, at a low frequency of 60 kHz, broadcasts a time synchronization signal whose range covers the en tire continental
US. The timing of the synchronization signal is controll ed by a set of atomic clocks to an accuracy of, and repeats
every 1 minute. The signal is used for devices, such as radio-controlled watches, that automatically synch ronize with it at
preset local times. WWVB’s long wavelength signal tends to pro pagate close to the ground.
(a) Calculate the wavelength of the radio waves from WWVB.
(b) Estimate the error that the travel time of the signal causes in synchronizing a radio controlled watc h in Norfolk,
Virginia, which is 1570 mi (2527 km) from Fort Collins, Col orado.
77. An outdoor WiFi unit for a picnic area has a 100-mW o utput and a range of about 30 m. What output power wou ld
reduce its range to 12 m for use with the same device s as before? Assume there are no obstacles in the way a nd that
microwaves into the ground are simply absorbed.

8.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663278. The prefix “mega” (M) and “kilo” (k), when referring to amounts of computer data, refer to factors of 1 024 or
210210rather than 1000 for the prefix kilo, and rather than 1,000,000 for the prefix Mega (M). If a wireless
(WiFi) router transfers 150 Mbps of data, how many bits per second is that in decimal arithmetic?
79. A computer user finds that his wireless router transmit s data at a rate of 75 Mbps (megabits per second). Co mpare the
average time to transmit one bit of data with the ti me difference between the wifi signal reaching an obs erver’s cell phone
directly and by bouncing back to the observer from a wall 8. 00 m past the observer.
80. (a) The ideal size (most efficient) for a broadcast an tenna with one end on the ground is one-fourth the wa velength (λ/4)
of the electromagnetic radiation being sent out. If a new radio station has such an antenna that is 50.0 m high, what frequency
does it broadcast most efficiently? Is this in the AM or FM ba nd?
(b) Discuss the analogy of the fundamental resonant mo de of an air column closed at one end to the resonanc e of
currents on an antenna that is one-fourth their waveleng th.
81. What are the wavelengths of (a) X-rays of frequency?
(b) Yellow light of frequency?
(c) Gamma rays of frequency?
82. For red light of λ=660nm, what are and?
83. A radio transmitter broadcasts plane electromagneti c waves whose maximum electric field at a particular l ocation is
. What is the maximum magnitude of the oscillating magnetic field at that location? How does it compare with
Earth’s magnetic field?
84. (a) Two microwave frequencies authorized for use in mi crowave ovens are: 915 and 2450 MHz. Calculate the
wavelength of each.
(b) Which frequency would produce smaller hot spots i n foods due to interference effects?
85. During normal beating, the heart creates a maximum 4.0 0-mV potential across 0.300 m of a person’s chest, cre ating a
1.00-Hz electromagnetic wave.
(a) What is the maximum electric field strength create d?
(b) What is the corresponding maximum magnetic field s trength in the electromagnetic wave?
(c) What is the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave?
86. Distances in space are often quoted in units of light-yea rs, the distance light travels in 1 year.
(a) How many meters is a light-year?
(b) How many meters is it to Andromeda, the nearest large gala xy, given that it is ly away?
(c) The most distant galaxy yet discovered is ly away. How far is this in meters?
87. A certain 60.0-Hz ac power line radiates an electromag netic wave having a maximum electric field strength o f 13.0
kV/m.
(a) What is the wavelength of this very-low-frequency ele ctromagnetic wave?
(b) What type of electromagnetic radiation is this wave
(c) What is its maximum magnetic field strength?
88. (a) What is the frequency of the 193-nm ultraviolet radiation used in laser eye surgery? (b) Assuming the accuracy with
which this electromagnetic radiation can ablate (res hape) the cornea is directly proportional to wavelen gth, how much more
accurate can this UV radiation be than the shortest visible wa velength of light?
Additional Problems
89. In a region of space, the electric field is pointed alon g the x-axis, but its magnitude changes as described by

8.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76632where t is in nanoseconds and x is in cm. Find the displacement current through a ci rcle of radius 3 cm in the plane at
90. A microwave oven uses electromagnetic waves of frequen cy to heat foods. The waves reflect from the
inside walls of the oven to produce an interference pattern of standing waves whose antinodes are hot spots that can leave
observable pit marks in some foods. The pit marks a re measured to be 6.0 cm apart. Use the method employ ed by Heinrich
Hertz to calculate the speed of electromagnetic waves this i mplies.
Use the Appendix D for the next two exercises
91. Galileo proposed measuring the speed of light by unc overing a lantern and having an assistant a known dist ance away
uncover his lantern when he saw the light from Galileo ’s lantern, and timing the delay. How far away must the assistant be
for the delay to equal the human reaction time of about 0.25 s?
92. Show that the wave equation in one dimension
is satisfied by any doubly differentiable function of ei ther the form or.
93. On its highest power setting, a microwave oven increases the temperature of 0.400 kg of spaghetti by 45.0°C in 120 s.
(a) What was the rate of energy absorption by the sp aghetti, given that its specific heat is? Assume
the spaghetti is perfectly absorbing.
(b) Find the average intensity of the microwaves, given t hat they are absorbed over a circular area 20.0 cm in diamet er.
(c) What is the peak electric field strength of the micr owave?
(d) What is its peak magnetic field strength?
94. A certain microwave oven projects 1.00 kW of microwaves ont o a 30-cm-by-40-cm area.
(a) What is its intensity in?
(b) Calculate the maximum electric field strength in t hese waves.
(c) What is the maximum magnetic field strength?
95. Electromagnetic radiation from a 5.00-mW laser is concen trated on a area.
(a) What is the intensity in?
(b) Suppose a 2.00-nC electric charge is in the beam. What is the maximum electric force it experiences?
(c) If the electric charge moves at 400 m/s, what maximum m agnetic force can it feel?
96. A 200-turn flat coil of wire 30.0 cm in diameter act s as an antenna for FM radio at a frequency of 100 MHz. T he
magnetic field of the incoming electromagnetic wave is perpendicular to the coil and has a maximum stren gth of
(a) What power is incident on the coil?
(b) What average emf is induced in the coil over one-fou rth of a cycle?
(c) If the radio receiver has an inductance of 2.50μH, what capacitance must it have to resonate at 100 MHz?
97. Suppose a source of electromagnetic waves radiates uni formly in all directions in empty space where there a re no
absorption or interference effects.
(a) Show that the intensity is inversely proportional to, th e distance from the source squared.
(b) Show that the magnitudes of the electric and magnetic f ields are inversely proportional to r.

8.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7663298. A radio station broadcasts its radio waves with a power of 50,000 W. What would be the intensity of this signal if it is
received on a planet orbiting Proxima Centuri, the close st star to our Sun, at 4.243 ly away?
99. The Poynting vector describes a flow of energy whenever electric and magnetic fields are present. Consider a long
cylindrical wire of radius r with a current I in the wire, with resistance R and voltage V. From the expressions for the electric
field along the wire and the magnetic field around t he wire, obtain the magnitude and direction of the Po ynting vector at the
surface. Show that it accounts for an energy flow into the wire from the fields around it that accounts for th e Ohmic heating
of the wire.
100. The Sun’s energy strikes Earth at an intensity of. As sume as a model approximation that all of the light is
absorbed. (Actually, about 30% of the light intensity is r eflected out into space.)
(a) Calculate the total force that the Sun’s radiation exerts on Earth.
(b) Compare this to the force of gravity between the Sun and Earth.
Note: Earth’s mass is.
101. If a Lightsail spacecraft were sent on a Mars mission, by what fractio n would its propulsion force be reduced when it
reached Mars?
102. Lunar astronauts placed a reflector on the Moon’s su rface, off which a laser beam is periodically reflecte d. The distance
to the Moon is calculated from the round-trip time.
(a) To what accuracy in meters can the distance to the Moon be determined, if this time can be measured to 0.100 ns?
(b) What percent accuracy is this, given the average di stance to the Moon is 384,400 km?
103. Radar is used to determine distances to various objects by measuring the round-trip time for an echo from the obje ct.
(a) How far away is the planet Venus if the echo time is 1000 s?
(b) What is the echo time for a car 75.0 m from a highway p olice radar unit?
(c) How accurately (in nanoseconds) must you be able to measure the echo time to an airplane 12.0 km away to
determine its distance within 10.0 m?
104. Calculate the ratio of the highest to lowest frequen cies of electromagnetic waves the eye can see, given t he wavelength
range of visible light is from 380 to 760 nm. (Note that t he ratio of highest to lowest frequencies the ear can hear is 1000.)
105. How does the wavelength of radio waves for an AM radio sta tion broadcasting at 1030 KHz compare with the
wavelength of the lowest audible sound waves (of 20 Hz). The speed of sound in air at 20°C is about 343 m/s.
Challenge Problems
106. A parallel-plate capacitor with plate separation d is connected to a source of emf that places a time -dependent voltage
V(t) across its circular plates of radius and area (see belo w).
(a) Write an expression for the time rate of change of e nergy inside the capacitor in terms of V(t) and dV(t)/dt.
(b) Assuming that V(t) is increasing with time, identify the directions of the electric field lines inside the capacitor and
of the magnetic field lines at the edge of the regio n between the plates, and then the direction of the Po ynting vector
at this location.
(c) Obtain expressions for the time dependence of E(t), for B(t) from the displacement current, and for the magnitud e
of the Poynting vector at the edge of the region between t he plates.

8.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76632(d) From, obtain an expression in terms of V(t) and dV(t)/dt for the rate at which electromagnetic field energy en ters
the region between the plates.
(e) Compare the results of parts (a) and (d) and explain th e relationship between them.
107. A particle of cosmic dust has a density.
(a) Assuming the dust particles are spherical and lig ht absorbing, and are at the same distance as Earth from the Sun,
determine the particle size for which radiation press ure from sunlight is equal to the Sun’s force of grav ity on the dust
particle.
(b) Explain how the forces compare if the particle radius is smaller.
(c) Explain what this implies about the sizes of dust particle likely to be present in the inner solar sy stem compared
with outside the Oort cloud.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.8: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

8.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766338.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)
Key Terms
displacement currentextra term in Maxwell’s equations that is analogous to a real
current but accounts for a changing electric field p roducing a
magnetic field, even when the real current is present
gamma ray (ray)extremely high frequency electromagnetic radiation emitted by the
nucleus of an atom, either from natural nuclear deca y or induced
nuclear processes in nuclear reactors and weapons; the l ower end
of the -ray frequency range overlaps the upper end of the X-ray
range, but rays can have the highest frequency of an y
electromagnetic radiation
infrared radiationregion of the electromagnetic spectrum with a freque ncy range that
extends from just below the red region of the visible light
spectrum up to the microwave region, or from to
Maxwell’s equationsset of four equations that comprise a complete, overar ching theory
of electromagnetism
microwaveselectromagnetic waves with wavelengths in the range fr om 1 mm
to 1 m; they can be produced by currents in macroscop ic circuits
and devices
Poynting vectorvector equal to the cross product of the electric-and magnetic
fields, that describes the flow of electromagnetic ene rgy through a
surface
radarcommon application of microwaves; radar can determine the
distance to objects as diverse as clouds and aircraft, as well as
determine the speed of a car or the intensity of a ra instorm
radiation pressureforce divided by area applied by an electromagnetic wave on a
surface
radio waveselectromagnetic waves with wavelengths in the range fr om 1 mm
to 100 km; they are produced by currents in wires and circuits and
by astronomical phenomena
thermal agitationthermal motion of atoms and molecules in any object a t a
temperature above absolute zero, which causes them to emit and
absorb radiation
ultraviolet radiationelectromagnetic radiation in the range extending up ward in
frequency from violet light and overlapping with th e lowest X-ray
frequencies, with wavelengths from 400 nm down to abou t 10 nm
visible lightnarrow segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to which the
normal human eye responds, from about 400 to 750 nm
X-rayinvisible, penetrating form of very high frequency e lectromagnetic
radiation, overlapping both the ultraviolet range a nd the -ray
range

8.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76633Key Equations
Displacement current
Gauss’s law
Gauss’s law for magnetism
Faraday’s law
Ampère-Maxwell law
Wave equation for plane EM wave
Speed of EM waves
Ratio of E field to B field in electromagnetic wave
Energy flux (Poynting) vector
Average intensity of an electromagnetic wave
Radiation pressure
Summary
16.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) was one of the major c ontributors to physics in the nineteenth century. Altho ugh he died young,
he made major contributions to the development of th e kinetic theory of gases, to the understanding of co lor vision, and to the
nature of Saturn’s rings. He is best known for having c ombined existing knowledge of the laws of electricity a nd of magnetism
with insights of his own into a complete overarching electrom agnetic theory, represented by Maxwell’s equations.
Maxwell’s prediction of electromagnetic waves resulted fro m his formulation of a complete and symmetric theory of e lectricity
and magnetism, known as Maxwell’s equations.
The four Maxwell’s equations together with the Lorentz f orce law encompass the major laws of electricity and magne tism. The
first of these is Gauss’s law for electricity; the second is Gauss’s law for magnetism; the third is Faraday’s law of in duction
(including Lenz’s law); and the fourth is Ampère’s law in a symmetric formulation that adds another source of magn etism,
namely changing electric fields.
The symmetry introduced between electric and magnetic f ields through Maxwell’s displacement current explains the
mechanism of electromagnetic wave propagation, in which changing magnetic fields produce changing electric fi elds and vice
versa.
Although light was already known to be a wave, the nature of th e wave was not understood before Maxwell. Maxwell’s
equations also predicted electromagnetic waves with wavel engths and frequencies outside the range of light. These theoretical
predictions were first confirmed experimentally by Heinrich Hertz.
16.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a stri ng, water, or air. Perhaps the most significant predict ion of Maxwell’s
equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic (or electromagnetic) fields that propagat e through space as
electromagnetic waves. Because Maxwell’s equations hold in free space, the predicted electromagnetic waves, u nlike mechanical
waves, do not require a medium for their propagation.
Maxwell’s equations predict that the directions of the elec tric and magnetic fields of the wave, and the wave’s direc tion of
propagation, are all mutually perpendicular. The electr omagnetic wave is a transverse wave.

8.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76633The strengths of the electric and magnetic parts of the wa ve are related by, which implies that the magnetic field B is
very weak relative to the electric field E.
Accelerating charges create electromagnetic waves (for e xample, an oscillating current in a wire produces electrom agnetic
waves with the same frequency as the oscillation).
16.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
The energy carried by any wave is proportional to its ampli tude squared. For electromagnetic waves, this means inten sity can be
expressed as
where I is the average intensity in and is the maxi mum electric field strength of a continuous sinusoid al wave. This
can also be expressed in terms of the maximum magnetic fiel d strength as
and in terms of both electric and magnetic fields as
The three expressions for are all equivalent.
16.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
Electromagnetic waves carry momentum and exert radiatio n pressure.
The radiation pressure of an electromagnetic wave is dire ctly proportional to its energy density.
The pressure is equal to twice the electromagnetic energy intensity if the wave is reflected and equal to the incide nt energy
intensity if the wave is absorbed.
16.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The relationship among the speed of propagation, wavelen gth, and frequency for any wave is given by, so that for
electromagnetic waves,, where f is the frequency, is the wa velength, and c is the speed of light.
The electromagnetic spectrum is separated into many catego ries and subcategories, based on the frequency and wavel ength,
source, and uses of the electromagnetic waves.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.7: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Geometrical Optics
In this chapter, we study the basic properties of lig ht. In the next few chapters, we investigate the beha vior of light when it interacts
with optical devices such as mirrors, lenses, and apertures.
9.1: The Propagation of Light
9.2: The Law of Reflection
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
9.4: Refraction
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
9.7: Optical Instruments
9.8: The Eye
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.3: Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
9.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
9.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
9.8.8: Biology of vision
9.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
9.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
9.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)
This page titled 9: Geometrical Optics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766369.1: The Propagation of Light
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the index of refraction, given the speed of l ight in a medium
List the ways in which light travels from a source to ano ther location
Our investigation of light revolves around two questions of fundamental importance:
1. What is the nature of light, and
2. how does light behave under various circumstances?
Answers to these questions can be found in Maxwell’s equations, which predict the existence of electromagnetic waves and their
behavior. Examples of light include radio and infrar ed waves, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, and X-r ays. Interestingly, not all
light phenomena can be explained by Maxwell’s theory. Experiments performed early in the twentieth century showed that light
has corpuscular, or particle-like, properties. The i dea that light can display both wave and particle ch aracteristics is called waveparticle duality, which is examined in Photons and Matter Wa ves.
Figure: Due to total internal reflection, an underw ater swimmer’s image is reflected back into the water where the camera is
located. The circular ripple in the image center is actually on the water surface. Due to the viewing an gle, total internal reflection is
not occurring at the top edge of this image, and we can see a view of activities on the pool deck. (credi t: modification of work by
“jayhem”/Flickr)
In this chapter, we study the basic properties of lig ht. In the next few chapters, we investigate the beha vior of light when it interacts
with optical devices such as mirrors, lenses, and apertures.
This chapter introduces the major ideas of geometric optics, which describe the formation of images due to reflection and
refraction. It is called “geometric” optics because t he images can be characterized using geometric const ructions, such as ray
diagrams. We have seen that visible light is an elect romagnetic wave; however, its wave nature becomes eviden t only when light
interacts with objects with dimensions comparable to the wavelength (about 500 nm for visible light). The refore, the laws of
geometric optics only apply to light interacting with obje cts much larger than the wavelength of the light.Learning Objectives

9.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76636
Figure: Cloud Gate is a public sculpture by Anish Kapo or located in Millennium Park in Chicago. Its stainless steel plates
reflect and distort images around it, including the C hicago skyline. Dedicated in 2006, it has become a po pular tourist attraction,
illustrating how art can use the principles of physical optics to startle and entertain. (credit: modificati on of work by Dhilung Kirat)
The Speed of Light: Early Measurements
The first measurement of the speed of light was made by the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer (1644–1710) in 1 675. He studied the
orbit of Io, one of the four large moons of Jupiter, and found that it had a period of revolution of 42.5 h around Jupiter. He also
discovered that this value fluctuated by a few secon ds, depending on the position of Earth in its orbit a round the Sun. Roemer
realized that this fluctuation was due to the finite speed of light and could be used to determine c.
Roemer found the period of revolution of Io by meas uring the time interval between successive eclipses by Jupiter. Figure
shows the planetary configurations when such a measure ment is made from Earth in the part of its orbit whe re it is receding from
Jupiter. When Earth is at point A, Earth, Jupiter, and Io are aligned. The next time th is alignment occurs, Earth is at point B, and the
light carrying that information to Earth must trave l to that point. Since B is farther from Jupiter than A, light takes more time to
reach Earth when Earth is at B. Now imagine it is about 6 months later, and the plan ets are arranged as in Figure. The
measurement of Io’s period begins with Earth at poin t A' and Io eclipsed by Jupiter. The next eclipse the n occurs when Earth is at
point B', to which the light carrying the information of this eclipse must travel. Since B' is closer to J upiter than A', light takes less
time to reach Earth when it is at B'. This time interv al between the successive eclipses of Io seen at A' an d B' is therefore less than
the time interval between the eclipses seen at A and B. By measuring the difference in these time interva ls and with appropriate
knowledge of the distance between Jupiter and Earth, R oemer calculated that the speed of light was, which i s only
33% below the value accepted today.
Figure: Roemer’s astronomical method for determining the speed of light. Measurements of Io’s period done wi th the
configurations of parts (a) and (b) differ, because th e light path length and associated travel time increa se from A to B (a) but
decrease from A'A′ to B'B′ (b).
The first successful terrestrial measurement of the sp eed of light was made by Armand Fizeau (1819–1896) in 1849. He placed a
toothed wheel that could be rotated very rapidly on one hilltop and a mirror on a second hilltop 8 km a way (Figure). An
intense light source was placed behind the wheel, so t hat when the wheel rotated, it chopped the light beam into a succession of
pulses. The speed of the wheel was then adjusted until no light returned to the observer located behind t he wheel. This could only
happen if the wheel rotated through an angle corresp onding to a displacement of (n+½) teeth, while the pu lses traveled down to the

9.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76636mirror and back. Knowing the rotational speed of the wh eel, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the distanc e to the mirror,
Fizeau determined the speed of light to be, which is onl y 5% too high.
Figure: Fizeau’s method for measuring the speed of ligh t. The teeth of the wheel block the reflected light upon return when the
wheel is rotated at a rate that matches the light tra vel time to and from the mirror.
The French physicist Jean Bernard Léon Foucault (1819 –1868) modified Fizeau’s apparatus by replacing the t oothed wheel with a
rotating mirror. In 1862, he measured the speed of li ght to be 2.98×10 m/s, which is within 0.6% of the presen tly accepted value.
Albert Michelson (1852–1931) also used Foucault’s metho d on several occasions to measure the speed of light. His first
experiments were performed in 1878; by 1926, he had refine d the technique so well that he found c to be (2.99796±4)×10 m/s.
Today, the speed of light is known to great precisio n. In fact, the speed of light in a vacuum c is so important that it is accepted as
one of the basic physical quantities and has the value
where the approximate value of 3.00×10 m/s is used whenever three-digit accuracy is sufficient.
Speed of Light in Matter
The speed of light through matter is less than it is in a vacuum, because light interacts with atoms in a material. The speed of light
depends strongly on the type of material, since its i nteraction varies with different atoms, crystal latti ces, and other substructures.
We can define a constant of a material that describes the sp eed of light in it, called the index of refraction n:
where is the observed speed of light in the material.
Since the speed of light is always less than c in matter and equals c only in a vacuum, the index of refraction is always g reater than
or equal to one; that is, n≥1. Table gives the indic es of refraction for some representative substances. Th e values are listed for
a particular wavelength of light, because they vary sl ightly with wavelength. (This can have important effe cts, such as colors
separated by a prism, as we will see in Dispersion.) Note that for gases, n is close to 1.0. This seems reasonable, since atoms in
gases are widely separated, and light travels at c in the vacuum between atoms. It is common to take for gases unless great
precision is needed. Although the speed of light v in a medium varies considerably from its value c in a vacuum, it is still a large
speed.
Figure: Index of Refraction in Various MediaFor ligh t with a wavelength of 589 nm in a vacuum8

9.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76636Medium n
Gases at 0°C, 1 atm
Air 1.000293
Carbon dioxide 1.00045
Hydrogen 1.000139
Oxygen 1.000271
Liquids at 20°C
Benzene 1.501
Carbon disulfide 1.628
Carbon tetrachloride 1.461
Ethanol 1.361
Glycerine 1.473
Water, fresh 1.333
Solids at 20°C
Diamond 2.419
Fluorite 1.434
Glass, crown 1.52
Glass, flint 1.66
Ice (at 0°C)0°C) 1.309
Polystyrene 1.49
Plexiglas 1.51
Quartz, crystalline 1.544
Quartz, fused 1.458
Sodium chloride 1.544
Zircon 1.923
Example: Speed of Light in Jewelry
Calculate the speed of light in zircon, a material used in jewelry to imitate diamond.
Strategy
We can calculate the speed of light in a material from th e index of refraction of the material, using Equation \ red{index}
Solution
Rearranging Equation for gives us
The index of refraction for zircon is given as 1.92 3 in Table, and is given in Equation. Entering t hese values in the
equation gives

9.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76636Significance
This speed is slightly larger than half the speed of light in a vacuum and is still high compared with spee ds we normally
experience. The only substance listed in Table that h as a greater index of refraction than zircon is diam ond. We shall see
later that the large index of refraction for zircon mak es it sparkle more than glass, but less than diamond.
Table shows that ethanol and fresh water have very si milar indices of refraction. By what percentage do th e speeds of
light in these liquids differ?
Answer
2.1% (to two significant figures)
The Ray Model of Light
You have already studied some of the wave characteris tics of light in the previous chapter on Electromagnetic Waves. In this
chapter, we start mainly with the ray characteristics. T here are three ways in which light can travel from a so urce to another
location (Figure). It can come directly from the sour ce through empty space, such as from the Sun to Earth. Or light can travel
through various media, such as air and glass, to th e observer. Light can also arrive after being reflec ted, such as by a mirror. In all
of these cases, we can model the path of light as a straigh t line called a ray.
Figure: Three methods for light to travel from a sour ce to another location. (a) Light reaches the upper atmosphere of Earth,
traveling through empty space directly from the sourc e. (b) Light can reach a person by traveling through media like air and glass.
(c) Light can also reflect from an object like a mir ror. In the situations shown here, light interacts with objects large enough that it
travels in straight lines, like a ray.
Experiments show that when light interacts with an obje ct several times larger than its wavelength, it travels in straight lines and
acts like a ray. Its wave characteristics are not pron ounced in such situations. Since the wavelength of visi ble light is less than a
micron (a thousandth of a millimeter), it acts like a ray in the many common situations in which it encou nters objects larger than a
micron. For example, when visible light encounters anyt hing large enough that we can observe it with unaided eyes, such as a coin,
it acts like a ray, with generally negligible wave charact eristics.
In all of these cases, we can model the path of light a s straight lines. Light may change direction when it encounters objects (such
as a mirror) or in passing from one material to ano ther (such as in passing from air to glass), but it th en continues in a straight line
or as a ray. The word “ray” comes from mathematics an d here means a straight line that originates at some p oint. It is acceptable to
visualize light rays as laser rays. The ray model of light describes the path of light as straight lines.
Since light moves in straight lines, changing direct ions when it interacts with materials, its path is des cribed by geometry and
simple trigonometry. This part of optics, where the ray aspect of light dominates, is therefore called ge ometric optics. Two lawsExercise

9.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76636govern how light changes direction when it interacts with matter. These are the law of reflection, for situations in which light
bounces off matter, and the law of refraction, for situations in which light passes through matter. W e will examine more about each
of these laws in upcoming sections of this chapter.
This page titled 9.1: The Propagation of Light is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: The Propagation of Light by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
1.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.
2.1: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766379.2: The Law of Reflection
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the reflection of light from polished and rough s urfaces
Describe the principle and applications of corner reflec tors
Whenever we look into a mirror, or squint at sunlight glinting from a lake, we are seeing a reflection. Wh en you look at a piece of
white paper, you are seeing light scattered from it. L arge telescopes use reflection to form an image of st ars and other astronomical
objects.
The law of reflection states that the angle of reflection equals the angle o f incidence:
The law of reflection is illustrated in Figure, which also shows how the angle of incidence and angle of re flection are
measured relative to the perpendicular to the surface a t the point where the light ray strikes.
Figure: The law of reflection states that the angle o f reflection equals the angle of incidence—θ =θ. The angles are measured
relative to the perpendicular to the surface at the point where the ray strikes the surface.
We expect to see reflections from smooth surfaces, bu t Figure illustrates how a rough surface reflects light. Since the light
strikes different parts of the surface at different angles, it is reflected in many different directions, or diffused. Diffused light is what
allows us to see a sheet of paper from any angle, as shown in Figur e.
Figure: Light is diffused when it reflects from a roug h surface. Here, many parallel rays are incident, but they are reflected at
many different angles, because the surface is rough.
People, clothing, leaves, and walls all have rough surfac es and can be seen from all sides. A mirror, on the ot her hand, has a smooth
surface (compared with the wavelength of light) and r eflects light at specific angles, as illustrated in Figure. When the Moon
reflects from a lake, as shown in Figure, a combination of th ese effects takes place.Learning Objectives
r i

9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76637
Figure: (a) When a sheet of paper is illuminated with many parallel incident rays, it can be seen at many different angles,
because its surface is rough and diffuses the light. (b) A mirror illuminated by many parallel rays reflects t hem in only one
direction, because its surface is very smooth. Only the observer at a particular angle sees the reflected ligh t. (c) Moonlight is spread
out when it is reflected by the lake, because the surf ace is shiny but uneven. (credit c: modification of w ork by Diego Torres
Silvestre)
When you see yourself in a mirror, it appears that the image is actually behind the mirror (Figure). We see the light coming
from a direction determined by the law of reflection. The angles are such that the image is exactly the same distance behind the
mirror as you stand in front of the mirror. If the m irror is on the wall of a room, the images in it are a ll behind the mirror, which can
make the room seem bigger. Although these mirror imag es make objects appear to be where they cannot be (li ke behind a solid
wall), the images are not figments of your imaginatio n. Mirror images can be photographed and videotaped by instruments and
look just as they do with our eyes (which are optical instruments themselves). The precise manner in which im ages are formed by
mirrors and lenses is discussed in an upcoming chapter on Geometric Optics and Image Formation.
Figure: (a) Your image in a mirror is behind the mir ror. The two rays shown are those that strike the mirro r at just the correct
angles to be reflected into the eyes of the person. Th e image appears to be behind the mirror at the same d istance away as (b) if you
were looking at your twin directly, with no mirror.
Corner Reflectors (Retroreflectors)
A light ray that strikes an object consisting of two mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces is reflec ted back exactly parallel to the
direction from which it came (Figure). This is true whenever the reflecting surfaces are perpendicular, a nd it is independent of
the angle of incidence. Such an object is called a corner reflector, since the light bounces from its inside corner. Corn er reflectors
are a subclass of retroreflectors, which all reflect rays back in the directions from which they came. Alth ough the geometry of the
proof is much more complex, corner reflectors can a lso be built with three mutually perpendicular refle cting surfaces and are useful
in three-dimensional applications.

9.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76637
Figure: A light ray that strikes two mutually perpend icular reflecting surfaces is reflected back exactly p arallel to the direction
from which it came.
Many inexpensive reflector buttons on bicycles, cars, a nd warning signs have corner reflectors designed to ret urn light in the
direction from which it originated. Rather than simp ly reflecting light over a wide angle, retroreflecti on ensures high visibility if
the observer and the light source are located toget her, such as a car’s driver and headlights. The Apollo astronauts placed a true
corner reflector on the Moon (Figure). Laser signals from Earth can be bounced from that corner reflecto r to measure the
gradually increasing distance to the Moon of a few centimet ers per year.
Figure: (a) Astronauts placed a corner reflector on t he Moon to measure its gradually increasing orbital di stance. (b) The
bright spots on these bicycle safety reflectors are refl ections of the flash of the camera that took this pict ure on a dark night. (credit
a: modification of work by NASA; credit b: modificat ion of work by “Julo”/Wikimedia Commons)
Working on the same principle as these optical reflec tors, corner reflectors are routinely used as radar r eflectors (Figure) for
radio-frequency applications. Under most circumstance s, small boats made of fiberglass or wood do not str ongly reflect radio
waves emitted by radar systems. To make these boats v isible to radar (to avoid collisions, for example), ra dar reflectors are attached
to boats, usually in high places.
Figure: A radar reflector hoisted on a sailboat is a t ype of corner reflector. (credit: Tim Sheerman-Chase)

9.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76637As a counterexample, if you are interested in buildin g a stealth airplane, radar reflections should be mini mized to evade detection.
One of the design considerations would then be to avoid bui lding 90°90° corners into the airframe.
This page titled 9.2: The Law of Reflection is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: The Law of Reflection by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766419.3: Huygens’s Principle
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe Huygens’s principle
Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of reflection
Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of refraction
Use Huygens’s principle to explain diffraction
So far in this chapter, we have been discussing optical phenomena using the ray model of light. However, some phenomena require
analysis and explanations based on the wave characte ristics of light. This is particularly true when the wav elength is not negligible
compared to the dimensions of an optical device, suc h as a slit in the case of diffraction. Huygens’s principle is an indispensable
tool for this analysis.
Figure shows how a transverse wave looks as viewed from above and from the side. A light wave can be imagined to
propagate like this, although we do not actually see it wiggling through space. From above, we view the wave fronts (or wave
crests) as if we were looking down on ocean waves. The side view would be a graph of the electric or magnetic fi eld. The view
from above is perhaps more useful in developing concepts a bout wave optics.
Figure: A transverse wave, such as an electromagnetic l ight wave, as viewed from above and from the side. Th e direction of
propagation is perpendicular to the wave fronts (or w ave crests) and is represented by a ray.
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) dev eloped a useful technique for determining in detail how and where waves
propagate. Starting from some known position, Huygens’s p rinciple states that every point on a wave front is a so urce of wavelets
that spread out in the forward direction at the same speed a s the wave itself. The new wave front is tangent to all of the wavelets.
Figure shows how Huygens’s principle is applied. A wave front is the long edge that moves, for example, with t he crest or the
trough. Each point on the wave front emits a semicircu lar wave that moves at the propagation speed. We can draw these wavelets
at a time later, so that they have moved a distance. The new wave front is a plane tangent to the wavelet s and is where we
would expect the wave to be a time later. Huygens’s pr inciple works for all types of waves, including water wav es, sound waves,
and light waves. It is useful not only in describing h ow light waves propagate but also in explaining the l aws of reflection and
refraction. In addition, we will see that Huygens’s princip le tells us how and where light rays interfere.Learning Objectives

9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76641
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front. Each point on the wave front emits a semicirc ular wavelet that
moves a distance s=vt. The new wave front is a line tan gent to the wavelets.
Reflection
Figure shows how a mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law of reflection.
As the wave front strikes the mirror, wavelets are first e mitted from the left part of the mirror and then fro m the right. The wavelets
closer to the left have had time to travel farther, produc ing a wave front traveling in the direction shown.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront striking a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitte d as each point on
the wave front struck the mirror. The tangent to the se wavelets shows that the new wave front has been refle cted at an angle equal
to the incident angle. The direction of propagation is perpendicular to the wave front, as shown by the d ownward-pointing arrows.
Refraction
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Hu ygens’s principle to a wave front passing from one medi um to another
(Figure). Each wavelet in the figure was emitted when t he wave front crossed the interface between the media. Since the
speed of light is smaller in the second medium, the wav es do not travel as far in a given time, and the ne w wave front changes
direction as shown. This explains why a ray changes di rection to become closer to the perpendicular when l ight slows down.
Snell’s law can be derived from the geometry in Figure (Exa mple).

9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76641
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront traveling from one medium to another, where it s speed is less. The
ray bends toward the perpendicular, since the wavelet s have a lower speed in the second medium.
Example: Deriving the Law of Refraction
By examining the geometry of the wave fronts, derive the l aw of refraction.
Strategy
Consider Figure, which expands upon Figure. It shows th e incident wave front just reaching the surface at po int A,
while point B is still well within medium 1. In the time it takes f or a wavelet from to reach on the surface at speed
, a wavelet from travels into medium 2 a distance of, where. Note that in this example, is
slower than because.
Figure: Geometry of the law of refraction from medi um 1 to medium 2.
Solution
The segment on the surface AB' is shared by both the triangle ABB' inside medium 1 and the triangle AA′B′ i nside medium 2.
Note that from the geometry, the angle ∠BAB' is equal to the angle of incidence,. Similarly, is.
The length of AB' is given in two ways as
Inverting the equation and substituting AA'=cΔt/n from ab ove and similarly, we obtain2

9.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76641Cancellation of allows us to simplify this equation int o the familiar form
Significance
Although the law of refraction was established experime ntally by Snell, its derivation here requires Huygens’s principle a nd
the understanding that the speed of light is different in di fferent media.
In Example, we had. If were decreased such that a nd the speed of light in medium 2 is faster than in
medium 1, what would happen to the length of AA'? What would happen to the wave front A'B' and the direction of the
refracted ray?
Answer
AA′ becomes longer, A'B' tilts further away from the surface, and the refracted ray tilts away from the normal.
This applet by Walter Fendt shows an animation of reflection and refraction using Huygens’s wavelets while you control t he
parameters. Be sure to click on “Next step” to display the wavelets. You can see the reflected and refracted wave fronts
forming.
Diffraction
What happens when a wave passes through an opening, su ch as light shining through an open door into a dar k room? For light, we
observe a sharp shadow of the doorway on the floor of the room, and no visible light bends around corners into other parts of the
room. When sound passes through a door, we hear it eve rywhere in the room and thus observe that sound spread s out when passing
through such an opening (Figure). What is the diffe rence between the behavior of sound waves and light wa ves in this case?
The answer is that light has very short wavelengths and acts like a ray. Sound has wavelengths on the order of the size of the door
and bends around corners (for frequency of 1000 Hz,
about three times smaller than the width of the doorway).Exercise

9.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76641
Figure: (a) Light passing through a doorway makes a sha rp outline on the floor. Since light’s wavelength is very small
compared with the size of the door, it acts like a ra y. (b) Sound waves bend into all parts of the room, a wave effect, because their
wavelength is similar to the size of the door.
If we pass light through smaller openings such as slit s, we can use Huygens’s principle to see that light ben ds as sound does (Figure
). The bending of a wave around the edges of an openi ng or an obstacle is called diffraction. Diffraction is a wave
characteristic and occurs for all types of waves. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it is evidence that the phenomenon
is a wave. Thus, the horizontal diffraction of the l aser beam after it passes through the slits in Figure is evidence that light is a
wave.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront striking an opening. The edges of the wave front bend after passing
through the opening, a process called diffraction. Th e amount of bending is more extreme for a small openi ng, consistent with the
fact that wave characteristics are most noticeable for interactions with objects about the same size as the wa velength.
This page titled 9.3: Huygens’s Principle is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.7: Huygens’s Principle by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766389.4: Refraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how rays change direction upon entering a medium
Apply the law of refraction in problem solving
Explain the phenomenon of total internal reflection
Describe the workings and uses of optical fibers
Analyze the reason for the sparkle of diamonds
Explain the cause of dispersion in a prism
Describe the effects of dispersion in producing rainbo ws
Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of dispersi on
You may often notice some odd things when looking in to a fish tank. For example, you may see the same fish appearing to be in
two different places (Figure). This happens because lig ht coming from the fish to you changes direction when it leaves the
tank, and in this case, it can travel two different p aths to get to your eyes. The changing of a light r ay’s direction (loosely called
bending) when it passes through substances of differen t refractive indices is called refraction and is related to changes in the speed
of light,. Refraction is responsible for a tremendou s range of optical phenomena, from the action of lens es to data
transmission through optical fibers.
Figure: (a) Looking at the fish tank as shown, we can see the same fish in two different locations, because li ght changes
directions when it passes from water to air. In this case, the light can reach the observer by two different paths, so the fish seems to
be in two different places. This bending of light is c alled refraction and is responsible for many optical p henomena. (b) This image
shows refraction of light from a fish near the top of a fish tank.
Figure shows how a ray of light changes direction when it passes from one medium to another. As before, the a ngles are
measured relative to a perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it. (Some of the incident light is reflected
from the surface, but for now we concentrate on the l ight that is transmitted.) The change in direction of the light ray depends on
the relative values of the indices of refraction of the two media involved. In the situations shown, me dium 2 has a greater index of
refraction than medium 1. Note that as shown in Figure, the direction of the ray moves closer to the perp endicular when it
progresses from a medium with a lower index of refrac tion to one with a higher index of refraction. Conve rsely, as shown in FigureLearning Objectives

9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638, the direction of the ray moves away from the perpe ndicular when it progresses from a medium with a highe r index of
refraction to one with a lower index of refraction. The pat h is exactly reversible.
Figure: The change in direction of a light ray depe nds on how the index of refraction changes when it cr osses from one
medium to another. In the situations shown here, the i ndex of refraction is greater in medium 2 than in me dium 1. (a) A ray of light
moves closer to the perpendicular when entering a med ium with a higher index of refraction. (b) A ray of light moves away from
the perpendicular when entering a medium with a low er index of refraction.
The amount that a light ray changes its direction d epends both on the incident angle and the amount th at the speed changes. For a
ray at a given incident angle, a large change in spe ed causes a large change in direction and thus a la rge change in angle. The exact
mathematical relationship is the law of refraction, or Snell’s law, after the Dutch mathematician Willebrord Snell (1591–1626), who
discovered it in 1621. The law of refraction is stated in eq uation form as
Here (n_1\) and are the indices of refraction for m edia 1 and 2, and and are the angles between the ray s and the
perpendicular in media 1 and 2. The incoming ray is c alled the incident ray, the outgoing ray is called t he refracted ray, and the
associated angles are the incident angle and the refra cted angle, respectively.
Snell’s experiments showed that the law of refraction is obeyed and that a characteristic index of refraction could be assigned to a
given medium and its value measured. Snell was not aware that the speed of light varied in different media, a key fact used when
we derive the law of refraction theoretically using Huygens’s Principle.
Find the index of refraction for medium 2 in Figure, assuming medium 1 is air and given that the inciden t angle is 30.0°
and the angle of refraction is 22.0°.
Strategy
The index of refraction for air is taken to be 1 in most cases (and up to four significant figures, it is 1.000). Thus,
here. From the given information, and. With this in formation, the only unknown in Snell’s law is, so we
can use Snell’s law (Equation) to find it.
Solution
From Snell’s law (Equation), we have
Entering known values,Example: Determining the Index of Refraction

9.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638Significance
This is the index of refraction for water, and Snell cou ld have determined it by measuring the angles and p erforming this
calculation. He would then have found 1.33 to be the appropriate index of refraction for water in all oth er situations, such as
when a ray passes from water to glass. Today, we can verify that the index of refraction is related to the spe ed of light in a
medium by measuring that speed directly.
Explore bending of light between two media with different indices of refraction. Use the “Intro” simulation and see how
changing from air to water to glass changes the bendi ng angle. Use the protractor tool to measure the angle s and see if you can
recreate the configuration in Example. Also by measu rement, confirm that the angle of reflection equals the angle of
incidence.
Suppose that in a situation like that in Example, li ght goes from air to diamond and that the incident a ngle is 30.0°.
Calculate the angle of refraction θ in the diamond.
Strategy
Again, the index of refraction for air is taken to be n =1.00, and we are given θ =30.0°. We can look up the index of refraction
for diamond, finding n =2.419. The only unknown in Snell’s law is, wh ich we wish to determine.
Solution
Solving Snell’s law (Equation) for yields
Entering known values,
The angle is thus
Significance
For the same 30.0° angle of incidence, the angle of re fraction in diamond is significantly smaller than in water (11.9° rather
than 22.0°—see Example). This means there is a larger change in direction in diamond. The cause of a lar ge change in
direction is a large change in the index of refract ion (or speed). In general, the larger the change in speed, the greater the effect
on the direction of the ray.
The solid with the next highest index of refraction a fter diamond is zircon. If the diamond in Example were replaced with
a piece of zircon, what would be the new angle of refraction?
Answer
15.1°Example: A Larger Change in Direction
1 1
Exercise: Zircon

9.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638Total Internal Reflection
A good-quality mirror may reflect more than 90% of the light that falls on it, absorbing the rest. But i t would be useful to have a
mirror that reflects all of the light that falls on it. I nterestingly, we can produce total reflection using an as pect of refraction.
Consider what happens when a ray of light strikes the s urface between two materials, as shown in Figure. Part of the light
crosses the boundary and is refracted; the rest is r eflected. If, as shown in the figure, the index of ref raction for the second medium
is less than for the first, the ray bends away from th e perpendicular. (Since, the angle of refraction is greater than the angle
of incidence—that is,.) Now imagine what happens as the incident angle increases. This causes to increase also. The
largest the angle of refraction can be is, as shown in Figu re.
Figure: (a) A ray of light crosses a boundary where th e index of refraction decreases. That is,. The ray be nds away
from the perpendicular. (b) The critical angle θ is the angle of incidence for which the angle of refra ction is 90°. (c) Total internal
reflection occurs when the incident angle is greater than the critical angle.
The critical angle for a combination of materials is defined to be th e incident angle that produces an angle of refract ion of.
That is, is the incident angle for which. If the inci dent angle is greater than the critical angle, as sh own in Figure
, then all of the light is reflected back into medi um 1, a condition called total internal reflection. (As Figure shows, the
reflected rays obey the law of reflection so that the angle of reflection is equal to the angle o f incidence in all three cases.)
Snell’s law states the relationship between angles and indices of refr action. It is given by
When the incident angle equals the critical angle (), the angle of refraction is (). Noting that, Snell’s
law in this case becomes
The critical angle for a given combination of materia ls is thus
for.
Total internal reflection occurs for any incident a ngle greater than the critical angle, and it can o nly occur when the second
medium has an index of refraction less than the firs t. Note that this equation is written for a light ray that travels in medium 1 and
reflects from medium 2, as shown in Figure.
Example: Determining a Critical Angle
What is the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air? The index of refraction
for polystyrene is 1.49.
Strategy
The index of refraction of air can be taken to be 1.00, as before. Thus, the condition that the second me dium (air) has an index
of refraction less than the first (plastic) is satisfied, and we can use the equationc

9.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638to find the critical angle, where and.
Solution
Substituting the identified values gives
Significance
This result means that any ray of light inside the pl astic that strikes the surface at an angle greater tha n 42.2° is totally
reflected. This makes the inside surface of the clea r plastic a perfect mirror for such rays, without any need for the silvering
used on common mirrors. Different combinations of mater ials have different critical angles, but any combina tion with
can produce total internal reflection. The same cal culation as made here shows that the critical angle for a ray going from water
to air is 48.6°, whereas that from diamond to air is 24.4°, a nd that from flint glass to crown glass is 66.3°.
At the surface between air and water, light rays can g o from air to water and from water to air. For which ray is there no
possibility of total internal reflection?
Answer
air to water, because the condition that the second me dium must have a smaller index of refraction is not satisfied
In the photo that opens this chapter, the image of a swimmer underwater is captured by a camera that is a lso underwater. The
swimmer in the upper half of the photograph, apparen tly facing upward, is, in fact, a reflected image of the swimmer below. The
circular ripple near the photograph’s center is actua lly on the water surface. The undisturbed water surro unding it makes a good
reflecting surface when viewed from below, thanks to to tal internal reflection. However, at the very top edge of this photograph,
rays from below strike the surface with incident angle s less than the critical angle, allowing the camera to capture a view of
activities on the pool deck above water.
Fiber optics is one application of total internal re flection that is in wide use. In communications, it is used to transmit
telephone, internet, and cable TV signals. Fiber opti cs employs the transmission of light down fibers of pl astic or glass.
Because the fibers are thin, light entering one is l ikely to strike the inside surface at an angle greate r than the critical angle and,
thus, be totally reflected (Figure). The index of re fraction outside the fiber must be smaller than insi de. In fact, most fibers
have a varying refractive index to allow more light to be guided along the fiber through total internal refraction. Rays are
reflected around corners as shown, making the fibers into ti ny light pipes.Exercise
Fiber Optics: Endoscopes to Telephones

9.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638
Figure: Light entering a thin optic fiber may strike the inside surface at large or grazing angles and is c ompletely reflected
if these angles exceed the critical angle. Such rays co ntinue down the fiber, even following it around cor ners, since the angles
of reflection and incidence remain large.
Bundles of fibers can be used to transmit an image with out a lens, as illustrated in Figure. The output of a device called an
endoscope is shown in Figure. Endoscopes are used to e xplore the interior of the body through its natural orifices or
minor incisions. Light is transmitted down one fiber bundle to illuminate internal parts, and the reflec ted light is transmitted
back out through another bundle to be observed.
Figure: (a) An image “A” is transmitted by a bundle o f optical fibers. (b) An endoscope is used to probe the body, both
transmitting light to the interior and returning an image such as the one shown of a human epiglottis (a str ucture at the base of
the tongue). (credit b: modification of work by “Me d_Chaos”/Wikimedia Commons)
Fiber optics has revolutionized surgical techniques and observations within the body, with a host of medica l diagnostic and
therapeutic uses. Surgery can be performed, such as a rthroscopic surgery on a knee or shoulder joint, emp loying cutting tools
attached to and observed with the endoscope. Samples can also be obtained, such as by lassoing an intestinal polyp for external
examination. The flexibility of the fiber optic bund le allows doctors to navigate it around small and dif ficult-to-reach regions in
the body, such as the intestines, the heart, blood ves sels, and joints. Transmission of an intense laser beam to burn away
obstructing plaques in major arteries, as well as del ivering light to activate chemotherapy drugs, are b ecoming commonplace.
Optical fibers have in fact enabled microsurgery and remote surgery where the incisions are small and the surgeon’s fingers do
not need to touch the diseased tissue.
Optical fibers in bundles are surrounded by a cladding material that has a lower index of refraction than t he core (Figure).
The cladding prevents light from being transmitted between fibers in a bundle. Without cladding, light co uld pass between

9.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638fibers in contact, since their indices of refraction a re identical. Since no light gets into the cladding (there is total internal
reflection back into the core), none can be transmit ted between clad fibers that are in contact with one another. Instead, the
light is propagated along the length of the fiber, minimizing the loss of signal and ensuring that a q uality image is formed at the
other end. The cladding and an additional protective la yer make optical fibers durable as well as flexible.
Figure: Fibers in bundles are clad by a material that has a lower index of refraction than the core to en sure total internal
reflection, even when fibers are in contact with one another.
Special tiny lenses that can be attached to the ends o f bundles of fibers have been designed and fabricat ed. Light emerging
from a fiber bundle can be focused through such a le ns, imaging a tiny spot. In some cases, the spot can be sc anned, allowing
quality imaging of a region inside the body. Special minute optical filters inserted at the end of the fiber bundle have the
capacity to image the interior of organs located te ns of microns below the surface without cutting the s urface—an area known
as nonintrusive diagnostics. This is particularly useful f or determining the extent of cancers in the stomach and bowe l.
In another type of application, optical fibers are commonly used to carry signals for telephone conversa tions and internet
communications. Extensive optical fiber cables have be en placed on the ocean floor and underground to ena ble optical
communications. Optical fiber communication systems off er several advantages over electrical (copper)-base d systems,
particularly for long distances. The fibers can be mad e so transparent that light can travel many kilomet ers before it becomes
dim enough to require amplification—much superior t o copper conductors. This property of optical fibers is called low loss.
Lasers emit light with characteristics that allow far mo re conversations in one fiber than are possible with electric signals on a
single conductor. This property of optical fibers is called high bandwidth. Optical signals in one fiber do not produce
undesirable effects in other adjacent fibers. This property of optical fibers is called reduced crosstal k. We shall explore the
unique characteristics of laser radiation in a later ch apter.
Corner Reflectors and Diamonds
Corner reflectors are perfectly efficient when the conditions for tota l internal reflection are satisfied. With common mat erials, it is
easy to obtain a critical angle that is less than 45 °. One use of these perfect mirrors is in binoculars, as s hown in Figure.
Another use is in periscopes found in submarines.

9.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638
Figure: These binoculars employ corner reflectors (pri sms) with total internal reflection to get light to t he observer’s eyes.
Total internal reflection, coupled with a large inde x of refraction, explains why diamonds sparkle more than other materials. The
critical angle for a diamond-to-air surface is only 24.4°, so when light enters a diamond, it has trouble gett ing back out (Figure
). Although light freely enters the diamond, it can e xit only if it makes an angle less than 24.4°. Facets o n diamonds are
specifically intended to make this unlikely. Good dia monds are very clear, so that the light makes many in ternal reflections and is
concentrated before exiting—hence the bright sparkle. (Zircon is a natural gemstone that has an exception ally large index of
refraction, but it is not as large as diamond, so it is not as highly prized. Cubic zirconia is manufac tured and has an even higher
index of refraction (≈ 2.17), but it is still less than that of diamond.) The col ors you see emerging from a clear diamond are not due
to the diamond’s color, which is usually nearly color less, but result from dispersion. Colored diamonds get their color from
structural defects of the crystal lattice and the in clusion of minute quantities of graphite and other materials. The Argyle Mine in
Western Australia produces around 90% of the world’s pi nk, red, champagne, and cognac diamonds, whereas around 50% of the
world’s clear diamonds come from central and southern Afr ica.
Figure: Light cannot easily escape a diamond, because its critical angle with air is so small. Most reflection s are total, and the
facets are placed so that light can exit only in part icular ways—thus concentrating the light and making t he diamond sparkle
brightly.
Dispersion
Everyone enjoys the spectacle of a rainbow glimmering against a dark stormy sky. How does sunlight falling on clear drops of rain
get broken into the rainbow of colors we see? The same process causes white light to be broken into colors by a clear glass prism or
a diamond (Figure).

9.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638
Figure: The colors of the rainbow (a) and those produ ced by a prism (b) are identical. (credit a: modific ation of work by
“Alfredo55”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modificatio n of work by NASA)
We see about six colors in a rainbow—red, orange, yel low, green, blue, and violet; sometimes indigo is liste d, too. These colors are
associated with different wavelengths of light, as shown in Figure. When our eye receives pure-wavelength lig ht, we tend to
see only one of the six colors, depending on wavelengt h. The thousands of other hues we can sense in other s ituations are our eye’s
response to various mixtures of wavelengths. White li ght, in particular, is a fairly uniform mixture of al l visible wavelengths.
Sunlight, considered to be white, actually appears to b e a bit yellow, because of its mixture of wavelengths, b ut it does contain all
visible wavelengths. The sequence of colors in rainbows i s the same sequence as the colors shown in the figure. This implies that
white light is spread out in a rainbow according to wav elength. Dispersion is defined as the spreading of whit e light into its full
spectrum of wavelengths. More technically, dispersion occu rs whenever the propagation of light depends on wavelength.
Figure: Even though rainbows are associated with six co lors, the rainbow is a continuous distribution of color s according to
wavelengths.
Any type of wave can exhibit dispersion. For example, so und waves, all types of electromagnetic waves, and water waves can be
dispersed according to wavelength. Dispersion may requir e special circumstances and can result in spectacula r displays such as in
the production of a rainbow. This is also true for so und, since all frequencies ordinarily travel at the s ame speed. If you listen to
sound through a long tube, such as a vacuum cleaner hose, you can easily hear it dispersed by interacti on with the tube. Dispersion,
in fact, can reveal a great deal about what the wave has encountered that disperses its wavelengths. The dispe rsion of
electromagnetic radiation from outer space, for exa mple, has revealed much about what exists between the stars—the so-called
interstellar medium.
Nick Moore’s video discusses dispersion of a pulse as he taps a long spring. Follow his explanation as Moore r eplays the highspeed footage showing high frequency waves outrunning the lower frequency waves. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=KbmOcT5sX7I
Acoustic Dispersion in a SpringAcoustic Dispersion in a Spring

9.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638Refraction is responsible for dispersion in rainbows and many other situations. The angle of refraction d epends on the index of
refraction, as we know from Snell’s law. We know that th e index of refraction n depends on the medium. But for a given medium,
n also depends on wavelength (Table).
Table: Index of Refraction () in Selected Media at Various Wavelengths
Medium Red (660 nm)Orange (610
nm)Yellow (580 nm) Green (550 nm) Blue (470 nm) Violet (410 nm)
Water 1.331 1.332 1.333 1.335 1.338 1.342
Diamond 2.410 2.415 2.417 2.426 2.444 2.458
Glass, crown 1.512 1.514 1.518 1.519 1.524 1.530
Glass, flint 1.662 1.665 1.667 1.674 1.684 1.698
Polystyrene 1.488 1.490 1.492 1.493 1.499 1.506
Quartz, fused 1.455 1.456 1.458 1.459 1.462 1.468
Note that for a given medium, n increases as wavelength decreases and is greatest for v iolet light. Thus, violet light is bent more
than red light, as shown for a prism in Figure. White light is dispersed into the same sequence of waveleng ths as seen in
Figures and.
Figure: (a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refracted at both surfaces. (b) White ligh t is dispersed by the
prism (shown exaggerated). Since the index of refracti on varies with wavelength, the angles of refraction v ary with wavelength. A
sequence of red to violet is produced, because the ind ex of refraction increases steadily with decreasing wav elength.
Example: Dispersion of White Light by Flint Glass
A beam of white light goes from air into flint glass at an incidence angle of 43.2°. What is the angle be tween the red (660 nm)
and violet (410 nm) parts of the refracted light?

9.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638
Strategy
Values for the indices of refraction for flint glass at various wavelengths are listed in Table. Use these values for calculate
the angle of refraction for each color and then take the di fference to find the dispersion angle.
Solution
Applying the law of refraction for the red part of the be am
we can solve for the angle of refraction as
Similarly, the angle of incidence for the violet part of the beam is
The difference between these two angles is
Significance
Although 0.6° may seem like a negligibly small angle, i f this beam is allowed to propagate a long enough dist ance, the
dispersion of colors becomes quite noticeable.
In the preceding example, how much distance inside th e block of flint glass would the red and the violet r ays have to progress
before they are separated by 1.0 mm?
Answer
9.3 cm
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection. You may have noticed that you see a rainbow only when you
look away from the Sun. Light enters a drop of water and is ref lected from the back of the drop (Figure).Exercise

9.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76638
Figure: A ray of light falling on this water drop en ters and is reflected from the back of the drop. This light is refracted and
dispersed both as it enters and as it leaves the drop.
The light is refracted both as it enters and as it l eaves the drop. Since the index of refraction of water varies with wavelength, the
light is dispersed, and a rainbow is observed (Figure). (No dispersion occurs at the back surface, because the l aw of
reflection does not depend on wavelength.) The actua l rainbow of colors seen by an observer depends on th e myriad rays being
refracted and reflected toward the observer’s eyes fr om numerous drops of water. The effect is most spectac ular when the
background is dark, as in stormy weather, but can also be observed in waterfalls and lawn sprinklers. The arc o f a rainbow comes
from the need to be looking at a specific angle rel ative to the direction of the Sun, as illustrated in Figure. If two reflections
of light occur within the water drop, another “second ary” rainbow is produced. This rare event produces an a rc that lies above the
primary rainbow arc, as in Figure, and produces colors i n the reverse order of the primary rainbow, with red at the lowest
angle and violet at the largest angle.
Figure: (a) Different colors emerge in different dir ections, and so you must look at different locations to see the various colors
of a rainbow. (b) The arc of a rainbow results from t he fact that a line between the observer and any poi nt on the arc must make the
correct angle with the parallel rays of sunlight for the observer to receive the refracted rays. (c) Doubl e rainbow. (credit c:
modification of work by “Nicholas”/Wikimedia Commons)
Dispersion may produce beautiful rainbows, but it can c ause problems in optical systems. White light used to t ransmit messages in
a fiber is dispersed, spreading out in time and eve ntually overlapping with other messages. Since a laser produces a nearly pure
wavelength, its light experiences little dispersion, an advantage over white light for transmission of informa tion. In contrast,
dispersion of electromagnetic waves coming to us from outer space can be used to determine the amount of matter they pass
through.
This page titled 9.4: Refraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
1.4: Refraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.
1.5: Total Internal Reflection by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

9.4.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766381.6: Dispersion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766619.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how an image is formed by a plane mirror.
Distinguish between real and virtual images.
Find the location and characterize the orientation of an im age created by a plane mirror.
Describe image formation by spherical mirrors.
Use ray diagrams and the mirror equation to calculate the p roperties of an image in a spherical mirror.
Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
You only have to look as far as the nearest bathroom to find an example of an image formed by a mirror. I mages in a plane mirror
are the same size as the object, are located behind the mi rror, and are oriented in the same direction as the object (i.e., “upright”).
To understand how this happens, consider Figure. Two r ays emerge from point, strike the mirror, and refle ct into the
observer’s eye. Note that we use the law of reflection to construct the reflected rays. If the reflected ray s are extended backward
behind the mirror (see dashed lines), they seem to ori ginate from point. This is where the image of point is located. If we
repeat this process for point, we obtain its image at point. You should convince yourself by using basic geometry that the
image height (the distance from to) is the same as the object height (the distance from to). By formi ng images of all
points of the object, we obtain an upright image of the obje ct behind the mirror.
Figure. Two light rays originating from point P on a n object are reflected by a flat mirror into the ey e of an observer. The
reflected rays are obtained by using the law of refle ction. Extending these reflected rays backward, they seem to come from point Q
behind the mirror, which is where the virtual image is located. Repeating this process for point P′ gives the image point Q′. The
image height is thus the same as the object height, the image is upright, and the object distance d is the sam e as the image distance
d. (credit: modification of work by Kevin Dufendach)
Notice that the reflected rays appear to the observe r to come directly from the image behind the mirror. In reality, these rays come
from the points on the mirror where they are reflect ed. The image behind the mirror is called a virtual image because it cannot be
projected onto a screen—the rays only appear to ori ginate from a common point behind the mirror. If you walk behind the mirror,
you cannot see the image, because the rays do not go there. However, in front of the mirror, the rays behave exactly as if they come
from behind the mirror, so that is where the virtual im age is located.
Later in this chapter, we discuss real images; a real image can be projected onto a screen because the r ays physically go through the
image. You can certainly see both real and virtual im ages. The difference is that a virtual image cannot b e projected onto a screen,
whereas a real image can.Learning Objectives
o
i

9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661Locating an Image in a Plane Mirror
The law of reflection tells us that the angle of inci dence is the same as the angle of reflection. Applyi ng this to triangles and
in Figure and using basic geometry shows that they are congruent triangles. This means that the distance f rom the
object to the mirror is the same as the distance f rom the mirror to the image. The object distance (d enoted) is the distance
from the mirror to the object (or, more generally, f rom the center of the optical element that creates its image). Similarly, the image
distance (denoted) is the distance from the mirror t o the image (or, more generally, from the center of the optical element that
creates it). If we measure distances from the mirror, t hen the object and image are in opposite directions, so for a plane mirror, the
object and image distances should have the opposite sign s:
An extended object such as the container in Figure ca n be treated as a collection of points, and we can ap ply the method above
to locate the image of each point on the extended obje ct, thus forming the extended image.
Multiple Images
If an object is situated in front of two mirrors, you m ay see images in both mirrors. In addition, the image in the first mirror may act
as an object for the second mirror, so the second mirr or may form an image of the image. If the mirrors ar e placed parallel to each
other and the object is placed at a point other than the midpoint between them, then this process of image -of-an-image continues
without end, as you may have noticed when standing in a hallway with mirrors on each side. This is shown in Figur e, which
shows three images produced by the blue object. Notic e that each reflection reverses front and back, just like pulling a right-hand
glove inside out produces a left-hand glove (this is why a reflection of your right hand is a left hand). T hus, the fronts and backs of
images 1 and 2 are both inverted with respect to the object, and the front and back of image 3 is inver ted with respect to image 2,
which is the object for image 3.
Figure. Two parallel mirrors can produce, in theory, an infinite number of images of an object placed of f center between the
mirrors. Three of these images are shown here. The fron t and back of each image is inverted with respect to its object. Note that the
colors are only to identify the images. For normal mir rors, the color of an image is essentially the same as th at of its object.
You may have noticed that image 3 is smaller than th e object, whereas images 1 and 2 are the same size a s the object. The ratio of
the image height with respect to the object height is ca lled magnification. More will be said about magnification in the next section.
Infinite reflections may terminate. For instance, two m irrors at right angles form three images, as shown in Figure. Images 1
and 2 result from rays that reflect from only a sin gle mirror, but image 1,2 is formed by rays that refl ect from both mirrors. This is
shown in the ray-tracing diagram in (\PageIndex{3b}\). To find image 1,2, you have to look behind the corner of the two mirrors.

9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661
Figure. Two mirrors can produce multiple images. (a) Three images of a plastic head are visible in the two mirrors at a right
angle. (b) A single object reflecting from two mirro rs at a right angle can produce three images, as shown by the green, purple, and
red images.
Images Formed by Spherical Mirrors
The image in a plane mirror has the same size as the object, is upright, and is the same distance behind t he mirror as the object is in
front of the mirror. A curved mirror, on the other h and, can form images that may be larger or smaller than the object and may form
either in front of the mirror or behind it. In gener al, any curved surface will form an image, although so me images make be so
distorted as to be unrecognizable (think of fun hou se mirrors). Because curved mirrors can create such a rich variety of images,
they are used in many optical devices that find man y uses. We will concentrate on spherical mirrors for the most part, because they
are easier to manufacture than mirrors such as parabol ic mirrors and so are more common.
Curved Mirrors
We can define two general types of spherical mirrors. If the reflecting surface is the outer side of the s phere, the mirror is called a
convex mirror. If the inside surface is the reflecting surface, it is ca lled a concave mirror.
Symmetry is one of the major hallmarks of many optic al devices, including mirrors and lenses. The symmetry a xis of such optical
elements is often called the principal axis or optic al axis. For a spherical mirror, the optical axis passe s through the mirror’s center
of curvature and the mirror’s vertex, as shown in Figure.
Figure. A spherical mirror is formed by cutting out a piece of a sphere and silvering either the inside or outside surface. A
concave mirror has silvering on the interior surface (think “cave”), and a convex mirror has silvering on t he exterior surface.

9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661Consider rays that are parallel to the optical axis of a parabolic mirror, as shown in Figure. Following th e law of reflection,
these rays are reflected so that they converge at a point, called the focal point. Figure shows a spherical mirror that is large
compared with its radius of curvature. For this mirror, the reflected rays do not cross at the same point, so the mirror does not have
a well-defined focal point. This is called spherical aberration and results in a blurred image of an extended objec t. Figure
shows a spherical mirror that is small compared to it s radius of curvature. This mirror is a good approxima tion of a parabolic
mirror, so rays that arrive parallel to the optical axis are reflected to a well-defined focal point. The distance along the optical axis
from the mirror to the focal point is called the focal l ength of the mirror.
Figure: (a) Parallel rays reflected from a parabolic mirror cross at a single point called the focal point F. (b) Parallel rays
reflected from a large spherical mirror do not cross a t a common point. (c) If a spherical mirror is small c ompared with its radius of
curvature, it better approximates the central part o f a parabolic mirror, so parallel rays essentially cross at a common point. The
distance along the optical axis from the mirror to th e focal point is the focal length f of the mirror.
A convex spherical mirror also has a focal point, as shown in Figure. Incident rays parallel to the optica l axis are reflected
from the mirror and seem to originate from point a t focal length behind the mirror. Thus, the focal point is virtual because no
real rays actually pass through it; they only appear to or iginate from it.
Figure: (a) Rays reflected by a convex spherical mirr or: Incident rays of light parallel to the optical a xis are reflected from a
convex spherical mirror and seem to originate from a well-defined focal point at focal distance f on the opposite side of the mirror.
The focal point is virtual because no real rays pass thr ough it. (b) Photograph of a virtual image formed by a convex mirror. (credit
b: modification of work by Jenny Downing)
How does the focal length of a mirror relate to the m irror’s radius of curvature? Figure shows a single r ay that is reflected by a
spherical concave mirror. The incident ray is parall el to the optical axis. The point at which the refle cted ray crosses the optical axis
is the focal point. Note that all incident rays that are parallel to the optical axis are reflected throu gh the focal point—we only show
one ray for simplicity. We want to find how the focal length (denoted by) relates to the radius of curv ature of the mirror,,
whose length is

9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661The law of reflection tells us that angles and are the same, and because the incident ray is parallel to the optical axis,
angles and are also the same. Thus, triangle is an iso sceles triangle with. If the angle is small then
which is called the “ small-angle approximation ”), then or. Inserting this into Equation for the radius,
we get
In other words, in the small-angle approximation, the focal length of a concave spherical mirror is half of its radius of curvature,
In this chapter, we assume that the small-angle approximation (also called the paraxial approximation) is always valid. In this
approximation, all rays are paraxial rays, which means t hat they make a small angle with the optical axis and are at a distance much
less than the radius of curvature from the optical axis. In this case, their angles of reflection are small angles, so
Figure: Reflection in a concave mirror. In the small -angle approximation, a ray that is parallel to the optical axis CP is
reflected through the focal point F of the mirror.
Using Ray Tracing to Locate Images
To find the location of an image formed by a spheri cal mirror, we first use ray tracing, which is the techni que of drawing rays and
using the law of reflection to determine the reflect ed rays (later, for lenses, we use the law of refractio n to determine refracted
rays). Combined with some basic geometry, we can use ray tracing to find the focal point, the image location, and other
information about how a mirror manipulates light. In fact, we already used ray tracing above to locate th e focal point of spherical
mirrors, or the image distance of flat mirrors. To loca te the image of an object, you must locate at least two points of the image.
Locating each point requires drawing at least two ray s from a point on the object and constructing their reflected rays. The point at
which the reflected rays intersect, either in real spac e or in virtual space, is where the corresponding poin t of the image is located.
To make ray tracing easier, we concentrate on four “princ ipal” rays whose reflections are easy to construct.
Figure shows a concave mirror and a convex mirror, ea ch with an arrow-shaped object in front of it. These ar e the objects
whose images we want to locate by ray tracing. To do so, we draw rays from point that is on the object but n ot on the optical
axis. We choose to draw our ray from the tip of the obj ect. Principal ray 1 goes from point and travels para llel to the optical axis.
The reflection of this ray must pass through the foc al point, as discussed above. Thus, for the concave m irror, the reflection of
principal ray 1 goes through focal point, as shown i n Figure. For the convex mirror, the backward extensio n of the
reflection of principal ray 1 goes through the foca l point (i.e., a virtual focus). Principal ray 2 trave ls first on the line going through
the focal point and then is reflected back along a line parallel to the optical axis. Principal ray 3 tr avels toward the center of

9.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661curvature of the mirror, so it strikes the mirror at normal incidence and is reflected back along the li ne from which it came. Finally,
principal ray 4 strikes the vertex of the mirror and is re flected symmetrically about the optical axis.
Figure: The four principal rays shown for both (a) a concave mirror and (b) a convex mirror. The image f orms where the rays
intersect (for real images) or where their backward e xtensions intersect (for virtual images).
The four principal rays intersect at point, which i s where the image of point is located. To locate poi nt, drawing any two of
these principle rays would suffice. We are thus free to choose whichever of the principal rays we desire to l ocate the image.
Drawing more than two principal rays is sometimes useful to verif y that the ray tracing is correct.
To completely locate the extended image, we need to locate a second point in the image, so that we know ho w the image is
oriented. To do this, we trace the principal rays from the base of the object. In this case, all four princ ipal rays run along the optical
axis, reflect from the mirror, and then run back along the optical axis. The difficulty is that, because t hese rays are collinear, we
cannot determine a unique point where they intersect. All we know is that the base of the image is on the o ptical axis. However,
because the mirror is symmetrical from top to botto m, it does not change the vertical orientation of t he object. Thus, because the
object is vertical, the image must be vertical. Ther efore, the image of the base of the object is on the optical axis directly above the
image of the tip, as drawn in the figure.
For the concave mirror, the extended image in this ca se forms between the focal point and the center of c urvature of the mirror. It is
inverted with respect to the object, is a real image, and is smaller than the object. Were we to move the o bject closer to or farther
from the mirror, the characteristics of the image wo uld change. For example, we show, as a later exercise, tha t an object placed
between a concave mirror and its focal point leads t o a virtual image that is upright and larger than th e object. For the convex
mirror, the extended image forms between the focal p oint and the mirror. It is upright with respect to the object, is a virtual image,
and is smaller than the object.
Ray tracing is very useful for mirrors. The rules for ray tracing are summarized here for reference:
A ray traveling parallel to the optical axis of a spher ical mirror is reflected along a line that goes through t he focal point of
the mirror (ray 1 in Figure).Ray-Tracing Rules

9.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661A ray traveling along a line that goes through the focal point of a spherical mirror is reflected along a line pa rallel to the
optical axis of the mirror (ray 2 in Figure).
A ray traveling along a line that goes through the cente r of curvature of a spherical mirror is reflected back alo ng the same
line (ray 3 in Figure).
A ray that strikes the vertex of a spherical mirror is ref lected symmetrically about the optical axis of the mirro r (ray 4 in
Figure).
We use ray tracing to illustrate how images are forme d by mirrors and to obtain numerical information ab out optical properties
of the mirror. If we assume that a mirror is small comp ared with its radius of curvature, we can also use alge bra and geometry
to derive a mirror equation, which we do in the next section. Combining ray tracing with the mirror equat ion is a good way to
analyze mirror systems.
Image Formation by Reflection—The Mirror Equation
For a plane mirror, we showed that the image formed has the same height and orientation as the object, and it is located at the same
distance behind the mirror as the object is in fron t of the mirror. Although the situation is a bit more complicated for curved
mirrors, using geometry leads to simple formulas relat ing the object and image distances to the focal len gths of concave and
convex mirrors.
Figure: Image formed by a concave mirror.
Consider the object shown in Figure. The center of c urvature of the mirror is labeled and is a distance from the vertex
of the mirror, as marked in the figure. The object a nd image distances are labeled and, and the object and image heights are
labeled and, respectively. Because the angles and are alternate interior angles, we know that they have t he same
magnitude. However, they must differ in sign if we meas ure angles from the optical axis, so. An analogous sce nario holds
for the angles and. The law of reflection tells us that they have the same magnitude, but their signs m ust differ if we measure
angles from the optical axis. Thus,. Taking the tan gent of the angles and, and using the property th at,
gives us
or
Similarly, taking the tangent of and gives

9.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661or
Combining Equation and gives
After a little algebra, this becomes
No approximation is required for this result, so it i s exact. However, as discussed above, in the small-angle a pproximation, the focal
length of a spherical mirror is one-half the radius of curvature of the mirror, or. Inserting this into Equation gives the
mirror equation:
The mirror equation relates the image and object dis tances to the focal distance and is valid only in the small-angle approximation
(Equation). Although it was derived for a concave mir ror, it also holds for convex mirrors (proving this is left as an exercise).
We can extend the mirror equation to the case of a plane mirror by noting that a plane mirror has an in finite radius of curvature.
This means the focal point is at infinity, so the mirror eq uation simplifies to
which is the same equation obtained earlier.
Notice that we have been very careful with the signs in deriving the mirror equation. For a plane mirror, th e image distance has the
opposite sign of the object distance. Also, the real image formed by the concave mirror in Figure is on the opposite side of the
optical axis with respect to the object. In this case, the image height should have the opposite sign of th e object height. To keep
track of the signs of the various quantities in the m irror equation, we now introduce a sign convention.
Using a consistent sign convention is very important i n geometric optics. It assigns positive or negative va lues for the
quantities that characterize an optical system. Unde rstanding the sign convention allows you to describe an image without
constructing a ray diagram. This text uses the following sig n convention:
1. The focal length is positive for concave mirrors and negative for convex mirrors.
2. The image distance is positive for real images and negative for virtual images.
Notice that rule 1 means that the radius of curvature of a spherical mirror can be positive or negative. What does it mean to
have a negative radius of curvature? This means sim ply that the radius of curvature for a convex mirror is defined to be
negative.
Image Magnification
Let’s use the sign convention to further interpret the derivation of the mirror equation. In deriving t his equation, we found that the
object and image heights are related by
See Equation. Both the object and the image formed by the mirror in Figure are real, so the object and image distances
are both positive. The highest point of the object i s above the optical axis, so the object height is po sitive. The image, however, isSign convention for spherical mirrors

9.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661below the optical axis, so the image height is negativ e. Thus, this sign convention is consistent with our de rivation of the mirror
equation.
Equation in fact describes the linear magnification (often simply called “ magnification ”) of the image in terms of the
object and image distances. We thus define the dimensio nless magnification as follows:
If is positive, the image is upright, and if is ne gative, the image is inverted. If, the image is larg er than the object, and
if, the image is smaller than the object. With this definition of magnification, we get the following rela tion between the
vertical and horizontal object and image distances:
This is a very useful relation because it lets you ob tain the magnification of the image from the object and image distances, which
you can obtain from the mirror equation.
One of the solar technologies used today for generat ing electricity involves a device (called a paraboli c trough or concentrating
collector) that concentrates sunlight onto a blacken ed pipe that contains a fluid. This heated fluid is pumped to a heat
exchanger, where the thermal energy is transferred to another system that is used to generate steam and ev entually generates
electricity through a conventional steam cycle. Figur e shows such a working system in southern California. The real
mirror is a parabolic cylinder with its focus located at the pipe; however, we can approximate the mirror as exactly one-quarter
of a circular cylinder.
Figure: Parabolic trough collectors are used to genera te electricity in southern California. (credit: “kjk olb”/Wikimedia
Commons)
1. If we want the rays from the sun to focus at 40.0 cm from t he mirror, what is the radius of the mirror?
2. What is the amount of sunlight concentrated onto the pipe, per meter of pipe length, assuming the insolation (i ncident solar
radiation) is 900 W/m?
3. If the fluid-carrying pipe has a 2.00-cm diameter, what is the temperature increase of the fluid per meter of pipe over a
period of 1 minute? Assume that all solar radiation inciden t on the reflector is absorbed by the pipe, and that the fl uid is
mineral oil.
Strategy
First identify the physical principles involved. Part (a) is related to the optics of spherical mirrors. Part (b) involves a little
math, primarily geometry. Part (c) requires an understan ding of heat and density.
Solution
a. The sun is the object, so the object distance is ess entially infinity:. The desired image distance is. We use
the mirror equation (Equation) to find the focal le ngth of the mirror:Example: Solar Electric Generating System

9.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661Thus, the radius of the mirror is
b. The insolation is 900 W/m. You must find the cro ss-sectional area of the concave mirror, since the power delivered is
. The mirror in this case is a quarter-section of a cylinder, so the area for a length of the mirror i s.
The area for a length of 1.00 m is then
The insolation on the 1.00-m length of pipe is then
c. The increase in temperature is given by. The mass o f the mineral oil in the one-meter section of pipe is
Therefore, the increase in temperature in one minute is
Significance
An array of such pipes in the California desert can p rovide a thermal output of 250 MW on a sunny day, with fluids reaching
temperatures as high as 400°C. We are considering only o ne meter of pipe here and ignoring heat losses along the pi pe.
A keratometer is a device used to measure the curvatu re of the cornea of the eye, particularly for fittin g contact lenses. Light is
reflected from the cornea, which acts like a convex m irror, and the keratometer measures the magnificati on of the image. The
smaller the magnification, the smaller the radius o f curvature of the cornea. If the light source is 1 2 cm from the cornea and the
image magnification is 0.032, what is the radius of curvatu re of the cornea?
Strategy
If you find the focal length of the convex mirror f ormed by the cornea, then you know its radius of curva ture (it’s twice the
focal length). The object distance is d =12cm and the magnification is m=0.032. First find the image distan ce and then solve
for the focal length.2
Example: Image in a Convex Mirror
o

9.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661Solution
Start with the equation for magnification (Equation) an d solving for and inserting the given values yields
where we retained an extra significant figure because this is an intermediate step in the calculation. Solv e the mirror equation
for the focal length and insert the known values for the o bject and image distances. The result is
The radius of curvature is twice the focal length, so
Significance
The focal length is negative, so the focus is virtual, as expected for a concave mirror and a real object. T he radius of curvature
found here is reasonable for a cornea. The distance from cornea to retina in an adult eye is about 2.0 cm. In practice, corneas
may not be spherical, which complicates the job of fit ting contact lenses. Note that the image distance her e is negative,
consistent with the fact that the image is behind th e mirror. Thus, the image is virtual because no rays ac tually pass through it.
In the problems and exercises, you will show that, for a fixed object distance, a smaller radius of curvatu re corresponds to a
smaller the magnification.
Step 1. First make sure that image formation by a spherical mirror is involved.
Step 2. Determine whether ray tracing, the mirror equation, or both are required. A sketch is very useful even if ray tracing
is not specifically required by the problem. Write symbo ls and known values on the sketch.
Step 3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).
Step 4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
Step 5. If ray tracing is required, use the ray-tracing ru les listed near the beginning of this section.
Step 6. Most quantitative problems require using the mirror equation. Use the examples as guides for using the mirror
equation.
Step 7. Check to see whether the answer makes sense. Do the si gns of object distance, image distance, and focal length
correspond with what is expected from ray tracing? Is the si gn of the magnification correct? Are the object and im age
distances reasonable?
Departure from the Small-Angle Approximation
The small-angle approximation (Equation) is a corne rstone of the above discussion of image formation by a spherical mirror.
When this approximation is violated, then the image created by a spherical mirror becomes distorted. Such distortion is called
aberration. Here we briefly discuss two specific types of ab errations: spherical aberration and coma.
Spherical aberration
Consider a broad beam of parallel rays impinging on a spherical mirror, as shown in Figure. The farther from the optical axis
the rays strike, the worse the spherical mirror appr oximates a parabolic mirror. Thus, these rays are not focused at the same point as
rays that are near the optical axis, as shown in the figure. Because of spherical aberration, the image of an extended object in a
spherical mirror will be blurred. Spherical aberration s are characteristic of the mirrors and lenses that we consider in the following
section of this chapter (more sophisticated mirrors and lenses are needed to eliminate spherical aberrations).PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: SPHERICAL MIRRORS

9.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76661
Figure: (a) With spherical aberration, the rays that are farther from the optical axis and the rays that a re closer to the optical
axis are focused at different points. Notice that the aberration gets worse for rays farther from the optica l axis. (b) For comatic
aberration, parallel rays that are not parallel to t he optical axis are focused at different heights and a t different focal lengths, so the
image contains a “tail” like a comet (which is “coma” in Latin). Note that the colored rays are only to f acilitate viewing; the colors
do not indicate the color of the light.
Coma or Comatic Aberration
Coma is similar to spherical aberration, but arises when t he incoming rays are not parallel to the optical ax is, as shown in Figure
. Recall that the small-angle approximation holds fo r spherical mirrors that are small compared to their radius. In this case,
spherical mirrors are good approximations of parabo lic mirrors. Parabolic mirrors focus all rays that ar e parallel to the optical axis
at the focal point. However, parallel rays that are not parallel to the optical axis are focused at differe nt heights and at different
focal lengths, as show in Figure. Because a spherical mirror is symmetric about the optical axis, the va rious colored rays in
this figure create circles of the corresponding color on the focal plane.
Although a spherical mirror is shown in Figure, comati c aberration occurs also for parabolic mirrors—it do es not result from
a breakdown in the small-angle approximation (Equatio n). Spherical aberration, however, occurs only for sph erical mirrors
and is a result of a breakdown in the small-angle appr oximation. We will discuss both coma and spherical aber ration later in this
chapter, in connection with telescopes.
This page titled 9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.2: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.
2.3: Spherical Mirrors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766639.6: Images Formed by Refraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe image formation by a single refracting surface
Determine the location of an image and calculate its pr operties by using a ray diagram
Determine the location of an image and calculate its pr operties by using the equation for a single refracting s urface
Use ray diagrams to locate and describe the image formed by a lens
Employ the thin-lens equation to describe and locate the image formed by a lens
When rays of light propagate from one medium to anot her, these rays undergo refraction, which is when light waves are bent at the
interface between two media. The refracting surface can form an image in a similar fashion to a reflecting surface, except that the
law of refraction (Snell’s law) is at the heart of the proces s instead of the law of reflection.
Refraction at a Plane Interface—Apparent Depth
If you look at a straight rod partially submerged in water, it appears to bend at the surface. The reason be hind this curious effect is
that the image of the rod inside the water forms a li ttle closer to the surface than the actual position of the rod, so it does not line up
with the part of the rod that is above the water. The same phenomenon explains why a fish in water appears to be closer to the
surface than it actually is.
Figure: Bending of a rod at a water-air interface. Point o n the rod appears to be at point, which is where the image of
point P forms due to refraction at the air-water int erface.
To study image formation as a result of refraction, consi der the following questions:
1. What happens to the rays of light when they enter or pa ss through a different medium?
2. Do the refracted rays originating from a single poi nt meet at some point or diverge away from each other?
To be concrete, we consider a simple system consistin g of two media separated by a plane interface (Figure). The object is in
one medium and the observer is in the other. For insta nce, when you look at a fish from above the water surf ace, the fish is in
medium 1 (the water) with refractive index 1.33, and y our eye is in medium 2 (the air) with refractive ind ex 1.00, and the surface of
the water is the interface. The depth that you “see” is the image height and is called the apparent depth. The actual depth of the
fish is the object height.Learning Objectives

9.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663
Figure: Apparent depth due to refraction. The real object at point P creates an image at point Q. The i mage is not at the same
depth as the object, so the observer sees the image at a n “apparent depth.”
The apparent depth h depends on the angle at which y ou view the image. For a view from above (the so-called “normal” view), we
can approximate the refraction angle to be small, a nd replace in Snell’s law by. With this approximati on, you can use
the triangles and to show that the apparent depth is g iven by
The derivation of this result is left as an exercise. Thu s, a fish appears at 3/4 of the real depth when viewed from ab ove.
Refraction at a Spherical Interface
Spherical shapes play an important role in optics pri marily because high-quality spherical shapes are fa r easier to manufacture than
other curved surfaces. To study refraction at a single spherical surface, we assume that the medium with the spherical surface at one
end continues indefinitely (a “semi-infinite” medium).
Refraction at a Convex Surface
Consider a point source of light at point P in front of a convex surface made of glass (Figure). Let be the radius of
curvature, n be the refractive index of the medium i n which object point P is located, and n be the refractive index of the med ium
with the spherical surface. We want to know what happens as a result of refraction at this interface.
Figure: Refraction at a convex surface ().
Because of the symmetry involved, it is sufficient t o examine rays in only one plane. The figure shows a ray of light that starts at
the object point, refracts at the interface, and goe s through the image point. We derive a formula rel ating the object distance
, the image distance, and the radius of curvature.
Applying Snell’s law to the ray emanating from point gives
Within the small-angle approximationi
1 2

9.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663Snell’s law then takes the form
From the geometry of Figure, we see that
Inserting both expressions into Equation gives
Using Figure, we calculate the tangent of the angles,, and:
Again using the small-angle approximation, we find that, so the above relationships become
Putting these angles into Equation gives
We can write this more conveniently as
If the object is placed at a special point called t he first focus, or the object focus, then the imag e is formed at infinity, as shown
in Figure.
Figure: (a) First focus (called the “object focus”) for refraction at a convex surface. (b) Second focus (cal led “image focus”)
for refraction at a convex surface.
We can find the location of the first focus by setti ng in Equation.

9.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663Similarly, we can define a second focus or image focus where the image is formed for an object that is fa r away (Figure).
The location of the second focus is obtained from Equ ation by setting:
Note that the object focus is at a different distance from t he vertex than the image focus because.
Although we derived this equation for refraction at a convex surface, the same expression holds for a concav e surface,
provided we use the following sign convention:
1. if surface is convex toward object; otherwise,.
2. if image is real and on opposite side from the object; otherwise,.
Thin Lenses
Lenses are found in a huge array of optical instrument s, ranging from a simple magnifying glass to a camera’s zoom lens to the eye
itself. In this section, we use the Snell’s law to explore the properties of lenses and how they form images.
The word “lens” derives from the Latin word for a lent il bean, the shape of which is similar to a convex lens. However, not all
lenses have the same shape. Figure shows a variety of dif ferent lens shapes. The vocabulary used to describe len ses is the
same as that used for spherical mirrors: The axis of symmetry of a lens is called the optical axis, where this axis intersects the lens
surface is called the vertex of the lens, and so forth.
Figure: Various types of lenses: Note that a converging lens has a thicker “waist,” whereas a diverging lens ha s a thinner
waist.
A convex or converging lens is shaped so that all lig ht rays that enter it parallel to its optical axis i ntersect (or focus) at a single
point on the optical axis on the opposite side of t he lens, as shown in Figure. Likewise, a concave or div erging lens is shaped
so that all rays that enter it parallel to its optic al axis diverge, as shown in part (b). To understand more precisely how a lens
manipulates light, look closely at the top ray that goes through the converging lens in part (a). Becau se the index of refraction of
the lens is greater than that of air, Snell’s law tell s us that the ray is bent toward the perpendicular to the interface as it enters the
lens. Likewise, when the ray exits the lens, it is bent awa y from the perpendicular. The same reasoning applie s to the diverging
lenses, as shown in Figure. The overall effect is that l ight rays are bent toward the optical axis for a conve rging lens and away
from the optical axis for diverging lenses. For a converg ing lens, the point at which the rays cross is the f ocal point F of the lens.Sign convention for single refracting surfaces

9.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663For a diverging lens, the point from which the rays ap pear to originate is the (virtual) focal point. The distance from the center of
the lens to its focal point is the focal length f of the lens.
Figure: Rays of light entering (a) a converging lens and (b) a diverging lens, parallel to its axis, conver ge at its focal point F.
The distance from the center of the lens to the focal point is the lens’s focal length f. Note that the lig ht rays are bent upon entering
and exiting the lens, with the overall effect being to bend the rays toward the optical axis.
A lens is considered to be thin if its thickness t is much less than the radii of curvature of both sur faces, as shown in Figure. In
this case, the rays may be considered to bend once at the center of the lens. For the case drawn in the figur e, light ray 1 is parallel to
the optical axis, so the outgoing ray is bent once at the center of the lens and goes through the focal po int. Another important
characteristic of thin lenses is that light rays that pa ss through the center of the lens are undeviated, as sho wn by light ray 2.
Figure: In the thin-lens approximation, the thickness t of the lens is much, much less than the radii R and R of curvature of
the surfaces of the lens. Light rays are considered to b end at the center of the lens, such as light ray 1. Li ght ray 2 passes through
the center of the lens and is undeviated in the thin- lens approximation.
As noted in the initial discussion of Snell’s law, the pat hs of light rays are exactly reversible. This means tha t the direction of the
arrows could be reversed for all of the rays in Figure. For example, if a point-light source is placed at the focal point of a
convex lens, as shown in Figure, parallel light rays emerg e from the other side.1 2

9.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663
Figure in converging and diverging lenses. This techni que is used in lighthouses and sometimes in traffic light s to produce a
directional beam of light from a source that emits li ght in all directions.
Ray Tracing and Thin Lenses
Ray tracing is the technique of determining or following (tracin g) the paths taken by light rays. Ray tracing for thi n lenses is very
similar to the technique we used with spherical mirror s. As for mirrors, ray tracing can accurately describe the operation of a lens.
The rules for ray tracing for thin lenses are similar to those of spherical mirrors:
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to the optic al axis passes through the focal point on the other sid e of the lens (ray 1 in
part (a) of Figure). A ray entering a diverging lens p arallel to the optical axis exits along the line that passe s through the
focal point on the same side of the lens (ray 1 in part (b) of the figure).
2. A ray passing through the center of either a convergin g or a diverging lens is not deviated (ray 2 in parts (a) an d (b)).
3. For a converging lens, a ray that passes through the fo cal point exits the lens parallel to the optical axis (ray 3 in part (a)). For a
diverging lens, a ray that approaches along the line that p asses through the focal point on the opposite side exit s the lens parallel
to the axis (ray 3 in part (b)).
Figure: Thin lenses have the same focal lengths on eith er side. (a) Parallel light rays entering a convergin g lens from the right
cross at its focal point on the left. (b) Parallel ligh t rays entering a diverging lens from the right seem t o come from the focal point
on the right.
Thin lenses work quite well for monochromatic light (i. e., light of a single wavelength). However, for light tha t contains several
wavelengths (e.g., white light), the lenses work less wel l. The problem is that, as we learned in the previous chapter, the index of

9.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663refraction of a material depends on the wavelength o f light. This phenomenon is responsible for many color ful effects, such as
rainbows. Unfortunately, this phenomenon also leads to aberrations in images formed by lenses. In particul ar, because the focal
distance of the lens depends on the index of refrac tion, it also depends on the wavelength of the incid ent light. This means that light
of different wavelengths will focus at different point s, resulting is so-called “ chromatic aberrations.” In particular, the edges of an
image of a white object will become colored and blurr ed. Special lenses called doublets are capable of correcting chromatic
aberrations. A doublet is formed by gluing together a converging lens and a diverging lens. The combined d oublet lens produces
significantly reduced chromatic aberrations.
Image Formation by Thin Lenses
We use ray tracing to investigate different types of images that can be created by a lens. In some circums tances, a lens forms a real
image, such as when a movie projector casts an image onto a screen. In other cases, the image is a virtual image, which cannot be
projected onto a screen. Where, for example, is the image formed by eyeglasses? We use ray tracing for t hin lenses to illustrate how
they form images, and then we develop equations to analyze quantitatively the properties of thin lenses.
Consider an object some distance away from a convergi ng lens, as shown in Figure. To find the location and s ize of the image,
we trace the paths of selected light rays originating from one point on the object, in this case, the tip of the arrow. The figure shows
three rays from many rays that emanate from the tip of the arrow. These three rays can be traced by usi ng the ray-tracing rules
given above.
Ray 1 enters the lens parallel to the optical axis and p asses through the focal point on the opposite side (rule 1).
Ray 2 passes through the center of the lens and is not de viated (rule 2).
Ray 3 passes through the focal point on its way to the lens and exits the lens parallel to the optical axis (rule 3).
The three rays cross at a single point on the opposi te side of the lens. Thus, the image of the tip of the arrow is located at this point.
All rays that come from the tip of the arrow and enter the le ns are refracted and cross at the point shown.
After locating the image of the tip of the arrow, we n eed another point of the image to orient the entire image of the arrow. We
chose to locate the image base of the arrow, which is on the optical axis. As explained in the section on spherical mirrors, the base
will be on the optical axis just above the image of t he tip of the arrow (due to the top-bottom symmetry of the lens). Thus, the
image spans the optical axis to the (negative) height shown. Rays from another point on the arrow, such as the middle of the arrow,
cross at another common point, thus filling in the rest of the image.
Although three rays are traced in this figure, only t wo are necessary to locate a point of the image. It is best to trace rays for which
there are simple ray-tracing rules.
Figure: Ray tracing is used to locate the image forme d by a lens. Rays originating from the same point on t he object are traced
—the three chosen rays each follow one of the rules fo r ray tracing, so that their paths are easy to determi ne. The image is located
at the point where the rays cross. In this case, a real image—one that can be projected on a screen—is formed.
Several important distances appear in the figure. As f or a mirror, we define dodo to be the object distance, or the distance of an
object from the center of a lens. The image distance d is defined to be the distance of the image from th e center of a lens. The
height of the object and the height of the image ar e indicated by h and h, respectively. Images that ap pear upright relative to thei
o i

9.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663object have positive heights, and those that are inve rted have negative heights. By using the rules of r ay tracing and making a scale
drawing with paper and pencil, like that in Figure, we can accurately describe the location and size of an image. But the real
benefit of ray tracing is in visualizing how images are for med in a variety of situations.
Oblique Parallel Rays and Focal Plane
We have seen that rays parallel to the optical axis a re directed to the focal point of a converging lens. In the case of a diverging
lens, they come out in a direction such that they app ear to be coming from the focal point on the opposit e side of the lens (i.e., the
side from which parallel rays enter the lens). What happens to parallel rays that are not parallel to th e optical axis (Figure)? In
the case of a converging lens, these rays do not con verge at the focal point. Instead, they come together on another point in the
plane called the focal plane. The focal plane conta ins the focal point and is perpendicular to the opt ical axis. As shown in the figure,
parallel rays focus where the ray through the center of the lens crosses the focal plane.
Figure: Parallel oblique rays focus on a point in a fo cal plane.
Thin-Lens Equation
Ray tracing allows us to get a qualitative picture o f image formation. To obtain numeric information, we derive a pair of equations
from a geometric analysis of ray tracing for thin le nses. These equations, called the thin-lens equation an d the lens maker’s
equation, allow us to quantitatively analyze thin lenses.
Consider the thick bi-convex lens shown in Figure. Th e index of refraction of the surrounding medium is n (if the lens is in
air, then) and that of the lens is. The radii of c urvatures of the two sides are and. We wish to find a relation
between the object distance, the image distance, and the parameters of the lens.
Figure for deriving the lens maker’s equation. Here, is the thickness of lens, n is the index of refraction of the exterior
medium, and is the index of refraction of the lens. We take the limit of to obtain the formula for a t hin lens.
To derive the thin-lens equation, we consider the im age formed by the first refracting surface (i.e., left surface) and then use this
image as the object for the second refracting surfac e. In the figure, the image from the first refracting surface is, which is formed1

9.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663by extending backwards the rays from inside the lens (these rays result from refraction at the first surf ace). This is shown by the
dashed lines in the figure. Notice that this image i s virtual because no rays actually pass through the point Q′. To find the image
distance corresponding to the image Q′, we use Equati on (Figure). In this case, the object distance is, t he image
distance is d′idi′, and the radius of curvature is. Inserting these into the relationship derived previ ous for refraction at curves
surfaces gives
The image is virtual and on the same side as the object, s o d ′<0 and d >0. The first surface is convex toward the objec t, so.
To find the object distance for the object formed b y refraction from the second interface, note that the role of the indices of
refraction n and n are interchanged in Equation. I n Figure, the rays originate in the medium with index, whereas in
Figure, the rays originate in the medium with index. Thus, we must interchange n and n in Equation. In ad dition, by
consulting again Figure, we see that the object dist ance is and the image distance is. The radius of cu rvature is R
Inserting these quantities into Equation gives
The image is real and on the opposite side from the o bject, so and. The second surface is convex away fr om the
object, so. Equation can be simplified by noting that
where we have taken the absolute value because is a ne gative number, whereas both and are positive. We can dispense with
the absolute value if we negate, which gives
Inserting this into Equation gives
Summing Equations and gives
In the thin-lens approximation, we assume that the le ns is very thin compared to the first image distance, or (or,
equivalently, and). In this case, the third and fou rth terms on the left-hand side of Equation cancel, leaving us
with
Dividing by gives us finally
The left-hand side looks suspiciously like the mirror equation that we derived above for spherical mirrors. As done for spherical
mirrors, we can use ray tracing and geometry to show that, f or a thin lens,
where is the focal length of the thin lens (this de rivation is left as an exercise). This is the thin-lens equation. The focal length of a
thin lens is the same to the left and to the right of the lens. Combining Equations and givesi o
1 2
1 2

9.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663which is called the lens maker’s equation. It shows that the focal length of a thin lens depen ds only of the radii of curvature and
the index of refraction of the lens and that of the surrounding medium. For a lens in air, and, so the lens maker’s
equation reduces to
To properly use the thin-lens equation, the following sig n conventions must be obeyed:
is positive if the image is on the side opposite the object (i.e., real image); otherwise, is negative (i.e., virtual image).
is positive for a converging lens and negative for a d iverging lens.
is positive for a surface convex toward the object, an d negative for a s urface concave toward object.
Making Lenses
The simulation above presents you with a flat piece of translucid material. The sliders allow you to make len ses and become more
familiar with the factors that determine how lenses behav e, acting on this case on a beam of parallel red light r ays.

Magnification
By using a finite-size object on the optical axis and ray tracing, you can show that the magnification of an im age is
(where the three lines mean “is defined as”). This is e xactly the same equation as we obtained for mirrors (see Equation 2.3.15). If
, then the image has the same vertical orientation a s the object (called an “upright” image). If m<0, the n the image has the
opposite vertical orientation as the object (called an “inverted ” image).
Using the Thin-Lens Equation
The thin-lens equation and the lens maker’s equation are broadly applicable to situations involving thi n lenses. We explore many
features of image formation in the following examples.
Consider a thin converging lens. Where does the ima ge form and what type of image is formed as the obje ct approaches the lens
from infinity? This may be seen by using the thin-l ens equation for a given focal length to plot the im age distance as a function of
object distance. In other words, we plot
for a given value of. For, the result is shown in Figure.Sign conventions for lenses

9.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663
Figure: (a) Image distance for a thin converging len s with f=1.0 cm as a function of object distance. (b) Same thing but for a
diverging lens with f=−1.0 cm.
An object much farther than the focal length f from the lens should produce an image near the foc al plane, because the second term
on the right-hand side of the equation above becomes negligible compared to the first term, so we have. This can be seen in
the plot of part (a) of the figure, which shows that th e image distance approaches asymptotically the foca l length of 1 cm for larger
object distances. As the object approaches the focal p lane, the image distance diverges to positive infinit y. This is expected because
an object at the focal plane produces parallel rays that form an image at infinity (i.e., very far from the lens). When the object is
farther than the focal length from the lens, the im age distance is positive, so the image is real, on th e opposite side of the lens from
the object, and inverted (because via Equation). W hen the object is closer than the focal length from the lens, the
image distance becomes negative, which means that the im age is virtual, on the same side of the lens as the object, an d upright.
For a thin diverging lens of focal length, a simila r plot of image distance vs. object distance is shown in Figure.
In this case, the image distance is negative for all positive object distances, which means that the imag e is virtual, on the same side
of the lens as the object, and upright. These characteri stics may also be seen by ray-tracing diagrams (Figure).
Figure: The red dots show the focal points of the lense s. (a) A real, inverted image formed from an object that is farther than
the focal length from a converging lens. (b) A virtu al, upright image formed from an object that is close r than a focal length from
the lens. (c) A virtual, upright image formed from a n object that is farther than a focal length from a diverging lens.
To see a concrete example of upright and inverted i mages, look at Figure, which shows images formed by c onverging lenses
when the object (the person’s face in this case) is place at different distances from the lens. In part (a) of the figure, the person’s
face is farther than one focal length from the lens, so the image is inverted. In part (b), the person’s face is closer than one focal
length from the lens, so the image is upright.

9.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663
Figure: (a) When a converging lens is held farther th an one focal length from the man’s face, an inverted image is formed.
Note that the image is in focus but the face is not, b ecause the image is much closer to the camera taking t his photograph than the
face. (b) An upright image of the man’s face is produ ced when a converging lens is held at less than one foc al length from his face.
(credit a: modification of work by “DaMongMan”/Flick r; credit b: modification of work by Casey Fleser)
Work through the following examples to better understand how thin lenses work.
Step 1. Determine whether ray tracing, the thin-lens equat ion, or both would be useful. Even if ray tracing is not us ed, a
careful sketch is always very useful. Write symbols and v alues on the sketch.
Step 2. Identify what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns).
Step 3. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem (identify the knowns).
Step 4. If ray tracing is required, use the ray-tracing ru les listed near the beginning of this section.
Step 5. Most quantitative problems require the use of the t hin-lens equation and/or the lens maker’s equation. So lve these
for the unknowns and insert the given quantities or use bot h together to find two unknowns.
Step 7. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Are the signs c orrect? Is the sketch or ray tracing consistent with the
calculation?
Example: Using the Lens Maker’s Equation
Find the radius of curvature of a biconcave lens symme trically ground from a glass with index of refractive 1.55 so that its
focal length in air is 20 cm (for a biconcave lens, both su rfaces have the same radius of curvature).
Strategy
Use the thin-lens form of the lens maker’s equation:
where and. Since we are making a symmetric biconcave lens, we have.
Solution
We can determine the radius of curvature from
Solving for and inserting,, and gives
l i d iff bj iPROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: LENSES

9.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663Example: Converging Lens and Different Object Distances
Find the location, orientation, and magnification of the image for an 3.0 cm high object at each of the following positions in
front of a convex lens of focal length 10.0 cm. (a), (b), and (c).
Strategy
We start with the thin-lens equation (Equation)
Solve this for the image distance and insert the given obje ct distance and focal length.
Solution
a. For and, this gives
The image is positive, so the image, is real, is on t he opposite side of the lens from the object, and is 12.6 cm from the lens. To
find the magnification and orientation of the image, u se
The negative magnification means that the image is i nverted. Since, the image is smaller than the object. The size of
the image is given by
b. For and
The image distance is negative, so the image is virtu al, is on the same side of the lens as the object, and is 10 cm from the lens.
The magnification and orientation of the image are foun d from
The positive magnification means that the image is upright (i.e., it has the same orientation as the obj ect). Since, the
image is larger than the object. The size of the image is

9.6.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663c. For and
The image distance is positive, so the image is real, is on the opposite side of the lens from the object, and is 20.0 cm from the
lens. The magnification is
The negative magnification means that the image is invert ed. Since, the image is the same size as the object.
When solving problems in geometric optics, we often ne ed to combine ray tracing and the lens equations. The following example
demonstrates this approach.
Example: Choosing the Focal Length and Type of Lens
To project an image of a light bulb on a screen 1.50 m away, you need to choose what type of lens to use (c onverging or
diverging) and its focal length (Figure). The distan ce between the lens and the light bulb is fixed at 0.75 m. Also, what is
the magnification and orientation of the image?
Figure: A light bulb placed 0.75 m from a lens havin g a 0.50-m focal length produces a real image on a sc reen, as
discussed in the example. Ray tracing predicts the imag e location and size.
Strategy
The image must be real, so you choose to use a conv erging lens. The focal length can be found by using the thin-lens equation
and solving for the focal length. The object distance i s and the image distance is.
Solution
Solve the thin lens for the focal length and insert the de sired object and image distances:

9.6.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76663The magnification is
Significance
The minus sign for the magnification means that the image is inverted. The focal length is positive, as exp ected for a
converging lens. Ray tracing can be used to check th e calculation (Figure). As expected, the image is inv erted, is real,
and is larger than the object.
This page titled 9.6: Images Formed by Refraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Images Formed by Refraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.
2.5: Thin Lenses by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766679.7: Optical Instruments
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Understand the optics of a simple magnifier
Characterize the image created by a simple magnifier
Describe the optics of a camera
Characterize the image created by a camera
Explain the physics behind the operation of microscopes and telescopes
Describe the image created by these instruments and calcul ate their magnifications
The Simple Magnifier
The apparent size of an object perceived by the eye depends on the angle the object subtends from the eye. As shown in Figure
, the object at subtends a larger angle from the e ye than when it is position at point. Thus, the object at forms a larger
image on the retina (see) than when it is positioned at (see). Thus, objects that subtend large angles fr om the eye appear
larger because they form larger images on the retina.
Figure: Size perceived by an eye is determined by the angle subtended by the object. An image formed on t he retina by an
object at is larger than an image formed on the ret ina by the same object positioned at B (compared imag e heights to).
We have seen that, when an object is placed within a f ocal length of a convex lens, its image is virtual, u pright, and larger than the
object (see ฀part (b) of this Figure). Thus, when such an image produced by a convex lens serves as the object for the eye, as
shown in Figure, the image on the retina is enlarged, because the i mage produced by the lens subtends a larger angle in the eye
than does the object. A convex lens used for this purpose i s called a magnifying glass or a simple magnifier.Learning Objectives

9.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667
Figure: The simple magnifier is a convex lens used to p roduce an enlarged image of an object on the retina. (a) With no
convex lens, the object subtends an angle from the ey e. (b) With the convex lens in place, the image prod uced by the convex
lens subtends an angle from the eye, with. Thus, the image on the retina is larger with the convex lens in place.
To account for the magnification of a magnifying le ns, we compare the angle subtended by the image (creat ed by the lens) with the
angle subtended by the object (viewed with no lens), as shown in Figure. We assume that the object is situa ted at the near
point of the eye, because this is the object distance at which the unaided eye can form the largest image on the retina. We will
compare the magnified images created by a lens with this maximum image size for the unaided eye. The mag nification of an image
when observed by the eye is the angular magnificatio n, which is defined by the ratio of the angle subte nded by the image
to the angle subtended by the object:
Consider the situation shown in Figure. The magnifyin g lens is held a distance from the eye, and the imag e produced by the
magnifier forms a distance from the eye. We want to calculate the angular magnification for any arbitrary and. In the smallangle approximation, the angular size of the image i s. The angular size of the object at the near poi nt is
. The angular magnification is then
Using the definition of linear magnification
and the thin-lens equation
we arrive at the following expression for the angular mag nification of a magnifying lens:

9.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667From Figure, we see that the absolute value of the im age distance is. Note that because the image is vi rtual,
so we can dispense with the absolute value by explicitly in serting the minus sign:
Inserting Equation into Equation gives us the final equation for the angular magnification of a magnifying lens:
Note that all the quantities in this equation have t o be expressed in centimeters. Often, we want the image to be at the near-point
distance (e.g.,) to get maximum magnification, and we hold the magnifying lens close to the eye (). In th is case,
Equation gives
which shows that the greatest magnification occurs for the lens with the shortest focal length. In addition, whe n the image is at the
near-point distance and the lens is held close to the eye (), then and Equation becomes
where is the linear magnification (Equation) previously derived for spherical mirrors and thin lenses. Another usefu l
situation is when the image is at infinity (). Equation t hen takes the form
The resulting magnification is simply the ratio of t he near-point distance to the focal length of the m agnifying lens, so a lens with a
shorter focal length gives a stronger magnification. Although this magnification is smaller by 1 than t he magnification obtained
with the image at the near point, it provides for the most comfortable viewing conditions, because the eye is relaxed when viewing
a distant object.
By comparing Equations and, we see that the range of ang ular magnification of a given converging lens is
A jeweler wishes to inspect a 3.0-mm-diameter diamond with a magnifier. The diamond is held at the jeweler’s near point (25
cm), and the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye.
a. What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to see a 15-mm-diameter image of the diamond?
b. What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to obtain 10× magnification?
Strategy
We need to determine the requisite magnification of the magnifier. Because the jeweler holds the magnif ying lens close to his
eye, we can use Equation to find the focal length of th e magnifying lens.
Solution
a. The required linear magnification is the ratio of the desired image diameter to the diamond’s actual di ameter (Equation
). Because the jeweler holds the magnifying lens clos e to his eye and the image forms at his near point, t he linearExample: Magnifying a Diamond

9.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667magnification is the same as the angular magnification, so
The focal length f of the magnifying lens may be calculated by solving Equa tion for, which gives
b. To get an image magnified by a factor of ten, we again s olve Equation for, but this time we use. The result is
Significance
Note that a greater magnification is achieved by using a lens with a smaller focal length. We thus need to u se a lens with radii
of curvature that are less than a few centimeters and hold it very close to our eye. This is not very conve nient. A compound
microscope, explored in the following section, can overco me this drawback.
The Camera
Cameras are very common in our everyday life. Between 1825 a nd 1827, French inventor Nicéphore Niépce successfully
photographed an image created by a primitive camera. Since then, enormous progress has been achieved in th e design of cameras
and camera-based detectors.
Initially, photographs were recorded by using the ligh t-sensitive reaction of silver-based compounds such a s silver chloride or silver
bromide. Silver-based photographic paper was in common use until the advent of digital photography in the 1 980s, which is
intimately connected to charge-coupled device (CCD) detectors. In a nutshell, a CCD is a semiconductor chi p that records images
as a matrix of tiny pixels, each pixel located in a “bin” in the surface. Each pixel is capable of dete cting the intensity of light
impinging on it. Color is brought into play by putti ng red-, blue-, and green-colored filters over the p ixels, resulting in colored
digital images (Figure). At its best resolution, one C CD pixel corresponds to one pixel of the image. To re duce the resolution
and decrease the size of the file, we can “bin” several CCD p ixels into one, resulting in a smaller but “pixelated ” image.

9.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667
Figure: A charge-coupled device (CCD) converts light signals into electronic signals, enabling electronic p rocessing and
storage of visual images. This is the basis for electronic imaging in all digital cameras, from cell phones to movie cameras. (credit
left: modification of work by Bruce Turner)
Clearly, electronics is a big part of a digital camer a; however, the underlying physics is basic optics. As a m atter of fact, the optics
of a camera are pretty much the same as those of a si ngle lens with an object distance that is significantl y larger than the lens’s
focal distance (Figure).
Figure: Modern digital cameras have several lenses to p roduce a clear image with minimal aberration and use red, blue, and
green filters to produce a color image.
For instance, let us consider the camera in a smartpho ne. An average smartphone camera is equipped with a stat ionary wide-angle
lens with a focal length of about 4–5 mm. (This focal length is about equal to the thickness of the phon e.) The image created by the
lens is focused on the CCD detector mounted at the op posite side of the phone. In a cell phone, the lens an d the CCD cannot move
relative to each other. So how do we make sure that both the ima ges of a distant and a close object are in focus?
Recall that a human eye can accommodate for distant and close images by changing its focal distance. A cell phone camera cannot
do that because the distance from the lens to the det ector is fixed. Here is where the small focal distance b ecomes important. Let us
assume we have a camera with a 5-mm focal distance. Wh at is the image distance for a selfie? The object di stance for a selfie (the
length of the hand holding the phone) is about 50 cm. Usi ng the thin-lens equation, we can write

9.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667We then obtain the image distance:
Note that the object distance is 100 times larger tha n the focal distance. We can clearly see that the 1/ (500 mm) term is significantly
smaller than 1/(5 mm), which means that the image dis tance is pretty much equal to the lens’s focal leng th. An actual calculation
gives us the image distance d =5.05mm. This value is extre mely close to the lens’s focal distance.
Now let us consider the case of a distant object. Let u s say that we would like to take a picture of a person standing about 5 m from
us. Using the thin-lens equation again, we obtain the image distance of 5.005 mm. The farther the object is from the lens, the closer
the image distance is to the focal distance. At the l imiting case of an infinitely distant object, we obtai n the image distance exactly
equal to the focal distance of the lens.
As you can see, the difference between the image distan ce for a selfie and the image distance for a distan t object is just about 0.05
mm or 50 microns. Even a short object distance such as the length of your hand is two orders of magnitude larger than the lens’s
focal length, resulting in minute variations of the image distance. (The 50-micron difference is smaller than the thickness of an
average sheet of paper.) Such a small difference can b e easily accommodated by the same detector, positio ned at the focal distance
of the lens. Image analysis software can help improve image q uality.
Conventional point-and-shoot cameras often use a mov able lens to change the lens-to-image distance. Comp lex lenses of the more
expensive mirror reflex cameras allow for superb qual ity photographic images. The optics of these camera le nses is beyond the
scope of this textbook.
Microscopes
Although the eye is marvelous in its ability to see objects large and small, it obviously is limited in t he smallest details it can detect.
The desire to see beyond what is possible with the nake d eye led to the use of optical instruments. We have seen that a simple
convex lens can create a magnified image, but it is h ard to get large magnification with such a lens. A m agnification greater than 5×
is difficult without distorting the image. To get hi gher magnification, we can combine the simple magnifyi ng glass with one or
more additional lenses. In this section, we examine microsc opes that enlarge the details that we cannot see with the naked eye.
Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600s by eyeglass makers in The Netherlands and Denmark. The simplest compound
microscope is constructed from two convex lenses (Fig ure). The objective lens is a convex lens of short f ocal length (i.e., high
power) with typical magnification from 5× to 100×. The eyepiece, also referred to as the ocular, is a convex lens of longer focal
length.
The purpose of a microscope is to create magnified images of small objects, and both lenses contribute to the final magnification.
Also, the final enlarged image is produced sufficient ly far from the observer to be easily viewed, since th e eye cannot focus on
objects or images that are too close (i.e., closer tha n the near point of the eye).i

9.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667
Figure: A compound microscope is composed of two lenses: an objective and an eyepiece. The objective forms t he first image,
which is larger than the object. This first image is in side the focal length of the eyepiece and serves as the object for the eyepiece.
The eyepiece forms final image that is further magnif ied.
To see how the microscope in Figure forms an image, con sider its two lenses in succession. The object is just beyond the focal
length of the objective lens, producing a real, in verted image that is larger than the object. This firs t image serves as the object
for the second lens, or eyepiece. The eyepiece is positi oned so that the first image is within its focal len gth, so that it can
further magnify the image. In a sense, it acts as a m agnifying glass that magnifies the intermediate ima ge produced by the
objective. The image produced by the eyepiece is a m agnified virtual image. The final image remains inve rted but is farther from
the observer than the object, making it easy to view.
The eye views the virtual image created by the eyepi ece, which serves as the object for the lens in the ey e. The virtual image
formed by the eyepiece is well outside the focal length o f the eye, so the eye forms a real image on the retina.
The magnification of the microscope is the product o f the linear magnification by the objective and th e angular magnification
by the eyepiece. These are given by
Here, and are the focal lengths of the objective and the eyepiece, respectively. We assume that the fina l image is formed at
the near point of the eye, providing the largest ma gnification. Note that the angular magnification of the eyepiece is the same as
obtained earlier for the simple magnifying glass. This should not be surprising, because the eyepie ce is essentially a magnifying
glass, and the same physics applies here. The net magnification of the compound microscope is the product of the l inear
magnification of the objective and the angular magnific ation of the eyepiece:

9.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667Calculate the magnification of an object placed 6.2 0 mm from a compound microscope that has a 6.00 mm-f ocal length
objective and a 50.0 mm-focal length eyepiece. The obje ctive and eyepiece are separated by 23.0 cm.
Strategy
This situation is similar to that shown in Figure. To find the overall magnification, we must know the linea r magnification
of the objective and the angular magnification of t he eyepiece. We can use Equation, but we need to use the thin-lens
equation to find the image distance of the objective.
Solution
Solving the thin-lens equation for gives
Inserting this result into Equation along with the known values
gives
Significance
Both the objective and the eyepiece contribute to t he overall magnification, which is large and negative, consistent with Figure
, where the image is seen to be large and inverted. I n this case, the image is virtual and inverted, which cannot happen for
a single element.Example: Microscope Magnification

9.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667
Figure: A compound microscope with the image created at infinity.
We now calculate the magnifying power of a microscope when the image is at infinity, as shown in Figure, bec ause this makes
for the most relaxed viewing. The magnifying power of the microscope is the product of linear magnificati on of the objective
and the angular magnification of the eyepiece. We know th at
and from the thin-lens equation we obtain
If the final image is at infinity, then the image cre ated by the objective must be located at the focal p oint of the eyepiece. This may
be seen by considering the thin-lens equation with o r by recalling that rays that pass through the focal point exit the lens
parallel to each other, which is equivalent to focus ing at infinity. For many microscopes, the distance bet ween the image-side focal
point of the objective and the object-side focal po int of the eyepiece is standardized at L = 16 cm. Th is distance is called the tube
length of the microscope. From Figure, we see that
Inserting this into Equation gives
We now need to calculate the angular magnification o f the eyepiece with the image at infinity. To do so, we take the ratio of the
angle subtended by the image to the angle subtend ed by the object at the near point of the eye (this is the closest that
the unaided eye can view the object, and thus this is the position where the object will form the largest im age on the retina of the
unaided eye). Using Figure and working in the small-angle approximation, we have
and

9.7.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667where is the height of the image formed by the obje ctive, which is the object of the eyepiece. Thus, the ang ular magnification
of the eyepiece is
The net magnifying power of the compound microscope with th e image at infinity is therefore
The focal distances must be in centimeters. The minu s sign indicates that the final image is inverted. Note that the only variables in
the equation are the focal distances of the eyepiece and the objective, which makes this equation particula rly useful.
Telescopes
Telescopes are meant for viewing distant objects and p roduce an image that is larger than the image produ ced in the unaided eye.
Telescopes gather far more light than the eye, allowi ng dim objects to be observed with greater magnifica tion and better resolution.
Telescopes were invented around 1600, and Galileo was th e first to use them to study the heavens, with monume ntal consequences.
He observed the moons of Jupiter, the craters and moun tains on the moon, the details of sunspots, and the fact that the Milky Way
is composed of a vast number of individual stars.
Figure: (a) Galileo made telescopes with a convex obj ective and a concave eyepiece. These produce an upri ght image and are
used in spyglasses. (b) Most simple refracting telescopes ha ve two convex lenses. The objective forms a real, inve rted image at (or
just within) the focal plane of the eyepiece. This im age serves as the object for the eyepiece. The eyepiec e forms a virtual, inverted
image that is magnified.

9.7.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667Figure shows a refracting telescope made of two lenses. The first lens, called the objective, forms a real image within the
focal length of the second lens, which is called the eyepiece. The image of the objective lens serves as the obje ct for the eyepiece,
which forms a magnified virtual image that is observed by the eye. This design is what Galileo used to observe the h eavens.
Although the arrangement of the lenses in a refracti ng telescope looks similar to that in a microscope, ther e are important
differences. In a telescope, the real object is far awa y and the intermediate image is smaller than the ob ject. In a microscope, the
real object is very close and the intermediate imag e is larger than the object. In both the telescope an d the microscope, the eyepiece
magnifies the intermediate image; in the telescope, howev er, this is the only magnification.
The most common two-lens telescope is shown in Figure. The object is so far from the telescope that it is essentially at
infinity compared with the focal lengths of the lense s, so the incoming rays are essentially parallel an d focus on the focal
plane. Thus, the first image is produced at
as shown in the figure, and is not large compared wit h what you might see by looking directly at the obje ct. However, the eyepiece
of the telescope eyepiece (like the microscope eyepie ce) allows you to get nearer than your near point to this first image and so
magnifies it (because you are near to it, it subtends a larger angle from your eye and so forms a larger image on your retina). As for
a simple magnifier, the angular magnification of a t elescope is the ratio of the angle subtended by the i mage (in) to the
angle subtended by the real object (in):
To obtain an expression for the magnification that i nvolves only the lens parameters, note that the foca l plane of the objective lens
lies very close to the focal plan of the eyepiece. I f we assume that these planes are superposed, we have t he situation shown in
Figure.
Figure: The focal plane of the objective lens of a t elescope is very near to the focal plane of the eyepi ece. The angle
subtended by the image viewed through the eyepiece i s larger than the angle subtended by the object when viewed with the
unaided eye.
We further assume that the angles and are small, so that the small-angel approximation holds (). If the i mage
formed at the focal plane has height then
where the minus sign is introduced because the height is negative if we measure both angles in the counterc lockwise direction.
Inserting these expressions into Equation gives

9.7.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667Thus, to obtain the greatest angular magnification, i t is best to have an objective with a long focal leng th and an eyepiece with a
short focal length. The greater the angular magnifi cation, the larger an object will appear when viewed through a telescope,
making more details visible. Limits to observable det ails are imposed by many factors, including lens qua lity and atmospheric
disturbance. Typical eyepieces have focal lengths of 2.5 cm or 1.25 cm. If the objective of the telescop e has a focal length of 1
meter, then these eyepieces result in magnifications of 40× and 80×, respectively. Thus, the angular magnif ications make the image
appear 40 times or 80 times closer than the real object.
The minus sign in the magnification indicates the im age is inverted, which is unimportant for observing t he stars but is a real
problem for other applications, such as telescopes on ships or telescopic gun sights. If an upright image i s needed, Galileo’s
arrangement in can be used. But a more common arran gement is to use a third convex lens as an eyepiece, increasing the
distance between the first two and inverting the image once again, as seen in Figure.
Figure: This arrangement of three lenses in a telescope produces an upright final image. The first two lenses are far enough
apart that the second lens inverts the image of the fi rst. The third lens acts as a magnifier and keeps the im age upright and in a
location that is easy to view.
The largest refracting telescope in the world is the 4 0-inch diameter Yerkes telescope located at Lake Gen eva, Wisconsin (Figure
), and operated by the University of Chicago.
It is very difficult and expensive to build large r efracting telescopes. You need large defect-free lense s, which in itself is a
technically demanding task. A refracting telescope b asically looks like a tube with a support structure to rotate it in different
directions. A refracting telescope suffers from sever al problems. The aberration of lenses causes the imag e to be blurred. Also, as
the lenses become thicker for larger lenses, more ligh t is absorbed, making faint stars more difficult to observe. Large lenses are
also very heavy and deform under their own weight. Some of these problems with refracting telescopes are addr essed by avoiding
refraction for collecting light and instead using a curved mirror in its place, as devised by Isaac Newton. These telescopes are
called reflecting telescopes.
Figure: In 1897, the Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin (U SA) built a large refracting telescope with an object ive lens that is 40
inches in diameter and has a tube length of 62 feet. (credit: Yerkes Observatory, University of Chicago)

9.7.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667Reflecting Telescopes
Isaac Newton designed the first reflecting telescope around 1670 to solve the problem of chromatic aberra tion that happens in all
refracting telescopes. In chromatic aberration, light of different colors refracts by slightly different a mounts in the lens. As a result,
a rainbow appears around the image and the image app ears blurred. In the reflecting telescope, light ray s from a distant source fall
upon the surface of a concave mirror fixed at the b ottom end of the tube. The use of a mirror instead of a lens eliminates chromatic
aberration. The concave mirror focuses the rays on its focal plane. The design problem is how to observe the focused image.
Newton used a design in which the focused light from th e concave mirror was reflected to one side of the tu be into an eyepiece
(Figure). This arrangement is common in many amateur tel escopes and is called the Newtonian design.
Some telescopes reflect the light back toward the midd le of the concave mirror using a convex mirror. In th is arrangement, the
light-gathering concave mirror has a hole in the mid dle (). The light then is incident on an eyepiece le ns. This arrangement of
the objective and eyepiece is called the Cassegrain design. Most big telescopes, including the Hubble space telesc ope, are of this
design. Other arrangements are also possible. In some te lescopes, a light detector is placed right at the spo t where light is focused
by the curved mirror.
Figure: Reflecting telescopes: (a) In the Newtonian d esign, the eyepiece is located at the side of the tele scope; (b) in the
Cassegrain design, the eyepiece is located past a hole i n the primary mirror.
Most astronomical research telescopes are now of the r eflecting type. One of the earliest large telescopes of this kind is the Hale
200-inch (or 5-meter) telescope built on Mount Palom ar in southern California, which has a 200 inch-diamet er mirror. One of the
largest telescopes in the world is the 10-meter Keck te lescope at the Keck Observatory on the summit of the d ormant Mauna Kea
volcano in Hawaii. The Keck Observatory operates two 10-me ter telescopes. Each is not a single mirror, but is ins tead made up of
36 hexagonal mirrors. Furthermore, the two telescopes o n the Keck can work together, which increases their po wer to an effective
85-meter mirror. The Hubble telescope (Figure) is an other large reflecting telescope with a 2.4 meter-diam eter primary mirror.
The Hubble was put into orbit around Earth in 1990.

9.7.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76667
Figure: The Hubble space telescope as seen from the Spac e Shuttle Discovery. (credit: modification of work b y NASA)
The angular magnification of a reflecting telescop e is also given by Equation. For a spherical mirror, the focal length is
half the radius of curvature, so making a large obj ective mirror not only helps the telescope collect m ore light, but also increases
the magnification of the image.
This page titled 9.7: Optical Instruments is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.8: The Simple Magnifier by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
2.7: The Camera by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.
2.9: Microscopes and Telescopes by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

9.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766659.8: The Eye
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Understand the basic physics of how images are formed by t he human eye
Recognize several conditions of impaired vision as well as the optics principles for treating these conditions
Physics of the Eye
The eye is remarkable in how it forms images and in th e richness of detail and color it can detect. However, our eyes often need
some correction to reach what is called “normal” visio n. Actually, normal vision should be called “ideal” vi sion because nearly
one-half of the human population requires some sort of eyesight correction, so requiring glasses is by n o means “abnormal.” Image
formation by our eyes and common vision correction can be analyzed with the optics discussed earlier in this chapter.
Figure shows the basic anatomy of the eye. The cornea and lens form a system that, to a good approximation, acts as a single
thin lens. For clear vision, a real image must be proje cted onto the light-sensitive retina, which lies a f ixed distance from the lens.
The flexible lens of the eye allows it to adjust the radius of curvature of the lens to produce an imag e on the retina for objects at
different distances. The center of the image falls on t he fovea, which has the greatest density of light rece ptors and the greatest
acuity (sharpness) in the visual field. The variable opening (i.e., the pupil) of the eye, along with chem ical adaptation, allows the
eye to detect light intensities from the lowest obse rvable to 10 times greater (without damage). This is an incredible range of
detection. Processing of visual nerve impulses begins with interconnections in the retina and continues in the brain. The optic nerve
conveys the signals received by the eye to the brain.
Figure: The cornea and lens of the eye act together to form a real image on the light-sensing retina, whi ch has its densest
concentration of receptors in the fovea and a blind spot over the optic nerve. The radius of curvature of the lens of an eye is
adjustable to form an image on the retina for differ ent object distances. Layers of tissues with varying indi ces of refraction in the
lens are shown here. However, they have been omitted from other pictures for clarity.
The indices of refraction in the eye are crucial to its ability to form images. Table lists the indices of refraction relevant to the
eye. The biggest change in the index of refraction, which is where the light rays are most bent, occurs at the air-cornea interface
rather than at the aqueous humor-lens interface. The ray diagram in Figure shows image formation by the co rnea and lens of
the eye. The cornea, which is itself a converging len s with a focal length of approximately 2.3 cm, provid es most of the focusing
power of the eye. The lens, which is a converging lens wit h a focal length of about 6.4 cm, provides the finer focus needed to
produce a clear image on the retina. The cornea and lens can be treated as a single thin lens, even though the light rays pass through
several layers of material (such as cornea, aqueous humor, several layers in the lens, and vitreous humor), changing direction at
each interface. The image formed is much like the on e produced by a single convex lens (i.e., a real, inve rted image). Although
images formed in the eye are inverted, the brain inverts them once more to make them seem upright.
Table: Refractive Indices Relevant to the Eye*This i s an average value. The actual index of refraction v aries throughout the lens and is
greatest in center of the lens.Learning Objectives

9.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665Material Index of Refraction
Water 1.33
Air 1.0
Cornea 1.38
Aqueous humor 1.34
Lens 1.41
Vitreous humor 1.34
Figure: In the human eye, an image forms on the reti na. Rays from the top and bottom of the object are t raced to show how a
real, inverted image is produced on the retina. The distance to the object is not to scale.
As noted, the image must fall precisely on the retina t o produce clear vision—that is, the image distance d must equal the lens-toretina distance. Because the lens-to-retina distance does not change, the image distance d must be the same for objects at all
distances. The ciliary muscles adjust the shape of t he eye lens for focusing on nearby or far objects. By changing the shape of the
eye lens, the eye changes the focal length of the lens. This mechanism of the eye is called accommodation.
Figure 3 shows the accommodation of the eye for dista nt and near vision. Since light rays from a nearby ob ject can diverge and still
enter the eye, the lens must be more converging (mor e powerful) for close vision than for distant vision. To be more converging,
the lens is made thicker by the action of the cilia ry muscle surrounding it. The eye is most relaxed wh en viewing distant objects,
one reason that microscopes and telescopes are designe d to produce distant images. Vision of very distant ob jects is called totally
relaxed, while close vision is termed accommodated, with the closest vision being fully accommodated.*
i
i

9.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Relaxed and accommodated vision for distant a nd close objects. (a) Light rays from the same point on a distant object
must be nearly parallel while entering the eye and m ore easily converge to produce an image on the retin a. (b) Light rays from a
nearby object can diverge more and still enter the e ye. A more powerful lens is needed to converge them o n the retina than if they
were parallel.
We will use the thin lens equations to examine image formation by the eye quantitatively. First, note the power of a lens is given as
, so we rewrite the thin lens equations as
and
We understand that must equal the lens-to-retina di stance to obtain clear vision, and that normal visio n is possible for objects at
distances to infinity.
Look at the central transparent area of someone’s ey e, the pupil, in normal room light. Estimate the diamet er of the pupil. Now
turn off the lights and darken the room. After a few m inutes turn on the lights and promptly estimate the diameter of the pupil.
What happens to the pupil as the eye adjusts to the room light? Explain your observations.
The eye can detect an impressive amount of detail, co nsidering how small the image is on the retina. To get some idea of how small
the image can be, consider the following example.
What is the size of the image on the retina of a c m diameter human hair, held at arm’s length (60.0 cm) away? Take
the lens-to-retina distance to be 2.00 cm.
Strategy:
We want to find the height of the image, given the height of the object is cm. We also know that the o bject
is 60.0 cm away, so that. For clear vision, the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance, and so
. The equation can be used to find with the known informa tion.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: THE PUPIL
Example:Size of Image on Retina

9.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665Solution
The only unknown variable in the equation is:
Rearranging to isolate yields
Substituting the known values gives
Discussion:
This truly small image is not the smallest discernible -- that is, the limit to visual acuity is even sma ller than this. Limitations
on visual acuity have to do with the wave properties of light and will be discussed in the next chapter. So me limitation is also
due to the inherent anatomy of the eye and processing tha t occurs in our brain.
Calculate the power of the eye when viewing objects at the greatest and smallest distances possible with norm al vision,
assuming a lens-to-retina distance of 2.00 cm (a typical value).
Strategy:
For clear vision, the image must be on the retina, and so here. For distant vision,, and for close vision,
, as discussed earlier. The equation as written just above, can be used directly to solve for in both ca ses,
since we know and. Power has units of diopters, where, and so we should express all distances in meters.
Solution
For distant vision,
Since, this gives
Now, for close vision,
Discussion:
For an eye with this typical 2.00 cm lens-to-retina d istance, the power of the eye ranges from 50.0 D (for d istant totally relaxed
vision) to 54.0 D (for close fully accommodated visio n), which is an 8% increase. This increase in power fo r close vision is
consistent with the preceding discussion and the ray t racing in Figure 3. An 8% ability to accommodate is co nsidered normal
but is typical for people who are about 40 years old. Younger people have greater accommodation ability, whereas older people
gradually lose the ability to accommodate. When an o ptometrist identifies accommodation as a problem in elder people, it is
most likely due to stiffening of the lens. The lens of the eye changes with age in ways that tend to preser ve the ability to seeExample:Power Range of the Eye

9.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665distant objects clearly but do not allow the eye to accommodate for close vision, a condition called presbyopia (literally, elder
eye). To correct this vision defect, we place a conver ging, positive power lens in front of the eye, such as found in reading
glasses. Commonly available reading glasses are rated by the ir power in diopters, typically ranging from 1.0 to 3.5 D.
The nearest point an object can be placed so that th e eye can form a clear image on the retina is called the near point of the eye.
Similarly, the far point is the farthest distance at which an object is clearly visible. A person with norma l vision can see objects
clearly at distances ranging from 25 cm to essentiall y infinity. The near point increases with age, becomi ng several meters for some
older people. In this text, we consider the near point to be 25 cm.
We can use the thin-lens equations to quantitatively examine image formation by the eye. First, we define the optical power of a
lens as
with the focal length f given in meters. The units of optical power are call ed “diopters” (D). That is, 1D=1/m,or 1m. Optometrists
prescribe common eyeglasses and contact lenses in unit s of diopters. With this definition of optical power, we can rewrite the thinlens equations as
Working with optical power is convenient because, for two or more lenses close together, the effective opti cal power of the lens
system is approximately the sum of the optical power of the individual lenses:
The cornea and eye lens have focal lengths of 2.3 an d 6.4 cm, respectively. Find the net focal length and optical power of the
eye.
Strategy
The optical powers of the closely spaced lenses add, so.
Solution
Writing the equation for power in terms of the focal leng ths gives
Hence, the focal length of the eye (cornea and lens toget her) is
The optical power of the eye is
For clear vision, the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance. Normal vision is possible for objects at distances
to infinity. The following example shows how to calcul ate the image distance for an object placed at the n ear point of the
eye.
The net focal length of a particular human eye is 1.7 cm. An object is placed at the near point of the eye. How far behind the
lens is a focused image formed?
Strategy−1
Example: Effective Focal Length of the Eye
Example: Image of an object placed at the near point

9.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665The near point is 25 cm from the eye, so the object distance is d =25 cm. We determine the image distan ce from the lens
equation:
Solution
Therefore, the image is formed 1.8 cm behind the lens.
Significance
From the magnification formula, we find. Since m<0, th e image is inverted in orientation with respect to
the object. From the absolute value of m we see that the image is much smaller than the objec t; in fact, it is only 7% of the size
of the object.
Vision Correction
The need for some type of vision correction is very common. Typical vision defects are easy to understand with geometric optics,
and some are simple to correct. Figure illustrates two common vision defects. Nearsightedness, or myopia, i s the ability to see
near objects, whereas distant objects are blurry. The eye over converges the nearly parallel rays from a distant object, and the rays
cross in front of the retina. More divergent rays from a close object are converged on the retina for a c lear image. The distance to
the farthest object that can be seen clearly is calle d the far point of the eye (normally the far point i s at infinity). Farsightedness, or
hyperopia, is the ability to see far objects clearly, whereas near objects are blurry. A farsighted eye doe s not sufficiently converge
the rays from a near object to make the rays meet on the re tina.o

9.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: (a) The nearsighted (myopic) eye converges ra ys from a distant object in front of the retina, so th ey have diverged
when they strike the retina, producing a blurry imag e. An eye lens that is too powerful can cause nearsight edness, or the eye may be
too long. (b) The farsighted (hyperopic) eye is unabl e to converge the rays from a close object on the ret ina, producing blurry nearfield vision. An eye lens with insufficient optical po wer or an eye that is too short can cause farsightedness.
Since the nearsighted eye over converges light rays, the correction for nearsightedness consists of placin g a diverging eyeglass lens
in front of the eye, as shown in Figure. This reduces t he optical power of an eye that is too powerful (recall that the focal
length of a diverging lens is negative, so its optical power is negative). Another way to understand this correc tion is that a diverging
lens will cause the incoming rays to diverge more to c ompensate for the excessive convergence caused by the lens system of the
eye. The image produced by the diverging eyeglass le ns serves as the (optical) object for the eye, and bec ause the eye cannot focus
on objects beyond its far point, the diverging lens mu st form an image of distant (physical) objects at a p oint that is closer than the
far point.

9.8.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Correction of nearsightedness requires a diverg ing lens that compensates for over convergence by the eye. The
diverging lens produces an image closer to the eye tha n the physical object. This image serves as the optical object for the eye, and
the nearsighted person can see it clearly because it is closer than their far point.
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to cor rect the vision of a nearsighted person whose far poin t is 30.0 cm? Assume
the corrective lens is fixed 1.50 cm away from the eye.
Strategy
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see dis tant objects clearly, which means that the eyeglass l ens must produce an
image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object at infinit y. An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be 30.0 cm−1.50 cm =28.5 cm from
the eyeglass lens. Therefore, we must have d =−28.5cm whe n d =. The image distance is negative because it is on the same
side of the eyeglass lens as the object.
Solution
Since d and dodo are known, we can find the optical power o f the eyeglass lens by using Equation:
Significance
The negative optical power indicates a diverging (or concave) lens, as expected. If you examine eyeglasses for nearsighted
people, you will find the lenses are thinnest in the c enter. Additionally, if you examine a prescription fo r eyeglasses for
nearsighted people, you will find that the prescribed optic al power is negative and given in units of diopters.
Correcting farsightedness consists simply of using the opposite type of lens as for nearsightedness (i.e., a converging lens), as
shown in Figure.
Such a lens will produce an image of physical objects t hat are closer than the near point at a distance th at is between the near point
and the far point, so that the person can see the i mage clearly. To determine the optical power needed f or correction, you must
therefore know the person’s near point, as explained in Ex ample.Example: Correcting Nearsightedness
i o
i

9.8.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Correction of farsightedness uses a converging l ens that compensates for the under convergence by the eye. The
converging lens produces an image farther from the ey e than the object, so that the farsighted person can se e it clearly.
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to all ow a farsighted person, whose near point is 1.00 m, to se e an object clearly
that is 25.0 cm from the eye? Assume the corrective lens i s fixed 1.5 cm from the eye.
Strategy
When an object is 25.0 cm from the person’s eyes, the eyeglass lens must produce an image 1.00 m away (the near point), so
that the person can see it clearly. An image 1.00 m f rom the eye will be 100cm−1.5cm=98.5cm from the eyegl ass lens because
the eyeglass lens is 1.5 cm from the eye. Therefore, d =−98.5cm, where the minus sign indicates that the imag e is on the same
side of the lens as the object. The object is 25.0cm−1.5cm =23.5cm from the eyeglass lens, so d =23.5cm.
Solution
Since d and dodo are known, we can find the optical power o f the eyeglass lens by using Equation:
Significance
The positive optical power indicates a converging (c onvex) lens, as expected. If you examine eyeglasses o f farsighted people,
you will find the lenses to be thickest in the center. In addition, prescription eyeglasses for farsighted people have a prescribed
optical power that is positive.
Anatomy of the Eye
Our sense of vision occurs due to transduction of li ght stimuli received through the eyes. The eyes are l ocated within either orbit in
the skull. See Figure for an illustration of the eye. The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, he lp to protect the eye
from abrasions by blocking particles that may land o n the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each l id is a thin membrane
known as the conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye called the sclera, connecting the eyelids to the
eyeball. The iris is the colored part of the eye. The iris is a smoot h muscle that opens and closes the pupil, the hole at the center ofExample: Correcting Farsightedness
i
o
i
[1]

9.8.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665the eye that allows light to enter. The iris constri cts the pupil in response to bright light and dilate s the pupil in response to dim
light. The cornea is the transparent front part of the eye that cove rs the iris, pupil, and anterior chamber. The cornea, wi th the
anterior chamber and lens, refracts light and contributes to vision. The corn ea can be reshaped by surgical procedures such as
LASIK. The innermost layer of the eye is the retina that contains the nervous tissue and specialized cells called photoreceptors for
the initial processing of visual stimuli. Two types o f photoreceptors within the retina are the rods and t he cones. The cones are
sensitive to different wavelengths of light and prov ide color vision. These nerve cells of the retina le ave the eye and enter the brain
via the optic nerve (cranial nerve II).
Figure: The Eye
Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland that is loc ated beneath the lateral edges of the nose. Tears fl ow through the lacrimal duct
to the medial corner of the eye and flow over the co njunctiva to wash away foreign particles. Movement of the eye within the orbit
occurs by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate from the bones of the orbit and ins ert into the surface of the
eyeball. The extraocular muscles are innervated by the abducens nerve, the trochlear nerve, and the ocu lomotor nerve (cranial
nerves III, IV, and V). See the illustration of the extraocul ar muscles in Figure.
Figure: Extraocular Muscles
More Anatomy
The human eye is made of an almost spherical (24 mm long and 22 mm across) gelatinous substance called t he vitreous humor
with refractive index 1.337, surrounded by a white shel l, the sclera (Figure). At the front, the sclera has an opening with a
transparent lens called the cornea, with for green light an index of refraction of 1.376. Most of the bending of the rays takes place
at the air-cornea interface and this is why it is diff icult to see under water (n = 1.33). After passing the cornea, the rays reach
the aqueous humour (n ≈1.336) with the iris (i.e. pupil). It can expand or contract from a 2 mm (bright sun) to 8 mm (low light)
diameter to adapt to the light intensity. The iris g ives colour to the eye. After the iris, the rays rea ch the flexible crystalline lens
which has the size of a bean (9 mm in diameter, and 4 mm thick in unaccommodated condition). Its index of refraction varies from
1.406 in the centre to 1.386 at the edge.[2]
[3] [4]
water

9.8.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Cross section of a human eye (from Wikimedia C ommons by Holly Fischer / CC BY).

Working of the eye
The entire eye can very accurately be treated as two lenses in contact, of which the crystalline lens can change its focal length.
Often the system is approximated by only a single len s. In unaccommodated condition, the first focal dista nce of the lens system is
f = 16 mm as measured from the cornea. The second foc al distance is equal to the length of the eye: f = 24 mm. These focal
distances are different, because the refractive indic es of the surrounding medium (air and vitreous humour) differ. The power of the
intact, unaccommodated eye lens system is, according to (2.5.35), (2.5.39):
In relaxed condition the lens focuses light coming f rom infinity on the retina. When the object is close r, the eye muscles contract
due to which the crystalline lens becomes more conve x and the focal length of the system decreases, as see n on the right of Figure
. At a certain point, the object will be too close to be focused on the retina. This is called the near poi nt of the eye. Due to the
loss of elasticity of the muscle, the near point moves from 7 cm for teens to 100 cm for a 60-year- old. Figure shows the
optical rays entering the eyes, for two configuratio ns: an object at infinity and an object nearby. The so-called normal near point is
at 25 cm. The far point is the furthest object which is imaged on the retina by the unaccommodated eye. For the normal eye the far
point is at infinity.o i

9.8.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Left: Optical rays showing how an eye accommo dates by changing its focal length. Right: Relaxed an d contracted
muscle at the crystalline lens needed for this accommod ation.(Left: adapted from Wikimedia Commons Erin Sil versmith / BY-NCSA 2.5 Generic. Right: adapted from Sjaastad O.V., San d O. and Hove K. (2010) Physiology of domestic animal s, 2nd edn., Oslo:
Scandinavian Veterinary Press).

Retina
The retina is composed of approximately 125 million photoreceptor cells: the rods and the cones. The rods are highly sensitive
black and white (intensity) sensors, while the cones are colour sensitive for the wavelengths 390 nm - 780 nm. UV light is absorbed
by the lens (people whose lens is removed because of c ataract can "see" UV light). The fovea centralis is the most sensitive centre
of the retina with a high density of cones. The eyes move continuously to focus the image on this area. T he information is
transferred by the optical nerve, placed at the back of t he eye, where it causes a blind spot.
Dioptric Power of a lens
For a combination of two thin lenses, it is not so eas y to derive the resulting focal length from the ind ividual focal length of the
lenses. It is easier to consider the dioptric power. For a single lens the dioptric power is defined by:
with R and R the radii of the thin lens and n the ind ex of refraction of the glass. Because for two lenses i n contact, the focal
length is given by:
the combined power of the two lenses is the sum of the indi vidual powers:
A lens of focal length has a dioptric power. If it is in contact with a negative lens of dioptric power
, the resulting power is, equivalent to a parallel sheet o f glass.
Common Disorders of the Eye
Eye disorders that nurses commonly see in practice include myopia, presbyopia, color blindness, dry eye, conjunctivitis, styes,
cataracts, macular degeneration, and glaucoma.
Myopia
Myopia or Nearsightedness is impaired vision that makes far-away objects look b lurry. It happens when the eyeball grows too
long from front to back or when there are problems wi th the shape of the cornea or the lens. These problems make light focus in
front of the retina, instead of on it, causing blurri ness. See Figure for a simulated image of a person’s v ision with myopia.
Nearsightedness usually becomes apparent between ages 6 and 14. It is corrected with glasses, contacts, or LASIK surge ry.1 2 i
[6]
[7]

9.8.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Simulated Vision with Myopia
A myopic eye has too short focal distances (has too h igh power) so that distant objects are focused in fro nt of the retina by the
unaccommodated eye. The far point is thus not at in finity, but closer. This can be corrected by a negati ve lens. Suppose the far point
is at. If the concave lens makes a virtual image of a distant object at distance in front of the corne a, the unaccommodated
eye can see it clearly. The lens Law (2.5.44), with imp lies then. Hence the required power of the lens is:
The lens is best put in the front focal plane of th e unaccomodated eye, i.e. at approximately 16 in f ront of the cornea. (Since the
distance of the retina to the eye lens is roughly and the refractive index of the vitrous humor is, this implies a focal
distance in air of the unaccomodated eye of). The reason is that in this case the magnification of the eye and the
negative lens together are the same as for the unco rrected eye. To see this, draw a ray from the top of t he object through the centre
of the negative lens. This will then be made parallel to the optical axis by the eye lens; the distance of this ray to the optical axis is
the image size on the retina. This ray will end up at the same point of the retina as when the negative le ns is taken out, because it is
not refracted by this lens.
Contact lenses are very close to the eye lens and he nce the total power of the eye with a contact lens is simply the sum of the power
of the eye and the contact lens.
Hyperopia
Hyperopia or Farsightedness. In this case a distant object is imaged by the un accommodated eye behind the retina, i.e. the back
focal distance of the unaccommodated eye is larger t han the depth of the eye. Close objects can not be i maged on the retina, hence
the near point is relatively far from the cornea. I n order to bend the rays more, a positive lens is plac ed in front of the eye. Suppose
that a hyperopic eye has near point at distance. For an object at to have virtual image at, so that it
can be seen, the focal length must satisfy
hence the power must be Diopter.

9.8.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Correction of farsighted (left) and nearsight ed (right) eye (adapted from Wikimedia Commons by Gu menyuk I.S. / CC
BY-SA 4.0).
Presbyopia
Presbyopia is impaired near vision. It commonly occurs in midd le-aged and older adults, making it difficult to clea rly see objects
up close. As people age, the lens in the eye gets hard er and less flexible and stops focusing light correctl y on the retina.
Presbyopia results in an increase in the distance be tween the near point and the retina. This defect aff ects all images. Presbyopia is
usually corrected by glasses with progressive correct ion, the upper part of glass used for distance vision and the lower part for near
vision.. See Figure for a simulated image of a person’s v ision with presbyopia.
Figure: Simulated Vision with Presbyopia[8]
[9]

9.8.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665Astigmatism
Astigmatism. In this case the focal distances for two direction s perpendicular to the optical axis are different. It is attributed to a
lack of symmetry of revolution of the cornea. This is co mpensated by using glasses which themselves are astigmati c.
Color Blindness
Color blindness makes it difficult to differentiate b etween certain colors. Color blindness can occur due to damage to the eye or to
the brain. There’s no cure for color blindness, but sp ecial glasses and contact lenses can help people diff erentiate between colors.
Most people who have color blindness are able to use vis ual strategies related to color selection and don’t h ave problems
participating in everyday activities.
Dry Eye
Dry eye is a very common eye condition that occurs wh en the eyes don’t make enough tears to stay wet or th e tears don’t work
correctly. Symptoms of dry eye include a scratchy fee ling, stinging, and burning. Treatment includes over- the-counter and
prescription eye drops, as well as lifestyle changes to decrease the dryness of the eyes.
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is a viral or bacterial infection that causes swelli ng and redness in the conjunctiva and sclera. See Figur e for
an image of conjunctivitis. The eye may feel itchy and painful with crusty yellow drainage present. Conj unctivitis is very
contagious, so the nurse should educate the patient an d family caregivers to wash hands frequently. Additiona lly, the patient should
not share items like pillowcases, towels, or makeup. Bacteria l conjunctivitis is treated with antibiotic eye drops.
Figure: Conjunctivitis
Stye
A stye is a bacterial infection of an oil gland in t he eyelid, causing a red, tender bump at the edge of the eyelid. See Figure
for an image of a stye. Treatment includes applying warm c ompresses to the eyelid and prescription eyedrops.[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

9.8.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Stye
Cataracts
A cataract is a cloudy area on the lens of the eye. Cataracts are very common in older adults. Over half of all Americans age 80 or
older either have cataracts or have had surgery to remove cataracts. See Figure for an image of a catar act. Cataracts develop
slowly and symptoms include faded colors, blurred or double vision, halos around light, and trouble seein g at night. See Figure
for a simulated image of a person’s vision with catar acts. Decreased vision due to cataracts may result in tr ouble reading
and driving and increases the risk of falling. Patien ts often undergo surgery for cataracts. During catarac t surgery, the doctor
removes the clouded lens and replaces it with a new, artifici al lens.
Figure: Cataracts[16]
[17]
[18]

9.8.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Simulated Vision with Cataracts
Macular Degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration is a common conditi on that causes blurred central vision. It is the le ading cause of vision loss for
people 50 and older. See Figure for a simulated imag e of a person’s vision with macular degeneration. The re are two types
of macular degeneration: dry (nonexudative) and wet (exudative). During dry macular degeneration, cellular debris called drusen
accumulates and scars the retina. In the wet (exudati ve) form, which is more severe, blood vessels grow behi nd the retina that leak
exudate fluid, causing hemorrhaging and scarring. The re is no treatment for dry macular degeneration, but laser therapy can be
used to help treat wet (exudative) macular degeneration.
Figure: Simulated Vision with Macular Degeneration
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is a group of eye diseases that causes vision loss by damaging the optic nerve due to increased in traocular pressure.
Treatment includes prescription eye drops to lower th e pressure inside the eye and slow the progression of the disease. If not treated
appropriately, glaucoma can cause blindness. Symptoms o f glaucoma include gradual loss of peripheral vision. See Figure
for a simulated image of a person’s vision with glauco ma. Because the loss of vision occurs so slowly, many people don’t realize
they have symptoms until the disease is well-progressed o r it is discovered during an eye exam.[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

9.8.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Simulated Vision with Glaucoma
Screening Tools for Eye Exams
Common screening tools used during an eye exam are t he Snellen chart, a near vision chart, and Ishihara p lates. Nurses working in
outpatient settings or school settings use these tool s when screening patients for vision problems. If a visio n problem is identified,
the patient is referred to an optometrist for furthe r testing. When performing a vision assessment, be sur e to provide adequate
lighting.
Snellen Chart
Distant vision is tested by using the Snellen chart. See Figure for an image of the Snellen chart. Place the patient 20 feet
away from the Snellen chart. Ask them to cover one eye and read the letters from the lowest line they can s ee clearly. Record the
corresponding fraction in the furthermost right-hand column. Repeat with the other eye. If the patient is we aring glasses or contact
lens during this assessment, document the results as “correct ed vision” when wearing these assistive devices.
A person with no visual impairment is documented as h aving 20/20 vision. A person with impaired vision ha s a different lower
denominator of this fraction. For example, a vision me asurement of 20/30 indicates the patient can see le tters clearly at 20 feet that
a person with normal vision can see clearly at 30 fee t. Alternative charts are also available for childre n or adults who can’t read
letters in English. See Figure for an alternative eye chart.[23]
[24]
[25]

9.8.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Snellen Chart
Figure: Alternative Eye Chart
Near Vision
Near vision is assessed by having a patient read from a prepared card that is held 14 inches away from the eyes. If a card is not
available, the patient can be asked to read from a n ewspaper as an alternative quick screening tool. See Figure for an image
of a prepared card used to assess near vision.[26]

9.8.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76665
Figure: Assessing Near Vision
Ishihara Plates
Ishihara plates are commonly used to assess color v ision. Each of the colored dotted plates shows either a number or a path. See
Figure for an example of Ishihara plates. A person with color blindness is not able to distinguish the numb ers or paths from
the other colored dots on the plate.
Figure: Ishihara Color Test Plates
New Correction Technique
In recent years, to correct eye defects such as myop ia and astigmatism, technology has been developed to change the local
curvatures of the surface of the cornea using an ex cimer laser. The laser is computer-controlled and ca uses photo-ablation in parts
of the cornea.

This page titled 9.8: The Eye is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
2.6: The Eye by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.
26.1: Physics of the Eye by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
8.2: Eye and Ear Basic Concepts by Ernstmeyer & Christman (Eds.) is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://wtcs.pressbooks.pub/nursingskills.
3.5: The Human Eye has no license indicated.[27]

9.8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783799.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
Anatomy of the Ear
Hearing is the transduction of sound waves into a neur al signal by the structures of the ear. See Figure f or an image of
the anatomy of the ear. The large, fleshy structure o n the lateral aspect of the head is known as the auricle. The C-shaped curves of
the auricle direct sound waves toward the ear canal. At the end of the ear canal is the tympanic membrane, commonly referred to
as the eardrum, that vibrates after it is struck by sound waves. The auricle, ear canal, and tympanic mem brane are referred to as the
external ear. The middle ear consists of a space wit h three small bones called the malleus, incus, and stap es, the Latin names that
roughly translate to “hammer,” “anvil,” and “stirrup.” The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane an d articulates with the
incus. The incus, in turn, articulates with the stapes. The stapes is attached to the inner ear, where the sound waves are transduced
into a neural signal. The middle ear is also connect ed to the pharynx through the Eustachian tube that helps equilibrate air pressure
across the tympanic membrane. The Eustachian tube is n ormally closed but will pop open when the muscles of t he pharynx
contract during swallowing or yawning. The inner ear i s often described as a bony labyrinth because it is composed of a series of
semicircular canals. The semicircular canals have t wo separate regions, the cochlea and the vestibule, t hat are responsible for
hearing and balance. The neural signals from these two regions are relayed to the brain stem through separa te fiber bundles.
However, they travel together from the inner ear to the b rain stem as the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).
Figure: The Ear
Hearing
Sound waves cause the tympanic membrane to vibrate. Th is vibration is amplified as it moves across the mall eus, incus, and stapes
and into the cochlea. Within the inner ear, the coch lear duct contains sound-transducing neurons. As the fr equency of a sound
changes, different hair cells within the cochlear du ct are sensitive to a particular frequency. In this manner, the cochlea separates
auditory stimuli by frequency and sends impulses to th e brain stem via the cochlear nerve. The cochlea en codes auditory stimuli for
frequencies between 20 and 20,000 Hz, the range of sound that h uman ears can detect.
Balance
Along with hearing, the inner ear is also responsible for the sense of balance. Semicircular canals in the vestibule have three ringlike extensions. One extension is oriented in the hor izontal plane, and the other two are oriented in the vertical plane. Hair cells
within the vestibule sense head position, head movemen t, and body motion. By comparing the relative movemen ts of both the
horizontal and vertical planes, the vestibular system can detect the direction of most head movements with in three-dimensional
space. However, medical conditions affecting the semic ircular canals cause incorrect signals to be sent to the brain, resulting in a
spinning type of dizziness called vertigo.[28]
[29]
[30]

9.8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78379Common Ear Disorders
Hearing Loss
Hearing loss is classified as conductive hearing los s or sensorineural hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss occurs when
something in the external or middle ear is obstruct ing the transmission of sound. For example, cerumen i mpaction or a perforated
tympanic membrane can cause conductive hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by pathology of the inner ear, cranial
nerve VIII, or auditory areas of the cerebral cortex. Presbycusis is sensorineural hearing loss that occurs with aging due to gradual
nerve degeneration. Ototoxic medications can also cause sensorineural hearing loss by affecting the hair cells in the cochlea.
Acute Otitis Media
Acute otitis media is the medical diagnosis for an middle ear infection. Ear infections are a common illness in the pediatri c
population. Children between the ages of 6 months and 2 years are more susceptible to ear infections becaus e of the size and shape
of their Eustachian tubes. Acute otitis media typica lly occurs after an upper respiratory infection when the Eustachian tube becomes
inflamed and the middle ear fills with fluid, causin g ear pain and irritability. This fluid can become i nfected, causing purulent fluid
and low-grade fever. Acute otitis media is diagnosed by a health care provider using an otoscope to examine the tympanic
membrane for bulging and purulent fluid. If not tre ated, acute otitis media can potentially cause perfo ration of the tympanic
membrane. Treating early acute otitis media with ant ibiotics is controversial in the United States due to the effort to prevent
antibiotic resistance. However, the treatment goals are to control pain and treat infection with antibiotics if a bacterial infection is
present.
Some children develop recurrent ear infections that can cause hearing loss affecting their language devel opment. For children
experiencing recurring cases, a surgery called myrin gotomy surgery is performed by an otolaryngologist. Dur ing myringotomy
surgery, a tympanostomy tube is placed in the tympan ic membrane to drain fluid from the middle ear and prevent infection from
developing. If a child has a tympanostomy tube in pla ce, it is expected to see clear fluid in their ear canal as it drains out of the
tube. See Figure for an image of a tympanostomy tube in th e ear.Video Review of Anatomy of the Ear[31]
Anatomy of the Ear (v2.0)Anatomy of the Ear (v2.0)
[32]
[33] [34]

9.8.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78379
Figure: Tympanostomy Tube
Otitis Externa
Otitis externa is the medical diagnosis for external ear inflammatio n and/or infection. See Figure for an image of otitis
externa. It is commonly known as “swimmer’s ear” because it commonly occurs in swimmers, especially in summer months. Otitis
externa can occur in all age groups and causes an ery thematous and edematous ear canal with associated yello w, white, or grey
debris. Patients often report itching in the ear canal with pain that is worsened by pulling upwards and outwa rds on the auricle.
Otitis externa is treated with antibiotic drops placed in the e ar canals.
Figure: Otitis Externa
Cerumen Impaction
Cerumen impaction refers to a buildup of earwax causing occlusion of t he ear canal. This occlusion often causes symptoms such
as hearing loss, ear fullness, and itching. See Figure for an image of cerumen impaction. Cerumen can be re moved via[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

9.8.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78379irrigation of the ear canal, ear drops to dissolve th e wax, or manual removal. In outpatient settings, nur ses often assist with ear
irrigation to remove cerumen impaction according to agency policy. See Figure for an image of an ear irr igation
procedure.
Figure: Cerumen Impaction
Figure: Ear Irrigation to Remove Cerumen Impaction
Tinnitus
Tinnitus is a ringing, buzzing, roaring, hissing, or whistling s ound in the ears. The noise may be intermittent or continuous.
Tinnitus can be caused by cerumen impaction, noise trauma, or ototoxic medications, such as diuretics o r high doses of aspirin.
Military personnel have a high incidence of tinnitus due to noise trauma from loud explosions and gunfire. There are no
medications to treat tinnitus, but patients can be re ferred to an otolaryngologist for treatment such as cognitive therapy or noise
masking.
Vertigo
Vertigo is a type of dizziness that is often described by pati ents as, “the room feels as if it is spinning.” Benign positional vertigo
(BPV) is a common condition caused by crystals becoming lodged in the semicircular canals in the vestibule of the inner ear that
send false movement signals to the brain. BPV can be treated by trained professionals using a specific set of maneuvers that guide
the crystals back to the chamber where they are supposed to b e in the inner ear.
1. “1411 Eye in The Orbit.jpg ” by OpenStax College is licensed under CC BY 3.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /14-1-sensory-perception ↵
2. Giddens, J. (2007). A survey of physical examination te chniques performed by RNs: Lessons for nursing education. Journal of
Nursing Education, 46 (2), 83-87. ↵
3. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]

9.8.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783794. “1412 Extraocular Muscles.jpg ” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 3.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /14-1-sensory-perception ↵
5. Forciea, B. (2015, May 12). Anatomy of the eye (v2.0). [Video]. YouTube. All rights reserved. Video used with per mission.
https://youtu.be/HmKGyJUcRLw ↵
6. “Eye disease simulation, myopia.jpg ” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
7. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 9). Types of refractive errors. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eyeconditions-and-diseases/refractive-errors/types-refra ctive-errors#section-id-6802 ↵
8. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 9). Types of refractive errors. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eyeconditions-and-diseases/refractive-errors/types-refra ctive-errors#section-id-6802 ↵
9. “Pesto ingredients - blurred.jpg ” by Colin is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
10. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 3). Color blindness. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/color-blindness ↵
11. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 5). Dry eye. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/dry-eye ↵
12. “ Swollen eye with conjunctivitis.jpg ” by Tanalai at English Wikipedia is licensed under CC BY 3.0 ↵
13. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 8). Causes of pink eye. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/pink-eye/causes-pink-eye ↵
14. “ External hordeolum.jpg ” by Inrankabirhossain is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
15. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 2). Blepharitis. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/blepharitis ↵
16. “Cataract in human eye.png” by Rakesh Ajuja, MD is licen sed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
17. “Eye disease simulation, cataract.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
18. National Eye Institute. (2019, August 3). Cataracts. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/cataracts ↵
19. “Eye disease simulation, age-related macular degenera tion.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the
Public Domain ↵
20. National Eye Institute. (2020, August 17). Age-related macular degeneration. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eyehealth/eye-conditions-and-diseases/age-related-macula r-degeneration ↵
21. “Eye disease simulation, glaucoma.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
22. National Eye Institute. (2020, July 28). Glaucoma. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/glaucoma ↵
23. “ Snellen chart.jpg ” by Jeff Dahl is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
24. Sue, S. (2007). Test distance vision by using a Snellen c hart. Community Eye Health, 20 (63), 52.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2040251/ ↵
25. “ US Navy 070808-N-6278K-128 Hospital Corpsman 3rd Class Edward Ma ce, an optician attached to the Military Sealift
Command (MSC) hospital ship USNS Comfort (T-AH 20), instructs a p atient on how to read an eye chart.jpg ” by Mass
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Joan E. Kretschmer for U.S. Na vy is in the Public Domain ↵
26. “111012-F-ZT401-067.JPG” by Airman 1st Class Brooke P. Be ers for U.S. Air Force is in the Public Domain. Access for free at
https://www.pacaf.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/593609/ keeping-sight-all-right/ ↵
27. This work is derivative of “ Ishihara 9.png ” and " Ishihara_1.png " by Shinobu Ishihara are in the Public Domain ↵
28. “1404 The Structure of the Ear.jpg” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
29. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵
30. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵
31. Forciea, B. (2105, May 12). Anatomy of the ear (v2.0). [Video]. YouTube. All rights reserved. Video used with per mission.
https://youtu.be/A2ji_Vd8cuE ↵
32. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Danishyar and Ashurst and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
33. “Ear Tube.png” by BruceBlaus is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
34. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Danishyar and Ashurst and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵

9.8.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7837935. “Otitis externa.gif” by S. Bhjimji MD is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556055/ ↵
36. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Medina-Blasi ni and Sharman and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
37. “Ear Wax.JPG” by Anand2202 is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
38. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Mankowski and R aggio and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
39. “150915-F-GO352-025.jpg” by Staff Sgt. Jason Huddleston for U.S. Air Force is licensed under CC0. Access for free at
https://www.59mdw.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/647342 /photo-essay-559th-medical-group-at-a-glance/ ↵
40. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Grossan and Pet erson and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
41. Woodhouse, S. (n.d.). Benign paraoxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Vestibular Disorders Association.
https://vestibular.org/article/diagnosis-treatment/ty pes-of-vestibular-disorders/benign-paroxysmal-positiona l-vertigo-bppv/ ↵
This page titled 9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Ernstmeyer &
Christman (Eds.) (OpenRN) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.2: Eye and Ear Basic Concepts by Ernstmeyer & Christman (Eds.) is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://wtcs.pressbooks.pub/nursingskills.

9.8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783709.8.2: A_Vision
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the followi ng:
Explain how electromagnetic waves differ from sound waves
Trace the path of light through the eye to the point of the optic nerve
Explain tonic activity as it is manifested in photorecep tors in the retina
Vision is the ability to detect light patterns from the outside environment and interpret them into imag es. Animals are bombarded
with sensory information, and the sheer volume of vis ual information can be problematic. Fortunately, the visual systems of species
have evolved to attend to the most-important stimuli. The importance of vision to humans is further substan tiated by the fact that
about one-third of the human cerebral cortex is dedicate d to analyzing and perceiving visual information.
Light
As with auditory stimuli, light travels in waves. The co mpression waves that compose sound must travel in a me dium—a gas, a
liquid, or a solid. In contrast, light is composed of e lectromagnetic waves and needs no medium; light can travel in a vacuum
(Figure 36.17). The behavior of light can be discussed in terms of the behavior of waves and also in terms o f the behavior of the
fundamental unit of light—a packet of electromagnet ic radiation called a photon. A glance at the elect romagnetic spectrum shows
that visible light for humans is just a small slice of the entire spectrum, which includes radiation tha t we cannot see as light because
it is below the frequency of visible red light and above the frequency of visible violet light.
Certain variables are important when discussing perce ption of light. Wavelength (which varies inversely with frequency) manifests
itself as hue. Light at the red end of the visible s pectrum has longer wavelengths (and is lower frequency), while light at the violet
end has shorter wavelengths (and is higher frequency). The wavelength of light is expressed in nanometers (nm); one nanometer is
one billionth of a meter. Humans perceive light that r anges between approximately 380 nm and 740 nm. Some ot her animals,
though, can detect wavelengths outside of the human ra nge. For example, bees see near-ultraviolet light in o rder to locate nectar
guides on flowers, and some non-avian reptiles sense infrared light (heat that prey gives off).
Figure 36.17 In the electromagnetic spectrum, visible li ght lies between 380 nm and 740 nm. (credit: modificatio n of work by
NASA)
Wave amplitude is perceived as luminous intensity, or brightness. The standard unit of intensity of light is the candela, which is
approximately the luminous intensity of one common can dle.
Light waves travel 299,792 km per second in a vacuum, (and somewhat slower in various media such as air and water), and those
waves arrive at the eye as long (red), medium (green), and short (blue) waves. What is termed “white light” is light that is
perceived as white by the human eye. This effect is pr oduced by light that stimulates equally the color r eceptors in the human eye.
The apparent color of an object is the color (or col ors) that the object reflects. Thus a red object refle cts the red wavelengths in
mixed (white) light and absorbs all other wavelengths of li ght.
Anatomy of the Eye
The photoreceptive cells of the eye, where transducti on of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in the retina (shown in
Figure 36.18) on the inner surface of the back of the eye. But light does not impinge on the retina unal tered. It passes through other
layers that process it so that it can be interpreted by the retina (Figure 36.18b). The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye,Learning Objectives

9.8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370and the crystalline lens, a transparent convex struc ture behind the cornea, both refract (bend) light to focus the image on the retina.
The iris, which is conspicuous as the colored part o f the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between t he lens and cornea that
regulates the amount of light entering the eye. In conditi ons of high ambient light, the iris contracts, reducing the size of the pupil at
its center. In conditions of low light, the iris relaxes an d the pupil enlarges.
Visual Connection
Figure 36.18 (a) The human eye is shown in cross section. The human eye contains structures, such as the cornea, iris, le ns,
and fovea, that process light so it can be deciphered by th e retina. Other structures like the aqueous humor and the vitreo us
humor help maintain the shape of the eye. (b) A blowup sho ws the layers of the retina. The retina contains photorece ptive cells.
In the retina, light is converted into neural signals sent t o the brain.
Which of the following statements about the human eye is false?
a. Rods detect color, while cones detect only shades of gray.
b. When light enters the retina, it passes the ganglion cel ls and bipolar cells before reaching photoreceptors at the rear of the eye.
c. The iris adjusts the amount of light coming into the ey e.
d. The cornea is a protective layer on the front of the ey e.
The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye, along with the crystalline lens, refract (bend) light to focus the image on the
retina. After passing through the cornea, light passes through the aqueous humour, which connects the cornea t o the lens. This clear
gelatinous mass also provides the corneal epithelium with nutrients and helps maintain the convex shape of the cornea. The iris,
which is visible as the colored part of the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between the lens and t he aqueous humour that
regulates the amount of light entering the eye. Light passes through the center of the iris, the pupil, whi ch actively adjusts its size to
maintain a constant level of light entering the eye. In conditions of high ambient light, the iris contra cts, reducing the size of the
pupil. In conditions of low light, the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges.
The main function of the lens is to focus light on the retina and fovea centralis. The lens is dynamic, fo cusing and re-focusing light
as the eye rests on near and far objects in the vis ual field. The lens is operated by muscles that stre tch it flat or allow it to thicken,
changing the focal length of light coming through i t to focus it sharply on the retina. With age comes t he loss of the flexibility of
the lens, and a form of farsightedness called presbyop ia results. Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind the retina.
Presbyopia is a deficit similar to a different type of farsightedness called hyperopia caused by an eyeba ll that is too short. For both
defects, images in the distance are clear but images nearby are blurry. Myopia (nearsightedness) occurs when an eyeball is
elongated and the image focus falls in front of the retin a. In this case, images in the distance are blurry but im ages nearby are clear.
There are two types of photoreceptors in the retina: rods and cones, named for their general appearance as illustrated in Figure
36.19. Rods are strongly photosensitive and are locate d in the outer edges of the retina. They detect dim l ight and are used
primarily for peripheral and nighttime vision. Cones are weakly photosensitive and are located near the c enter of the retina. They
respond to bright light, and their primary role is in da ytime, color vision.Visual Connection

9.8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370
Figure 36.19 Rods and cones are photoreceptors in the re tina. Rods respond in low light and can detect only shad es of gray. Cones
respond in intense light and are responsible for color vi sion. (credit: modification of work by Piotr Sliwa)
The fovea is the region in the center back of the eye that is responsible for acute vision. The fovea has a high density of cones.
When you bring your gaze to an object to examine it intently in bright light, the eyes orient so that t he object’s image falls on the
fovea. However, when looking at a star in the night sky o r other object in dim light, the object can be bette r viewed by the
peripheral vision because it is the rods at the edg es of the retina, rather than the cones at the center, that operate better in low light.
In humans, cones far outnumber rods in the fovea.
Link to Learning
Review the anatomical structure of the eye, clicking on each part to practice identifi cation.
Transduction of Light
The rods and cones are the site of transduction of l ight to a neural signal. Both rods and cones contain p hotopigments. In
vertebrates, the main photopigment, rhodopsin, has t wo main parts (Figure 36.20): an opsin, which is a memb rane protein (in the
form of a cluster of α-helices that span the membran e), and retinal—a molecule that absorbs light. When l ight hits a photoreceptor,
it causes a shape change in the retinal, altering its structure from a bent (cis) form of the molecule to its linear (trans) isomer. This
isomerization of retinal activates the rhodopsin, sta rting a cascade of events that ends with the closing of Na channels in the
membrane of the photoreceptor. Thus, unlike most othe r sensory neurons (which become depolarized by exposur e to a stimulus)
visual receptors become hyperpolarized and thus driven awa y from threshold (Figure 36.21).Link to Learning

9.8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370
Figure 36.20 (a) Rhodopsin, the photoreceptor in verteb rates, has two parts: the trans-membrane protein opsin, an d retinal. When
light strikes retinal, it changes shape from (b) a cis to a trans form. The signal is passed to a G-protein called transd ucin, triggering
a series of downstream events.
Figure 36.21 When light strikes rhodopsin, the G-protein tra nsducin is activated, which in turn activates phosphodies terase.
Phosphodiesterase converts cGMP to GMP, thereby closing sodiu m channels. As a result, the membrane becomes hyperpolarized.
The hyperpolarized membrane does not release glutamat e to the bipolar cell.
Trichromatic Coding
There are three types of cones (with different photo psins), and they differ in the wavelength to which the y are most responsive, as
shown in Figure 36.22. Some cones are maximally respons ive to short light waves of 420 nm, so they are call ed S cones (“S” for
“short”); others respond maximally to waves of 530 nm (M cones, for “medium”); a third group responds maxi mally to light of
longer wavelengths, at 560 nm (L, or “long” cones). Wi th only one type of cone, color vision would not be p ossible, and a twocone (dichromatic) system has limitations. Primates use a three-cone (trichromatic) system, resulting in ful l color vision.
The color we perceive is a result of the ratio of ac tivity of our three types of cones. The colors of the visual spectrum, running from
long-wavelength light to short, are red (700 nm), ora nge (600 nm), yellow (565 nm), green (497 nm), blue (470 nm), indigo (450

9.8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370nm), and violet (425 nm). Humans have very sensitive pe rception of color and can distinguish about 500 leve ls of brightness, 200
different hues, and 20 steps of saturation, or about 2 mil lion distinct colors.
Figure 36.22 Human rod cells and the different types of cone c ells each have an optimal wavelength. However, there is
considerable overlap in the wavelengths of light detected.
Retinal Processing
Visual signals leave the cones and rods, travel to t he bipolar cells, and then to ganglion cells. A large degree of processing of visual
information occurs in the retina itself, before visual i nformation is sent to the brain.
Photoreceptors in the retina continuously undergo to nic activity. That is, they are always slightly active even when not stimulated
by light. In neurons that exhibit tonic activity, the absence of stimuli maintains a firing rate at a baseli ne; while some stimuli
increase firing rate from the baseline, and other st imuli decrease firing rate. In the absence of light, the bipolar neurons that connect
rods and cones to ganglion cells are continuously a nd actively inhibited by the rods and cones. Exposu re of the retina to light
hyperpolarizes the rods and cones and removes their inhibition of bipolar cells. The now active bipolar cells in turn stimulate the
ganglion cells, which send action potentials along th eir axons (which leave the eye as the optic nerve). T hus, the visual system
relies on change in retinal activity, rather than t he absence or presence of activity, to encode visual signals for the brain. Sometimes
horizontal cells carry signals from one rod or cone t o other photoreceptors and to several bipolar cells. When a rod or cone
stimulates a horizontal cell, the horizontal cell in hibits more distant photoreceptors and bipolar cells, creating lateral inhibition.
This inhibition sharpens edges and enhances contrast i n the images by making regions receiving light appe ar lighter and dark
surroundings appear darker. Amacrine cells can distribute information from one bipolar cell to many ganglion c ells.
You can demonstrate this using an easy demonstration t o “trick” your retina and brain about the colors you are observing in your
visual field. Look fixedly at Figure 36.23 for about 4 5 seconds. Then quickly shift your gaze to a sheet of blank white paper or a
white wall. You should see an afterimage of the Norwegi an flag in its correct colors. At this point, close y our eyes for a moment,
then reopen them, looking again at the white paper or wall; the afterimage of the flag should continue to appear as red, white, and
blue. What causes this? According to an explanation called opponent process theory, as you gazed fixedly at the green, black, and
yellow flag, your retinal ganglion cells that respond positively to green, black, and yellow increased their firing dramatically. When
you shifted your gaze to the neutral white ground, th ese ganglion cells abruptly decreased their activity and the brain interpreted
this abrupt downshift as if the ganglion cells were resp onding now to their “opponent” colors: red, white, and blue, respectively, in
the visual field. Once the ganglion cells return to their baseline activity state, the false perception of color wil l disappear.
Figure 36.23 View this flag to understand how retinal process ing works. Stare at the center of the flag (indicated by the whi te dot)
for 45 seconds, and then quickly look at a white background, noticing how colors appear.

9.8.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370Higher Processing
The myelinated axons of ganglion cells make up the o ptic nerves. Within the nerves, different axons carry different qualities of the
visual signal. Some axons constitute the magnocellula r (big cell) pathway, which carries information about f orm, movement, depth,
and differences in brightness. Other axons constitute th e parvocellular (small cell) pathway, which carries i nformation on color and
fine detail. Some visual information projects directly back into the brain, while other information crosses to the opposite side of the
brain. This crossing of optical pathways produces the distinctive optic chiasma (Greek, for “crossing”) fo und at the base of the
brain and allows us to coordinate information from both eyes.
Once in the brain, visual information is processed in several places, and its routes reflect the complexity and importance of visual
information to humans and other animals. One route take s the signals to the thalamus, which serves as the rou ting station for all
incoming sensory impulses except olfaction. In the thalamus, the magnocellular and parvocellular distin ctions remain intact, and
there are different layers of the thalamus dedicated to each. When visual signals leave the thalamus, they travel to the primary
visual cortex at the rear of the brain. From the visu al cortex, the visual signals travel in two direction s. One stream that projects to
the parietal lobe, in the side of the brain, carries magnocellular (“where”) information. A second stream projects to the temporal
lobe and carries both magnocellular (“where”) and parv ocellular (“what”) information.
Another important visual route is a pathway from the retina to the superior colliculus in the midbrain, where eye movements are
coordinated and integrated with auditory information. Finally, there is the pathway from the retina to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) of the hypothalamus. The SCN is a cluster of cells that is considered to be the body’s internal clock, which controls our
circadian (day-long) cycle. The SCN sends information to the pineal gland, which is important in sleep/wake patterns and annual
cycles.
Figure: The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SNC): The presence of light and darkness influences circadian rhythms and related
physiology and behavior through the SCN.
Link to Learning
View this interactive presentation to review what you have learned about how vision functio ns.
The human eye is wrapped in three layers of tissue:
the sclerotic coat. This tough layer creates the "white" of the eye except in the front where it forms the transparent cornea. The
corneaThe surface of the cornea is kept moist and dust-f ree by secretions from the tear glands.
admits light to the interior of the eye and
bends the light rays to that they can be brought to a focu s.
the choroid coat. This middle layer is deeply pigmented with melanin. It reduces reflection of stray light within the eye. Th e
choroid coat forms the iris in the front of the eye. This, too, is pigmented and is r esponsible for eye "color". The size of its
opening, the pupil, is variable and under the control of the autonomic nervo us system. In dim light (or when danger threatens),
the pupil opens wider letting more light into the eye. In bright light the pupil closes down. This not only reduces the amount of
light entering the eye but also improves its image-forming ability (as does "stopping down" the iris diaphragm of a cam era).
the retina The retina is the inner layer of the eye. It contains the l ight receptors, the rods and cones (and thus serves as the
"film" of the eye). The retina also has many interneuro ns that process the signals arising in the rods and cones befo re passingLink to Learning

9.8.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370them back to the brain. (Note: the rods and cones are not at the surface of the retina but lie underneath the layer of
interneurons.)
Figure 15.9.3.1 Human eye
All the nerve impulses generated in the retina travel back to the brain by way of the axons in the optic n erve (above). At the
point on the retina where the approximately 1 millio n axons converge on the optic nerve, there are no r ods or cones. This spot,
called the blind spot, is thus insensitive to light.
Figure 15.9.3.2 Blind spot
You can demonstrate the presence of the blind spot. C over your right eye with your hand and stare at the red circle as you
move closer to the screen (the square will disappear). Or cover your left eye and stare at the red square as you mov e.
The Lens
The lens is located just behind the iris. It is held in position by zonules extending from an encircling ring of muscle. When thi s
ciliary muscle is relaxed, its diameter increases, the zonules are put under tension, and the lens is flattened and when contracted,
its diameter is reduced, the zonules relax, and the l ens becomes more spherical. These changes enable the e ye to adjust its focus
between far objects and near objects.
Figure 15.9.3.3 Eye corrections
Farsightedness. If the eyeball is too short or the lens too flat or i nflexible, the light rays entering the eye — particula rly those from
nearby objects — will not be brought to a focus by th e time they strike the retina. Eyeglasses with convex lenses can correct the
problem. Farsightedness is called hypermetropia.
Nearsightedness. If the eyeball is too long or the lens too spherical, the image of distant objects is brought to a focus in front of the
retina and is out of focus again before the light s trikes the retina. Nearby objects can be seen more ea sily. Eyeglasses with concave
lenses correct this problem by diverging the light rays bef ore they enter the eye. Nearsightedness is called myopia.
Cataracts One or both lenses often become cloudy as one ages. When a cataract seriously interferes with seeing, the c loudy lens is
easily removed and a plastic one substituted. The entir e process can be done in a few minutes as an outpatie nt under local
anesthesia.
The iris and lens divide the eye into two main chambers:The blind spot

9.8.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370the front chamber is filled with a watery liquid, the aqueous humor
the rear chamber is filled with a jellylike material, the vitreous body
The Retina
Four kinds of light-sensitive receptors are found in the retina:
rods
three kinds of cones, each "tuned" to respond best to light from a portion of th e spectrum of visible light
cones that absorb long-wavelength light (red)
cones that absorb middle-wavelength light (green)
cones that absorb short-wavelength light (blue)
This scanning electron micrograph (courtesy of Scott Mittman and David R. Copenhagen) shows rods and cones in the retina of the
tiger salamander. Each type of receptor has its own special pigment for absorbing light. Each consists of a transmembrane protein
called opsin coupled to the prosthetic group retinal. Retinal is a derivative of vitamin A (which explai ns why night blindness is one
sign of vitamin A deficiency) and is used by all four t ypes of receptors.
Figure 15.9.3.4 The retina
The amino acid sequence of each of the four types o f opsin are similar, but the differences account for their differences in
absorption spectrum. The retina also contains a complex a rray of interneurons:
bipolar cells and ganglion cells that together form a path from the rods and cones to the b rain
a complex array of other interneurons that form synapses with t he bipolar and ganglion cells and modify their activity.
Ganglion cells are always active. Even in the dark th ey generate trains of action potentials and conduct them back to the brain
along the optic nerve. Vision is based on the modulation of these nerve impulses. There is not the direct relationship between
visual stimulus and an action potential that is found in the senses of hearing, taste, and smell. In fact, acti on potentials are not even
generated in the rods and cones.
Rod Vision
Rhodopsin is the light-absorbing pigment of the rod s. This G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) is incorporat ed in the membranes of
disks that are neatly stacked (some 1000 or more of them) in the outer portion of the rod. This arrang ement is reminiscent of the
organization of thylakoids, another light-absorbing dev ice.

9.8.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370
Fig.15.9.3.5 Rod cells of kangaroo bat
The electron micrograph (courtesy of Keith Porter) sh ows the rod cells of the kangaroo rat. The outer segme nts of the rods contain
the orderly stacks of membranes which incorporate rho dopsin. The inner portion contain many mitochondria. The two parts of the
rod are connected by a stalk (arrow) that has the same structure as a primary cilium. Although the disks are initially formed from
the plasma membrane, they become separated from it. Th us signals generated in the disks must be transmitted by a chemical
mediator (a "second messenger" called cyclic GMP (cGMP) to alter the potential of the plasma membrane o f the rod. Rhodopsin
consists of an opsin of 348 amino acids coupled to retinal. Like all G-protein-coupled receptors, opsin has 7 seg ments of alpha
helix that pass back and forth through the lipid bilay er of the disk membrane.
Retinal
Figure 15.9.3.6 Retinal
Retinal consists of a system of alternating single and double bonds. In the dark, the hydrogen atoms attached to the #11 and #12
carbon atoms of retinal (red arrows) point in the same direction producing a kink in th e molecule. This configuration is designated
cis. When light is absorbed by retinal, the molecule straig htens out forming the all- trans isomer.
This physical change in retinal triggers the following chain of events culminating in a change in the
pattern of impulses sent back along the optic nerve.
1. Formation of all- trans retinal activates its opsin.
2. Activated rhodopsin, in turn, activates many molecul es of a G protein called transducin.
3. Transducin activates an enzyme that breaks down cyclic GMP.
4. The drop in cGMP closes Na channels in the plasma membrane of the rod. Because the se positive ions can no longer enter, the
interior of the cell becomes more negative (hyperpolar ized) increasing its membrane potential from about −30 to so me −70 mV.
5. This slows the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate at syn apses between the rod and interneurons (e.g., bipolar cel ls).
6. This reduction in glutamate release activates some inte rneuron pathways, inhibits others.
7. The interplay of excited and inhibited interneuron s modulates the spontaneous firing of the ganglion cells to which they are
connected and gives rise to the ability of the retina to dis criminate shapes.
So the retina is not simply a sheet of photocells, but a tiny brain center that carries out complex informa tion processing before
sending signals back along the optic nerve. In fact, the retina really is part of the brain and grows out from it during embr yonic
development.
Rod vision is acute but coarse
Rods do not provide a sharp image for several reasons.
Adjacent rods are connected by gap junctions and so sha re their changes in membrane potential.
Several nearby rods often share a single circuit to one g anglion cell.
A single rod can send signals to several different gangli on cells.
So if only a single rod is stimulated, the brain has n o way of determining exactly where on the retina it wa s. However, rods are
extremely sensitive to light. A single photon (the m inimum unit of light) absorbed by a small cluster of adjacent rods is sufficient to+

9.8.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370send a signal to the brain. So although rods provide us with a relatively grainy, colorless image, they pe rmit us to detect light that is
over a billion times dimmer than what we see on a bright sun ny day.
Cone Vision
Although cones operate only in relatively bright lig ht, they provide us with our sharpest images and enabl e us to see colors. Most
of the 3 million cones in each retina are confined to a small region just opposite the lens called the fovea. So our sharpest and
colorful images are limited to a small area of view. Because we can quickly direct our eyes to anything in view that interests us, we
tend not to be aware of just how poor our peripheral vision is.
The three types of cones provide us the basis of color v ision. Cones are "tuned" to different portions of the visib le spectrum.
red absorbing cones; those that absorb best at the relative ly long wavelengths peaking at 565 nm
green absorbing cones with a peak absorption at 535 nm
blue absorbing cones with a peak absorption at 440 nm.
Retinal is the prosthetic group for each pigment. Dif ferences in the amino acid sequence of their opsins accounts for the differences
in absorption. The response of cones is not all-or-non e. Light of a given wavelength (color), say 500 nm (gre en), stimulates all
three types of cones, but the green-absorbing cones wil l be stimulated most strongly. Like rods, the absor ption of light does not
trigger action potentials but modulates the membrane pote ntial of the cones.
Color Blindness
The term color blindness is something of a misnomer. Very few (~1 in 10) people cannot distinguish color s at all. Most "colorblind" people actually have abnormal color vision su ch as confusing the red and green of traffic lights. As high as 8% of the males
in some populations have an inherited defect in their ability to discriminate reds and greens. These defe cts are found almost
exclusively in males because the genes that encode the r ed-absorbing and green-absorbing opsins are on the X chromo some.
Figure 15.9.3.7 Red - Green genes
The X chromosome normally carries a cluster of from 2 to 9 opsin genes. The minimum basis for normal red-gr een vision is one
gene whose opsin absorbs efficiently in the red and on e that absorbs well in the green (chromosome 1 in the figure). Multiple
copies of these genes are also fine (2 and 3). Males with either a "green gene" or "red gene" miss ing are severely color blind (4 and
5). However, if all the red genes carry mutations (this seldom seems to be the case for the green genes — n obody knows why), then
they may have red-green color blindness that ranges from mild to severe depending on the particular muta tions involved (6). The
rule seems to be that the more the mutations shift th e pigment towards green, the more serious the defect. Ho wever, a large number
of mutations don't always produce serious defects. Mul tiple mutations in a single gene may offset each oth er producing only mild
defects. And as long as one normal copy of each gene is present, the presence of additional mutated genes sel dom produce a serious
problem (7).
Why do some males have as many as 9 copies of genes encoding the red and green opsins, when two are enoug h? The sequences of
the red and green genes are the same at 98% of thei r nucleotides. This high degree of similarity creates the risk of mismatches in
synapsis during meiosis with unequal crossing over.5

9.8.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78370Blue vision
Abnormal blue sensitivity occasionally occurs in huma ns but is much rarer than abnormalities in red-gree n vision. The gene for the
blue-cone opsin is located on chromosome 7. Thus this trait shows an autosomal pattern of inheritance bein g found in females as
often as in males.
This page titled 9.8.2: A_Vision is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.
15.9C: Vision by John W. Kimball is licensed CC BY 3.0. Original source: https://www.biology-pages.info/.

9.8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783809.8.3: Vision
Vision is the special sense of sight that is based on the tr ansduction of light stimuli received through the eye s. The eyes are located
within either orbit in the skull. The bony orbits su rround the eyeballs, protecting them and anchoring t he soft tissues of the eye
(Figure). The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, hel p to protect the eye from abrasions by blocking part icles that
may land on the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each lid is a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva. The
conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye (the sclera), connecting the eyelids to the eyeball. Tears are produced by the
lacrimal gland, located beneath the lateral edges of the nose. Tea rs produced by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the
medial corner of the eye, where the tears flow over the conj unctiva, washing away foreign particles.

Figure: The Eye in the Orbit The eye is located within the orbit and surrounded by soft tissues that protect and support its
function. The orbit is surrounded by cranial bones of the skull. (CC-BY-4.0, OpenStax, Human Anatomy)
Movement of the eye within the orbit is accomplished b y the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate from the bones
of the orbit and insert into the surface of the eye ball (Figure). Four of the muscles are arranged at the cardinal points around
the eye and are named for those locations. They are t he superior rectus, medial rectus, inferior rectus, and lateral rectus. When
each of these muscles contract, the eye to moves to ward the contracting muscle. For example, when the super ior rectus contracts,
the eye rotates to look up. The superior oblique originates at the posterior orbit, near the origin o f the four rectus muscles.
However, the tendon of the oblique muscles threads thro ugh a pulley-like piece of cartilage known as the trochlea. The tendon
inserts obliquely into the superior surface of the e ye. The angle of the tendon through the trochlea mea ns that contraction of the
superior oblique rotates the eye medially. The inferior oblique muscle originates from the floor of the orbit and in serts into the
inferolateral surface of the eye. When it contracts, it laterally rotates the eye, in opposition to the superior oblique. Rotation of the
eye by the two oblique muscles is necessary because th e eye is not perfectly aligned on the sagittal plane. When the eye looks up or
down, the eye must also rotate slightly to compensate for the superior rectus pulling at approximately a 2 0-degree angle, rather than
straight up. The same is true for the inferior rectu s, which is compensated by contraction of the inferio r oblique. A seventh muscle
in the orbit is the levator palpebrae superioris, which is responsible for elevating and retracting the upper eyelid, a movement that
usually occurs in concert with elevation of the eye by th e superior rectus (see Figure).

9.8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78380

Figure: Extraocular Muscles The extraocular muscles move the eye within the orbit. (CC-BY-4.0, OpenStax, Human
Anatomy)

Figure: Structure of the Eye The sphere of the eye can be divided into anterior a nd posterior chambers. The wall of the eye
is composed of three layers: the fibrous tunic, vascular tunic, and neural tunic. Within the neural tunic i s the retina, with three
layers of cells and two synaptic layers in between. The center of the retina has a small indentation known a s the fovea. (CC-BY-4.0,
OpenStax, Human Anatomy)
Light falling on the retina causes chemical changes to pigment molecules in the photoreceptors, ultimate ly leading to a change in
the activity of the RGCs. Photoreceptor cells have two parts, the inner segment and the outer segment (Figure). The inner
segment contains the nucleus and other common organ elles of a cell, whereas the outer segment is a specia lized region in which
photoreception takes place. There are two types of ph otoreceptors—rods and cones—which differ in the shape of their outer
segment. The rod-shaped outer segments of the rod photoreceptor contain a stack of membrane-bound discs that contain the
photosensitive pigment rhodopsin. The cone-shaped outer segments of the cone photoreceptor contain their photosensitive
pigments in infoldings of the cell membrane. There a re three cone photopigments, called opsins, which are each sensitive to a
particular wavelength of light. The wavelength of visi ble light determines its color. The pigments in huma n eyes are specialized in
perceiving three different primary colors: red, green, and blue.

9.8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78380
Figure: Photoreceptor (a) All photoreceptors have inner segments containing the nucleus and other important organelles
and outer segments with membrane arrays containing the photosensitive opsin molecules. Rod outer segments are l ong columnar
shapes with stacks of membrane-bound discs that contain t he rhodopsin pigment. Cone outer segments are short, ta pered shapes
with folds of membrane in place of the discs in the ro ds. (b) Tissue of the retina shows a dense layer of nucle i of the rods and
cones. LM × 800. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012) (CC- BY-4.0,
OpenStax, Human Anatomy)
This page titled 9.8.3: Vision is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783829.8.4: Vision_Correction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Identify and discuss common vision defects.
Explain nearsightedness and farsightedness corrections.
Explain laser vision correction.
The need for some type of vision correction is very common. Common vision defects are easy to understand, and some are simple
to correct. Figure illustrates two common vision defe cts. Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see distant objects
clearly while close objects are clear. The eye overcon verges the nearly parallel rays from a distant obje ct, and the rays cross in front
of the retina. More divergent rays from a close object are converged on the retina for a clear image. The distance to the farthest
object that can be seen clearly is called the far p oint of the eye (normally infinity). Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to
see close objects clearly while distant objects may be clear. A farsighted eye does not converge sufficien t rays from a close object to
make the rays meet on the retina. Less diverging ray s from a distant object can be converged for a clea r image. The distance to the
closest object that can be seen clearly is called the near point of the eye (normally 25 cm).
Figure: (a) The nearsighted (myopic) eye converges ra ys from a distant object in front of the retina; thus, they are diverging
when they strike the retina, producing a blurry imag e. This can be caused by the lens of the eye being too powerful or the length of
the eye being too great. (b) The farsighted (hyperop ic) eye is unable to converge the rays from a close ob ject by the time they strike
the retina, producing blurry close vision. This can be caused by insufficient power in the lens or by the ey e being too short.
Since the nearsighted eye over converges light rays, the correction for nearsightedness is to place a d iverging spectacle lens in front
of the eye. This reduces the power of an eye that is too powerful. Another way of thinking about this is th at a diverging spectacle
lens produces a case 3 image, which is closer to the eye t han the object (Figure). To determine the spectacle power needed
for correction, you must know the person’s far point -- that is, you must know the greatest distance at whic h the person can see
clearly. Then the image produced by a spectacle lens must be at this distance or closer for the nearsigh ted person to be able to see it
clearly. It is worth noting that wearing glasses does no t change the eye in any way. The eyeglass lens is si mply used to create an
image of the object at a distance where the nearsigh ted person can see it clearly. Whereas someone not wea ring glasses can see
clearly objects that fall between their near point and their far poi nt, someone wearing glasses can see images that fall between their
near point and their far point.Learning Objectives

9.8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78382
Figure: Correction of nearsightedness requires a diverg ing lens that compensates for the overconvergence by t he eye. The
diverging lens produces an image closer to the eye tha n the object, so that the nearsighted person can see it clearly.
What power of spectacle lens is needed to correct the vision of a nearsighted person whose far point is 30.0 cm? Assume the
spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the e ye by eyeglass frames.
Strategy:
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see ver y distant objects clearly. That means the spectacle l ens must produce an
image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object very far awa y. An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be 28.5 cm to the left of the
spectacle lens (Figure). Therefore, we must get when. The image distance is negative, because it is
on the same side of the spectacle as the object.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using as written earlier:
Since, we obtain:
Discussion:
The negative power indicates a diverging (or concave) lens, as expected. The spectacle produces a case 3 ima ge closer to the
eye, where the person can see it. If you examine eyegl asses for nearsighted people, you will find the lenses are thinnest in the
center. Additionally, if you examine a prescription f or eyeglasses for nearsighted people, you will find that the prescribed
power is negative and given in units of diopters.
Since the farsighted eye under converges light rays, the correction for farsightedness is to place a convergin g spectacle lens in front
of the eye. This increases the power of an eye that is to o weak. Another way of thinking about this is that a conv erging spectacle
lens produces a case 2 image, which is farther from t he eye than the object (Figure). To determine the sp ectacle power
needed for correction, you must know the person’s nea r point -- that is, you must know the smallest distance at which the person
can see clearly. Then the image produced by a specta cle lens must be at this distance or farther for the farsighted person to be able
to see it clearly.Example: Correcting Nearsightedness

9.8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78382
Figure: Correction of farsightedness uses a converging l ens that compensates for the under convergence by the eye. The
converging lens produces an image farther from the ey e than the object, so that the farsighted person can se e it clearly.
What power of spectacle lens is needed to allow a far sighted person, whose near point is 1.00 m, to see an o bject clearly that is
25.0 cm away? Assume the spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the eye by eyeglass frames.
Strategy
When an object is held 25.0 cm from the person’s ey es, the spectacle lens must produce an image 1.00 m awa y (the near point).
An image 1.00 m from the eye will be 98.5 cm to the le ft of the spectacle lens because the spectacle lens i s 1.50 cm from the
eye (Figure). Therefore,. The image distance is neg ative, because it is on the same side of the spectacle as
the object. The object is 23.5 cm to the left of the spec tacle, so that.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using:
Discussion
The positive power indicates a converging (convex) le ns, as expected. The convex spectacle produces a cas e 2 image farther
from the eye, where the person can see it. If you exa mine eyeglasses of farsighted people, you will find the lenses to be thickest
in the center. In addition, a prescription of eyeglasses for farsighted people has a prescribed power that is positiv e.
Another common vision defect is astigmatism an unevenness or asymmetry in the focus of the eye. For example, rays passing
through a vertical region of the eye may focus closer than ra ys passing through a horizontal region, resulting in the i mage appearing
elongated. This is mostly due to irregularities in th e shape of the cornea but can also be due to lens i rregularities or unevenness in
the retina. Because of these irregularities, different parts of the lens system produce images at different locations. The eye-brain
system can compensate for some of these irregulariti es, but they generally manifest themselves as less dis tinct vision or sharper
images along certain axes. Figure shows a chart used to detect astigmatism. Astigmatism can be at least parti ally corrected
with a spectacle having the opposite irregularity of the eye. If an eyeglass prescription has a cylindr ical correction, it is there to
correct astigmatism. The normal corrections for short- or farsightedness are spherical corrections, uniform along all axes.Example:Correcting Farsightedness

9.8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78382
Figure: This chart can detect astigmatism, unevenness in the focus of the eye. Check each of your eyes separat ely by looking
at the center cross (without spectacles if you wear the m). If lines along some axes appear darker or clearer than others, you have an
astigmatism.
Contact lenses have advantages over glasses beyond t heir cosmetic aspects. One problem with glasses is that as the eye moves, it is
not at a fixed distance from the spectacle lens. Cont acts rest on and move with the eye, eliminating this p roblem. Because contacts
cover a significant portion of the cornea, they prov ide superior peripheral vision compared with eyeglasse s. Contacts also correct
some corneal astigmatism caused by surface irregula rities. The tear layer between the smooth contact and the cornea fills in the
irregularities. Since the index of refraction of the t ear layer and the cornea are very similar, you now h ave a regular optical surface
in place of an irregular one. If the curvature of a contact lens is not the same as the cornea (as may be n ecessary with some
individuals to obtain a comfortable fit), the tear la yer between the contact and cornea acts as a lens. If the tear layer is thinner in the
center than at the edges, it has a negative power, for example. Skilled optometrists will adjust the power of the contact to
compensate.
Laser vision correction has progressed rapidly in the last few years. It is th e latest and by far the most successful in a series of
procedures that correct vision by reshaping the cor nea. As noted at the beginning of this section, the co rnea accounts for about twothirds of the power of the eye. Thus, small adjustments of its curvature have the same effect as putting a l ens in front of the eye. To
a reasonable approximation, the power of multiple le nses placed close together equals the sum of their p owers. For example, a
concave spectacle lens (for nearsightedness) having has the same effect on vision as reducing the power of the eye
itself by 3.00 D. So to correct the eye for nearsighted ness, the cornea is flattened to reduce its power. Simi larly, to correct for
farsightedness, the curvature of the cornea is enha nced to increase the power of the eye -- the same ef fect as the positive power
spectacle lens used for farsightedness. Laser visio n correction uses high intensity electromagnetic radia tion to ablate (to remove
material from the surface) and reshape the corneal surf aces.
Today, the most commonly used laser vision correction procedure is Laser in situ Keratomileusis (LASIK). The top layer of the
cornea is surgically peeled back and the underlying t issue ablated by multiple bursts of finely controll ed ultraviolet radiation
produced by an excimer laser. Lasers are used because they not only produce well-focused intense light, but they also emit very
pure wavelength electromagnetic radiation that can b e controlled more accurately than mixed wavelength l ight. The 193 nm
wavelength UV commonly used is extremely and strongly absorbed by corneal tissue, allowing precise evaporatio n of very thin
layers. A computer controlled program applies more bursts, usually at a rate of 10 per second, to the ar eas that require deeper
removal. Typically a spot less than 1 mm in diameter and about in thickness is removed by each burst. Near sightedness,
farsightedness, and astigmatism can be corrected with an accuracy that produces normal distant vision in more than 90% of the
patients, in many cases right away. The corneal flap is replaced; healing takes place rapidly and is nearl y painless. More than 1
million Americans per year undergo LASIK (Figure).

9.8.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78382
Figure: Laser vision correction is being performed usin g the LASIK procedure. Reshaping of the cornea by la ser ablation is
based on a careful assessment of the patient’s vision and is computer controlled. The upper corneal layer is te mporarily peeled back
and minimally disturbed in LASIK, providing for more rapid and less painful healing of the less sensitive tissue s below. (credit:
U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Cla ss Brien Aho)
Summary
Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see distan t objects and is corrected with a diverging lens to reduce power.
Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to see close objects and is corrected with a converging lens to increase power.
In myopia and hyperopia, the corrective lenses produce i mages at a distance that the person can see clearly—the fa r point and
near point, respectively.
Glossary
nearsightedness
another term for myopia, a visual defect in which distant o bjects appear blurred because their images are focuse d in front of the
retina rather than being focused on the retina
myopia
a visual defect in which distant objects appear blurred bec ause their images are focused in front of the retina rath er than being
focused on the retina
far point
the object point imaged by the eye onto the retina in a n unaccommodated eye
farsightedness
another term for hyperopia, the condition of an eye where incoming rays of light reach the retina before they co nverge into a
focused image
hyperopia
the condition of an eye where incoming rays of light reach the retina before they converge into a focused image
near point
the point nearest the eye at which an object is accurate ly focused on the retina at full accommodation
astigmatism
the result of an inability of the cornea to properly focu s an image onto the retina
laser vision correction

9.8.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78382a medical procedure used to correct astigmatism and eyesi ght deficiencies such as myopia and hyperopia
This page titled 9.8.4: Vision_Correction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
26.2: Vision Correction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

9.8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783729.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information
Figure 15.9.4.2 Ganglion cells
By inserting an electrode in a single ganglion cell, it was shown (by Stephen W. Kuffler) that
Even in the dark, ganglion cells have a slow, steady rate o f firing.
Diffuse light directed on the retina has little effect on this rate.
But a tiny spot of light falling on a small circular area of the retina can greatly increase the firing rate of some ganglion cells
(left) while
a spot directed around the perimeter of such an " on" area suppresses that ganglion cell (center).
Light shining on both areas produces no effect (right).
Other ganglion cells have a central " off" area surrounded by an " on" area.
Figure 15.9.4.3 Lateral geniculate nucleus
Two associates of Kuffler, David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wi esel inserted electrodes in these areas but instead of directing light
into the eye, they projected images on a screen in f ront of the animal (an anesthetized cat or monkey). Us ing this procedure, they
found that
cells of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) respond about the same way that ganglion cells do; that is, to circular spots of
light.
But the cells in the visual cortex receiving input from the LGN no longer respond to circles of light but only to bars of light (or
dark) or to straight-line edges between dark and light ar eas.
One of these "simple cortical cells" will only respond when the stimulus is directed at a particular area of the sc reen and at a
specific angle. However, an ineffective position for one of these cortical cells is an effective position for another.
Figure 15.9.4.4 LGN

9.8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78372The diagram shows this mechanism by which the circular response areas of ganglion and LGN cells can be converted into the
rectangular response areas found in the cells of the visual cortex. Other cells ("complex cortical cells") still want th eir edges
oriented in one direction, but the edges can now be moved across the screen. As the figure shows, this can be explained if a set of
simple cortical cells all responding to an edge of th e same slope but each responsible for a different p art of the visual field converge
on a single "complex cortical cell". Thus these com plex cortical cells continue to respond to the stimu lus even though its absolute
position on the retina changes.
While these studies provide only the tiniest glimpse in to the workings of the brain, they provide some clues of wh at will be found:
At each step of processing, the inputs of a number of inte rneurons are funneled into a single output.
So, at each step, some of the information is selectively d estroyed.
A simple cortical cell, for example, fires only if a numbe r of LGN cells converging on it are simultaneously active. Otherwise,
the excitation dies out at the synapses.
In this way, each level of the brain acts as a filtering devi ce and, in doing so, provides a mechanism by which certain feat ures of
what might be a very complex stimulus can be discriminat ed..
So instead of responding to particular impulses in particular circuits, the mammalian brain seems to respond to the sp atial and
temporal organization of many impulses passing along many converging circuits.
The importance of these studies was recognized by th e award of a Nobel Prize in 1981 to Hubel and Wiesel (t oo late for Kuffler,
who died in 1980).
This page titled 9.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by John W.
Kimball via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.9D: Processing Visual Information by John W. Kimball is licensed CC BY 3.0. Original source: https://www.biology-pages.info/.

9.8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783839.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the simple theory of color vision.
Outline the coloring properties of light sources.
Describe the retinex theory of color vision.
The gift of vision is made richer by the existence of color. Objects and lights abound with thousands of hues that stimulate our
eyes, brains, and emotions. Two basic questions are addr essed in this brief treatment -- what does color mea n in scientific terms,
and how do we, as humans, perceive it?
Simple Theory of Color Vision
We have already noted that color is associated with th e wavelength of visible electromagnetic radiation. Wh en our eyes receive
pure-wavelength light, we tend to see only a few colors. Six of these (most often listed) are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and
violet. These are the rainbow of colors produced when white light is dispersed according to different wavelen gths. There are
thousands of other hues that we can perceive. These include brown, teal, gold, pin k, and white. One simple theory of color vision
implies that all these hues are our eye’s response to different combinations of wavelengths. This is true to an extent, but we find
that color perception is even subtler than our eye’s response for various wavelengths of light.
The two major types of light-sensing cells (photorec eptors) in the retina are rods and cones Rods are more sensitive than cones by
a factor of about 1000 and are solely responsible f or peripheral vision as well as vision in very dark e nvironments. They are also
important for motion detection. There are about 120 million rods in the human retina. Rods do not yield color information. You
may notice that you lose color vision when it is very da rk, but you retain the ability to discern grey scales.
1. Go into a darkened room from a brightly lit room, or f rom outside in the Sun. How long did it take to start seeing sha pes
more clearly? What about color? Return to the bright room. Did it take a few minutes before you could see things c learly?
2. Demonstrate the sensitivity of foveal vision. Look at the letter G in the word ROGERS. What about the clarit y of the letters
on either side of G?
Cones are most concentrated in the fovea, the centr al region of the retina. There are no rods here. The fovea is at the center of the
macula, a 5 mm diameter region responsible for our central vision. The cones work best in bright light an d are responsible for high
resolution vision. There are about 6 million cones in the human retina. There are three types of cones, a nd each type is sensitive to
different ranges of wavelengths, as illustrated in Figure. A simplified theory of color vision is that there are three primary
colors corresponding to the three types of cones. The thous ands of other hues that we can distinguish among are created by various
combinations of stimulations of the three types of c ones. Color television uses a three-color system in whic h the screen is covered
with equal numbers of red, green, and blue phosphor dots. The broad range of hues a viewer sees is produced b y various
combinations of these three colors. For example, you will perceive yellow when red and green are illuminat ed with the correct ratio
of intensities. White may be sensed when all three are illuminated. Then, it would seem that all hues can be p roduced by adding
three primary colors in various proportions. But there is an indication that color vision is more sophistic ated. There is no unique set
of three primary colors. Another set that works is yel low, green, and blue. A further indication of the nee d for a more complex
theory of color vision is that various different co mbinations can produce the same hue. Yellow can be sen sed with yellow light, or
with a combination of red and green, and also with white light from which violet has been removed. The three-p rimary-colors
aspect of color vision is well established; more sophisti cated theories expand on it rather than deny it.Learning Objectives
TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: RODS AND CONES

9.8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78383
Figure: The image shows the relative sensitivity of the three types of cones, which are named according to w avelengths of
greatest sensitivity. Rods are about 1000 times more sensi tive, and their curve peaks at about 500 nm. Evidenc e for the three types
of cones comes from direct measurements in animal and h uman eyes and testing of color blind people.
Consider why various objects display color -- that i s, why are feathers blue and red in a crimson rosella? The true color of an object
is defined by its absorptive or reflective characte ristics. Figure shows white light falling on three dif ferent objects, one pure
blue, one pure red, and one black, as well as pure red light falling on a white object. Other hues are crea ted by more complex
absorption characteristics. Pink, for example on a ga lah cockatoo, can be due to weak absorption of all co lors except red. An object
can appear a different color under non-white illumin ation. For example, a pure blue object illuminated with pure red light will
appear black, because it absorbs all the red light falling o n it. But, the true color of the object is blue, which is independent of
illumination.
Figure: Absorption characteristics determine the true color of an object. Here, three objects are illumina ted by white light,
and one by pure red light. White is the equal mixtur e of all visible wavelengths; black is the absence of l ight.
Similarly, light sources have colors that are defined by the wavelengths they produce. A helium-neon laser emits pure red light. In
fact, the phrase “pure red light” is defined by havi ng a sharp constrained spectrum, a characteristic of laser light. The Sun produces
a broad yellowish spectrum, fluorescent lights emit blu ish-white light, and incandescent lights emit reddish-wh ite hues as seen in
Figure 3. As you would expect, you sense these colors when viewing the light source directly or when illuminating a white object
with them. All of this fits neatly into the simplified th eory that a combination of wavelengths produces various hues.
This activity is best done with plastic sheets of diffe rent colors as they allow more light to pass through t o our eyes. However,
thin sheets of paper and fabric can also be used. Over lay different colors of the material and hold them up to a white light.
Using the theory described above, explain the colors you o bserve. You could also try mixing different crayon colo rs.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: EXPLORING COLOR ADDITION

9.8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78383
Figure: Emission spectra for various light sources are sho wn. Curve A is average sunlight at Earth’s surface, cur ve B is light
from a fluorescent lamp, and curve C is the output of an in candescent light. The spike for a helium-neon laser (curve D) is due to its
pure wavelength emission. The spikes in the fluorescent output are due to atomic spectra -- a topic that wil l be explored later.
Color Constancy and a Modified Theory of Color Vision
The eye-brain color-sensing system can, by comparing various objects in its view, perceive the true color of an object under
varying lighting conditions -- an ability that is c alled color constancy. We can sense that a white tablecloth, for example, is white
whether it is illuminated by sunlight, fluorescent li ght, or candlelight. The wavelengths entering the eye are quite different in each
case, as the graphs in Figure 3 imply, but our color vision can detect the true color by comparing the ta blecloth with its
surroundings.
Theories that take color constancy into account are based on a large body of anatomical evidence as well as perceptual studies.
There are nerve connections among the light recepto rs on the retina, and there are far fewer nerve conn ections to the brain than
there are rods and cones. This means that there is si gnal processing in the eye before information is se nt to the brain. For example,
the eye makes comparisons between adjacent light rece ptors and is very sensitive to edges as seen in Figure 4. Rather than
responding simply to the light entering the eye, whic h is uniform in the various rectangles in this figur e, the eye responds to the
edges and senses false darkness variations.
Figure: The importance of edges is shown. Although the grey strips are uniformly shaded, as indicated by the graph
immediately below them, they do not appear uniform at all. Instead, they are perceived darker on the da rk side and lighter on the
light side of the edge, as shown in the bottom graph. This is due to nerve impulse processing in the eye.
One theory that takes various factors into account wa s advanced by Edwin Land (1909 – 1991), the creative founder of the Polaroid
Corporation. Land proposed, based partly on his many el egant experiments, that the three types of cones are or ganized into systems
called retinexes. Each retinex forms an image that is compared with th e others, and the eye-brain system thus can compare a

9.8.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78383candle-illuminated white table cloth with its general ly reddish surroundings and determine that it is ac tually white. This retinex
theory of color vision is an example of modified theories of color vision that attempt to account for its subtleties. One striki ng
experiment performed by Land demonstrates that some t ype of image comparison may produce color vision. Two pictures are taken
of a scene on black-and-white film, one using a red f ilter, the other a blue filter. Resulting black-and -white slides are then projected
and superimposed on a screen, producing a black-and -white image, as expected. Then a red filter is place d in front of the slide
taken with a red filter, and the images are again su perimposed on a screen. You would expect an image in va rious shades of pink,
but instead, the image appears to humans in full color with all the hues of the original scene. This implies that color vision can be
induced by comparison of the black-and-white and red images. Color vision is not completely understood or explained, and the
retinex theory is not totally accepted. It is apparent t hat color vision is much subtler than what a first look mig ht imply.
Make a whole rainbow by mixing red, green, and blue li ght. Change the wavelength of a monochromatic beam o r filter white
light. View the light as a solid beam, or see the individual photons.
Color Vision
Single Bulb
RGB BulbsPHET EXPLORATIONS: COLOR VISION

9.8.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78383Summary
The eye has four types of light receptors -- rods and thre e types of color-sensitive cones.
The rods are good for night vision, peripheral vision, an d motion changes, while the cones are responsible for ce ntral vision and
color.
We perceive many hues, from light having mixtures of wave lengths.
A simplified theory of color vision states that there are three primary colors, which correspond to the three typ es of cones, and
that various combinations of the primary colors produce a ll the hues.
The true color of an object is related to its relative a bsorption of various wavelengths of light. The color of a light source is
related to the wavelengths it produces.
Color constancy is the ability of the eye-brain system to d iscern the true color of an object illuminated by variou s light sources.
The retinex theory of color vision explains color const ancy by postulating the existence of three retinexes or i mage systems,
associated with the three types of cones that are compared t o obtain sophisticated information.
Glossary
hues
identity of a color as it relates specifically to the s pectrum
rods and cones
two types of photoreceptors in the human retina; rods are re sponsible for vision at low light levels, while cones are ac tive at
higher light levels
simplified theory of color vision
a theory that states that there are three primary colors, wh ich correspond to the three types of cones
color constancy
a part of the visual perception system that allows people to perceive color in a variety of conditions and to se e some consistency
in the color
retinex
a theory proposed to explain color and brightness perc eption and constancies; is a combination of the words r etina and cortex,
which are the two areas responsible for the processing of visual information
retinex theory of color vision
the ability to perceive color in an ambient-colored env ironment
This page titled 9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
26.3: Color and Color Vision by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

9.8.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/783979.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
Vision is such an everyday occurrence that we seldom stop to think and wonder how we are able to see the ob jects that surround us.
Yet the vision process is a fascinating example of h ow light can produce molecular changes. The retina cont ain the molecules that
undergo a chemical change upon absorbing light, but it is the brain that actually makes sense of the vi sual information to create an
image.
Introduction
Light is one of the most important resources for civi lization, it provides energy as it pass along by the s un. Light influence our
everyday live. Living organisms sense light from the environment by photoreceptors. Light, as waves carry en ergy, contains energy
by different wavelength. In vision, light is the stimul us input. Light energy goes into eyes stimulate pho toreceptor in eyes.
However, as an energy wave, energy is passed on through light a t different wavelength.
Light, as waves carry energy, contains energy by different w avelength. From long wavelength to short wavelength, en ergy increase.
400 nm to 700 nm is visible spectrum.
Light energy can convert chemical to other forms. Vitamin A, also known as retinol, anti-dry eye vitamins, is a requ ired nutrition
for human health. The predecessor of vitamin A is pre sent in the variety of plant carotene. Vitamin A is critical for vision because it
is needed by the retina of eye. Retinol can be conv ert to retinal, and retinal is a chemical necessary f or rhodopsin. As light enters
the eye, the 11- cis-retinal is isomerized to the all-"trans" form.

9.8.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78397Mechanism of Vision
The molecule cis-retinal can absorb light at a spec ific wavelength. When visible light hits the cis-ret inal, the cis-retinal undergoes
an isomerization, or change in molecular arrangement, to all-trans-r etinal. The new form of trans-retinal does not fit as we ll into the
protein, and so a series of geometry changes in the p rotein begins. The resulting complex is referred to a bathrhodopsin (there are
other intermediates in this process, but we'll ignore th em for now).
The reaction above shows Lysine side-chain from the o psin react with 11-cis-retinal when stimulated. By rem oving the oxygen
atom form the retinal and two hydrogen atom form the free amino group of the lysine, the linkage show on t he picture above is
formed, and it is called Schiff base.
Signal Transduction Pathway
As the protein changes its geometry, it initiates a ca scade of biochemical reactions that results in changes in charge so that a large
potential difference builds up across the plasma memb rane. This potential difference is passed along to a n adjoining nerve cell as
an electrical impulse. The nerve cell carries this impul se to the brain, where the visual information is interpreted.
The light image is mapped on the surface of the reti na by activating a series of light-sensitive cells k nown as rods and cones or
photoreceptors. The rods and cones convert the light i nto electrical impulses which are transmitted to the br ain via nerve fibers. The
brain then determines, which nerve fibers carried the electrical impulse activate by light at certain ph otoreceptors, and then creates
an image.
The retina is lined with many millions of photorecep tor cells that consist of two types: 7 million cones provide color information
and sharpness of images, and 120 million rods are ex tremely sensitive detectors of white light to provide night vision. The tops of
the rods and cones contain a region filled with memb rane-bound discs, which contain the molecule cis-retina l bound to a protein
called opsin. The resulting complex is called rhodopsin or "visual purple".
Figure 3: A fundus photograph of the back of the retina. The white ar ea is the beginning of the optical nerve (optic disc). The
image in this photo is the right eye of eric anthamatten. (CC- BY-SA-4.0; TheGoose aPrisoner).
In human eyes, rod and cones react to light stimula tion, and a series of chemical reactions happen in c ells. These cells receive light,
and pass on signals to other receiver cells. This chain of process is class signal transduction pathway. Sign al transduction pathway
is a mechanism that describe the ways cells react and response to stimulation.
References
1. Biochemistry, L. Stryer (W.H. Freeman and Co, San Francisco, 19 75).
2. The Cambridge Guide to the Material World, Rodney Cotterill (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1 985)

9.8.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/78397Contributors
{{template.ContribOphardt()}}
9.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
Vision and Light is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.

9.8.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/1057479.8.8: Biology of vision
Figure appears at first glance to be just a pattern of colored leaves, but hidden within it is the three-di mensional shape of
an ant. Can you see the ant among the leaves? This fi gure is an example of a stereogram, which is a two-dime nsional picture
that reveals a three-dimensional object when viewed c orrectly. If you can’t see the hidden image, it doe sn’t mean that there is
anything wrong with your eyes. It’s all in how your brai n interprets what your eyes are sensing. The eyes are s pecial sensory
organs, and vision is one of our special senses.
Figure: Stereogram
Vision
Vision is the ability to detect light patterns from the o utside environment and interpret them into images. Basically vision, or sight,
is the ability to sense light and see. The eye is the special sensory organ that collects and focus es light and forms images. However,
the eye is not sufficient for us to see. The brain also pla ys a necessary role in vision.
Humans are bombarded with sensory information, and th e sheer volume of visual information can be problema tic. Fortunately, our
visual system is able to attend to the most-important stimuli. The importance of vision to humans is furt her substantiated by the fact
that about one-third of the human cerebral cortex is dedi cated to analyzing and perceiving visual information.
Anatomy of the Eye
The photoreceptive (light receiving) cells of the e ye, where conversion of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in the retina
(shown in Figure: (a)) on the inner surface of the b ack of the eye. Light passes through several layers of the eye that process
it so that it can be interpreted by the retina (Figu re: (b)). The cornea (Figures and), the front transparent layer
of the eye, and the crystalline lens, a transparent convex structure behind the cornea, bo th refract (bend) light to focus the image on
the retina. The iris, which is conspicuous as the colored part of the ey e, is a circular muscular ring lying between the lens and
cornea that regulates the amount of light entering the eye. In conditions of high light, the iris contract s, reducing the size of the
pupil at its center. In conditions of low light, the iris r elaxes and the pupil enlarges.
The main function of the lens is to focus light on th e retina and fovea. The lens is dynamic, focusing an d re-focusing light as the
eye rests on near and far objects in the visual field. The lens is operated by muscles that stretch it flat or allow it to thicken,
changing the focal length of light coming through it to focus it sharply on the retina.
The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, help to protect the eye from abrasions by blocking parti cles that may land on the
surface of the eye. The inner surface of each lid is a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends
over the white areas of the eye (the sclera), connect ing the eyelids to the eyeball. Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland, located
beneath the lateral edges of the nose. Tears produce d by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the medial corner of the eye,
where the tears flow over the conjunctiva, washing away forei gn particles.

9.8.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747
Figure: (a) The human eye is shown in cross section. (b) A blowu p shows the layers of the retina.
This diagram shows the lateral view of the eye. The major parts are labeled.
Figure: The Eye in the Orbit The eye is located within the orbit and surrounded by soft tissues that protect
and support its function. The orbit is surrounded by cra nial bones of the skull.
There are two types of photoreceptor cells in the re tina: rods and cones, named for their general appearance as illustrated in Figure
:. Rods are strongly photosensitive and are located in the outer edges of the retina; Rods detect dim light and are used
primarily for peripheral and nighttime vision. Cone s are weakly photosensitive and are located near the c enter of the retina; Cones
respond to bright light, and their primary role is in da ytime, color vision.
Figure: Rods and cones are photoreceptors in the retina. Rods r espond in low light and can detect only shades of gray. Cones
respond in intense light and are responsible for color vision. (credit: modification of work by Piotr Sliwa)
The fovea is the region in the center back of the eye that i s responsible for acute vision. The fovea has a high density of just cones.
When you bring your gaze to an object to examine it intently in bright light, the eyes orient so that t he object’s image falls on the
fovea. This is the area of the retina that gives us high clarity of vision. However, when looking at a star in the night sky or other
object in dim light, the object can be better viewed by the peripheral vision because it is the rods in higher concentrations in the
other regions of the retina, rather than the cones a t the center, that operate better in low light. In l ow-light conditions, the rods allow
us to see in shades of gray because cones require bright li ght to be stimulated and don't respond in low light condit ions.
LINK TO LEARNING
Review the anatomical structure of the eye, clicking on each part to practice identifi cation.

9.8.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747How the Eye Works
Figure shows the anatomy of the human eye in cross-se ction. The eye gathers and focuses light to form an i mage and then
changes the image to nerve impulses that travel to the brain. How the eye performs these functions is sum marized in the following
steps.
1. Light passes first through the cornea, which is a clear outer layer that protects the eye and helps to focus the light by refracting,
or bending, it.
2. Light next enters the interior of the eye through an openi ng called the pupil. The size of this opening is controlled by the
colored part of the eye, called the iris, which adjusts the size based on the brightness of the light. T he iris causes the pupil to
narrow in bright light and widen in dim light.
3. The light then passes through the lens, which refracts the light even more and focuses it on the r etina at the back of the eye as
an inverted image.
4. The retina contains photoreceptor cells of two types, called rods and c ones. Rods, which are found mainly in all areas of the
retina other than the very center, are particularly sen sitive to low levels of light. Cones, which are found mainl y in the center of
the retina, are sensitive to light of different colors and allow color vision. The rods and cones convert the ligh t that strikes them
to nerve impulses.
5. The nerve impulses from the rods and cones travel to the optic nerve via the optic disc, which is a circular area at the back of
the eye where the optic nerve connects to the retina.
Figure: In this image, you can see the three layers of the eyeball, the sclera (cornea at the front), chor oid, and retina. Lens,
pupil, Irish, optic disc, option nerve (not labeled), blood vessels, and eye muscles are also visible. Trace th e path of light through
the eye as you read about in the five steps described i n the text
Role of the Brain in Vision
The optic nerves from both eyes meet and cross just below the bottom of the hypothalamus in the brain. T he information from both
eyes is sent to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe of the cerebrum, which is part of the cerebral cortex. The visual cortex is the
largest system in the human brain and is responsible for processing visual images. It interprets messages fro m both eyes and “tells”
us what we are seeing.
Processing Visual Input
Light
Light travels in electromagnetic waves. Figure of the electromagnetic spectrum shows that visible light fo r humans is just a
small slice of the entire spectrum, which includes radi ation that we cannot see as light because it is below t he frequency of visible
red light or above the frequency of visible violet l ight. The wavelength of light is expressed in nanomete rs (nm); one nanometer is
one billionth of a meter.
Humans can see light that ranges between approximately 380 nanometers (nm) and 740 nm wavelengths (called visible light). We
perceive different wavelengths within this range as dif ferent colors. Some other animals, though, can detect wa velengths outside of

9.8.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747the human range. For example, bees see near-ultraviolet light in order to locate nectar guides on flowers, and some non-avian
reptiles sense infrared light (heat that prey gives off).
Figure: In the electromagnetic spectrum, visible light lies be tween 380 nm and 740 nm. (credit: modification of w ork by
NASA)
Color Vision (Trichromatic Coding)
There are three types of cones, each with different photoreceptive proteins (photopsins). By being sensit ive to different
wavelengths of light, provide us with color vision (Fig ure). By comparing the activity of the three differ ent cones, the brain
can extract color information from visual stimuli. Fo r example, a bright blue light that has a wavelength of approximately 450 nm
would activate the “red” cones minimally, the “green ” cones marginally, and the “blue” cones predominant ly. The relative
activation of the three different cones is calculat ed by the brain, which perceives the color as blue. Howe ver, cones cannot react to
low-intensity light, and rods do not sense the color of light. Therefore, our low-light vision is—in essenc e—in grayscale. In other
words, in a dark room, everything appears as a shade of g ray. If you think that you can see colors in the dar k, it is most likely
because your brain knows what color something is and is relying on that memory.
With only one type of cone, color vision would not be possible, and a two-cone (dichromatic) system has limi tations. Primates,
including humans, use a three-cone (trichromatic) sy stem, resulting in full color vision. The color we pe rceive is a result of the ratio
of activity of our three types of cones. Humans have ve ry sensitive perception of color and can distinguish about 500 levels of
brightness, 200 different hues, and 20 steps of saturation, or about 2 million distinct colors.
This graph shows the normalized absorbance versus w avelength for different cell types in the eye.
Figure: Human rod cells and the different types of co ne cells each have an optimal wavelength. However, t here is
considerable overlap in the wavelengths of light dete cted.
Retinal Processing
Visual signals leave the cones and rods, travel to t he bipolar cells, and then to ganglion cells. A large degree of processing of visual
information occurs in the retina itself, before visual i nformation is sent to the brain.
Higher Processing
The myelinated axons of ganglion cells make up the o ptic nerves. Within the nerves, different axons carry different qualities of the
visual signal. Some axons constitute the magnocellula r (big cell) pathway, which carries information about f orm, movement, depth,
and differences in brightness. Other axons constitute th e parvocellular (small cell) pathway, which carries i nformation on color and
fine detail. Some visual information projects directly back into the brain, while other information crosses to the opposite side of the
brain. This crossing of optical pathways produces the distinctive optic chiasma (Greek, for “crossing”) fo und at the base of the
brain and allows us to coordinate information from both eyes.
Once in the brain, visual information is processed in several places, and its routes reflect the complexity and importance of visual
information to humans and other animals.
Vision Problems
Vision problems are very common. Two of the most comm on are myopia and hyperopia, and they often start in childhood or
adolescence. Another common problem, called presbyopi a, occurs in most people beginning in middle adultho od. All three
problems result in blurred vision due to the failure of the eyes to focus images correctly on the retina.

9.8.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747Myopia
Myopia, or nearsightedness, occurs when the light that comes into the eye does not directly focus on the retina but in front of it, as
shown in Figure. This causes the image of distant ob jects to be out of focus but does not affect the foc us of close objects.
Myopia may occur because the eyeball is elongated fro m front to back or because the cornea is too curved. Myopia can be
corrected through the use of corrective lenses, either eyeglasses or contact lenses. Myopia can also be corr ected by refractive
surgery performed with a laser.
Figure: In myopia, the focal point of images is in fr ont of the retina because the eyeball is elongated.
Hyperopia
Hyperopia, or farsightedness, occurs when the light that comes int o the eye does not directly focus on the retina but behind it, as
shown in Figure. This causes the image of close objec ts to be out of focus but does not affect the focus o f distant objects.
Hyperopia may occur because the eyeball is too short f rom front to back or because the lens is not curved e nough. Hyperopia can
be corrected through the use of corrective lenses or lase r surgery.
Figure: In hyperopia, the focal point of images is be hind the retina because the eyeball is too short.
Presbyopia
Presbyopia is a vision problem associated with aging in which th e eye gradually loses its ability to focus on close objects.
Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind t he retina. The precise cause of presbyopia is not k nown for certain, but
evidence suggests that the lens may become less elast ic with age, and the muscles that control the lens ma y lose power as people
grow older. The first signs of presbyopia – eyestrai n, difficulty seeing in dim light, problems focusing on small objects, and fine
print – are usually first noticed between the ages of 40 and 50. Most older people with this problem use c orrective lenses to focus
on close objects because surgical procedures to correct presbyopia have not been as successful as those for myopia and hyperopia.

9.8.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747The most common cause of blindness in the Western h emisphere is age-related macular degeneration (AMD). About 15
million people in the United States have this type of blindness, and 30 million people are affected world wide. At present, there
is no cure for AMD. The disease occurs with the death of a layer of cells called retinal pigment epitheliu m, which normally
provides nutrients and other support to the macula o f the eye. The macula is an oval-shaped pigmented ar ea near the center of
the retina that is specialized for high visual acui ty and has the retina’s greatest concentration of cone s. When the epithelial cells
die and the macula is no longer supported or nourish ed, the macula also starts to die. Patients experience a black spot in the
center of their vision, and as the disease progresses, the black spot grows outward. Patients eventually los e the ability to read
and even to recognize familiar faces before developing t otal blindness.
In 2016, a landmark surgery was performed as a trial o n a patient with severe AMD. In the first-ever operatio n of its kind, Dr.
Pete Coffey of the University of London implanted a t iny patch of cells behind the retina in each of the patient’s eyes. The cells
were retinal pigmented epithelial cells that had bee n grown in a lab from stem cells, which are undifferentiated cells that have
the ability to develop into other cell types. By si x months out from the operation, the new cells were stil l surviving, and the
doctor was hopeful that the patient’s vision loss would s top and even be reversed. At that point, several other operations had
already been planned to test the new procedure. If t hese cases are a success, Dr. Coffey predicts that the surgery will become as
routine as cataract surgery and prevent millions of pati ents from losing their vision.
Section Summary
Vision is the only photo responsive sense. Visible light travels in waves and is a very small slice of th e electromagnetic radiation
spectrum. Light waves differ based on their frequency (wav elength = hue) and amplitude (intensity = brightness).
In the retina there are two types of light receptors (photoreceptors): cones and rods. Cones, which are the source of color vision,
exist in three forms—L, M, and S—and they are different ially sensitive to different wavelengths. Cones are l ocated in the retina,
along with the dim-light, achromatic receptors (rods). Cones are found in the fovea, the central region of the retina, whereas rods
are found everywhere else throughout the retina.
Visual signals travel from the eye over the axons of retinal ganglion cells, which make up the optic ner ves. Ganglion cells come in
several versions. Some ganglion cell axons carry info rmation on form, movement, depth, and brightness, while o ther axons carry
information on color and fine detail.
Questions
1. Explain how the eye collects and focuses light to form a n image and converts it to nerve impulses.
2. Identify two common vision problems, including both the ir causes and their effects on vision.
3. If a person is blind but their retina is functioning p roperly, where do you think the damage might be? Explain your answer.
4. When you see colors, what receptor cells are activated? Where are these receptors located? What lobe of the brai n is primarily
used to process visual information?
5. Why do people over 55 often need reading glasses?
a. Their cornea no longer focuses correctly.
b. Their lens no longer focuses correctly.
c. Their eyeball has elongated with age, causing images to f ocus in front of their retina.
d. Their retina has thinned with age, making vision more diff icult.
6. Why is it easier to see images at night using periphe ral, rather than the central, vision?
a. Cones are denser in the periphery of the retina.
b. Bipolar cells are denser in the periphery of the reti na.
c. Rods are denser in the periphery of the retina.
d. The optic nerve exits at the periphery of the retina.Feature: Human Biology in the News

9.8.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/105747Explore More
9.8.8: Biology of vision is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
11.7: Human Senses by Suzanne Wakim & Mandeep Grewal is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://www.ck12.org/book/ck-12-humanbiology/.
14.2: Sensory Perception by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/anatomy-and-physiolog y.

9.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766439.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
1.1. 2.1% (to two significant figures)
1.2. 15.1°
1.3. air to water, because the condition that the second medium m ust have a smaller index of refraction is not satisfied
1.4. 9.3 cm
1.5. becomes longer, tilts further away from the surfa ce, and the refracted ray tilts away from the normal.
1.6. also
1.7. There will be only refraction but no reflection.
Conceptual Questions
1. model as a ray when devices are large compared to wav elength, as a wave when devices are comparable or small
compared to wavelength
3. This fact simply proves that the speed of light is great er than that of sound. If one knows the distance to t he location of the
lightning and the speed of sound, one could, in pri nciple, determine the speed of light from the data. I n practice, because the
speed of light is so great, the data would have to be known t o impractically high precision.
5. Powder consists of many small particles with randomly orient ed surfaces. This leads to diffuse reflection, reducing s hine.
7. “toward” when increasing n (air to water, water to glass); “away” when decreasing n (glass to air)
9. A ray from a leg emerges from water after refractio n. The observer in air perceives an apparent location for the source, as
if a ray traveled in a straight line. See the dashed ray bel ow.
The figure is illustration of the formation of the image of a leg unde r water, as seen by a viewer in the air above
the water. A ray is shown leaving the leg and refracting at the water air interface. The refracted ray bends away
from the normal. Extrapolating the refracted ray back into the wate r, the extrapolated ray is above the actual
ray so that the image of the leg is above the actual leg and the leg a ppears shorter.
11. The gemstone becomes invisible when its index of refra ction is the same, or at least similar to, the water sur rounding it.
Because diamond has a particularly high index of re fraction, it can still sparkle as a result of total internal reflection, not
invisible.
13. One can measure the critical angle by looking for the onset of total internal reflection as the angle of incidence is varied.
Equation 1.5 can then be applied to compute the index o f refraction.

9.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664315. In addition to total internal reflection, rays that refract into and out of diamond crystals are subject to dispersion due to
varying values of n across the spectrum, resulting in a spar kling display of colors.
17. yes
19. No. Sound waves are not transverse waves.
21. Energy is absorbed into the filters.
23. Sunsets are viewed with light traveling straight from the Sun toward us. When blue light is scattered out of this path, the
remaining red light dominates the overall appearance of the setting Sun.
25. The axis of polarization for the sunglasses has been rotated.
Problems
27.
29. ice at
31. 1.03 ns
33. 337 m
35. proof
37. proof
39. reflection,; refraction,
41.
43. 1.53
45. a. 2.9 m;
b. 1.4 m
47. a.;
b.
49.
51. a. 1.43, fluorite;
b.
53. a.;
b.
55. for red, for violet
57. a.;
b. 1.3 m
59.
61. for red, for violet
63. 0.500
65. 0.125 or 1/8
67.
69.
71. a. 0.500;

9.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76643b. 0.250;
c. 0.187
73.
75.
Additional Problems
77. 114 radian/s
79. 3.72 mm
81.
83. a. 1.92. The gem is not a diamond (it is zircon).
b.
85. a. 0.898;
b. We cannot have, since this would imply a speed greate r than c.
c. The refracted angle is too big relative to the angle of incidence.
87.
89. a.;
b. yes
Challenge Problems
91. First part:. The remainder depends on the complexity of the solution the reader constructs.
93. proof; 1.33
95. a. 0.750;
b. 0.563;
c. 1.33
This page titled 9.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766691.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
Conceptual Questions
1. Virtual image cannot be projected on a screen. You c annot distinguish a real image from a virtual image simply by judging
from the image perceived with your eye.
3. Yes, you can photograph a virtual image. For example, if you photograph your reflection from a plane mirro r, you get a
photograph of a virtual image. The camera focuses the light that enters its lens to form an image; whether the source of the
light is a real object or a reflection from mirror (i.e., a virtual image) does not matter.
5. No, you can see the real image the same way you can se e the virtual image. The retina of your eye effecti vely serves as a
screen.
7. The mirror should be half your size and its top ed ge should be at the level of your eyes. The size does not depend on your
distance from the mirror.
9. when the object is at infinity; see the mirror equatio n
11. Yes, negative magnification simply means that the i mage is upside down; this does not prevent the image fr om being
larger than the object. For instance, for a concave m irror, if distance to the object is larger than one focal distance but smaller
than two focal distances the image will be inverted and magn ified.
13. answers may vary
15. The focal length of the lens is fixed, so the image distan ce changes as a function of object distance.
17. Yes, the focal length will change. The lens maker’s e quation shows that the focal length depends on the in dex of
refraction of the medium surrounding the lens. Beca use the index of refraction of water differs from th at of air, the focal
length of the lens will change when submerged in water.
19. A relaxed, normal-vision eye will focus parallel rays of l ight onto the retina.
21. A person with an internal lens will need glasses to rea d because their muscles cannot distort the lens as t hey do with
biological lenses, so they cannot focus on near objec ts. To correct nearsightedness, the power of the int raocular lens must be
less than that of the removed lens.
23. Microscopes create images of macroscopic size, so geomet ric optics applies.
25. The eyepiece would be moved slightly farther from th e objective so that the image formed by the objecti ve falls just
beyond the focal length of the eyepiece.
Problems
27.

1.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669
Figure shows cross sections of two mirrors placed at an ang le of 60 degrees to each other. Six small circles label ed object,
and are shown. The object is on the bisector between the mirrors. Line 1 intersects mirror 1 perpendicular ly
connecting the object to on the other side of the m irror. Line 2 intersects the mirror 2 perpendicularly connecting the object to
on the other side of the mirror. Lines parallel to th ese respectively connect to and to. Lines parallel to these respectively
connect to and to.
29. It is in the focal point of the big mirror and at the cente r of curvature of the small mirror.
31.
33.
35. Step 1: Image formation by a mirror is involved.
Step 2: Draw the problem set up when possible.
Step 3: Use thin-lens equations to solve this problem.
Step 4: Find f.
Step 5: Given:.
Step 6: No ray tracing is needed.
Step 7: Using. Then,.
Step 8: The image is virtual because the image dista nce is negative. The focal length is positive, so the mirror is
concave.
37. a. for a convex mirror;
b. (behind the cornea);
c., so that
39.
41.

1.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror. Two r ays originating from a point strike the mirror and ar e reflected. The
distance of the point from the mirror is labeled and.
43.
with
45.
47.
49. proof
51. a.;
b., so that and
or
53. a.;
b., so the maximum height is;
c. This seems quite reasonable, since at 3.00 m it is pos sible to get a full length picture of a person.
55. a.;
b.
57. a. Using,. Then we can determine the magnification,.
b. and;
c. The magnification m increases rapidly as you increase t he object distance toward the focal length.
59.
61.
63. 83 cm to the right of the converging lens,
65.

1.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7666967.
69. a.;
b.;
c.
71.
73. Originally, the close vision was 51.0 D. Therefore,
75. originally,; because the power for normal distant vision is 50.0 D, the power should be decreased by 20.0 D
77.
79. a.;
b.
81. We need when, so
83. Let = far point ⇒
85.
87.
89.
91.
93.
95.
97. a.;
b.
99. a. behind the objective lens;
b.;
c.
d.;
e.
101.
103.
105.
107. Answers will vary.
109. 12 cm to the left of the mirror,

1.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669111. 27 cm in front of the mirror,, orientation upright
113. The following figure shows three successive images begi nning with the image in mirror. is the image in
mirror, whose image in mirror is whose image in mirror is the real image.
Figure shows the side view of two concave mirrors, and placed one on top of the other, facing each other. The top,, one
has a small hole in the middle. A penny is placed on t he bottom mirror. An image of the penny labeled is shown below.
Another image of the penny, labeled is shown above t he top mirror. This is labeled real image.
115. 5.4 cm from the axis
117. Let the vertex of the concave mirror be the origin of the coordinate system. Image 1 is at −10/3 cm (−3. 3 cm), image 2 is
at −40/11 cm (−3.6 cm). These serve as objects for s ubsequent images, which are at −310/83 cm (−3.7 cm), −934 0/2501 cm
(−3.7 cm), −140,720/37,681 cm (−3.7 cm). All remaining imag es are at approximately −3.7 cm.
119.
Figure shows two prisms with their bases parallel to each other at an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal. T o the right of this is a
bi-convex lens. A ray along the optical axis enters th is set up from the left, deviates between the two prism s and travels parallel to
the optical axis, slightly below it. It enters the len s and deviates to pass through its focal point on the ot her side.
121. Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O o n the axis and tip P. A bi-concave lens with focal po int F1 and
F2 on the left and right respectively and a concave mirror with center of curvature C. Two rays originate from P and diverge
through the bi-concave lens. Their back extensions converge between F1 and the lens to form image Q1. Two r ays
originating from the tip of Q1 strike the mirror, are re flected and converge at Q2 between C and the mirror.
123. −5 D
125. 11
Additional Problems
127. a.

1.A.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror with c entre of curvature O and focal point F. Point P lies on the axis between
point F and the mirror. Ray 1 originates from point P, travels along the axis and hits the mirror. The ref lected ray 1 prime travels
back along the axis. Ray 2 originates from P and hits the mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. Line OX, labeled
normal at X, bisects the angle formed by PX and ray 2 prime. The back extensions of 1 prime and 2 prime in tersect at point Q.
b.
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror with p oints P, O, Q and F lying on the optical axis. Point P is furthest from the
mirror. Ray 1 originates from P, travels along the ax is and hits the mirror. The reflected ray 1 prime tra vels back along the axis. Ray
2 originates from P and hits the mirror at point X. T he reflected ray 2 prime intersects the axis at point Q, which lies between points
P and F. OX, labeled normal at X, bisects the angle PX Q.
c.
Figure shows a convex mirror with point P lying betwee n point F and the mirror on the optical axis. Ray 1 originates from P, travels
along the axis and hits the mirror. The reflected ray 1 prime travels back along the axis. Ray 2 originate s from P and hits the mirror
at point X. The angle formed by reflected ray 2 pri me and PX is bisected by OX, the normal at X. The back extensions of 1 prime
and 2 prime intersect at point Q, just behind the mir ror.
d. similar to the previous picture but with point P outside th e focal length;
e. Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis. For a point object placed off axis in front of a conca ve mirror
corresponding to parts (a) and (b), the case for convex mirro r left as exercises.

1.A.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669
Figure a shows the cross section of a concave mirror. Poi nt P lies above the axis, closer to the mirror than fo cal point F. Ray 1
originates from P and hits the mirror. Reflected ray 1 prime travels back along the same line as ray 1 and intersects the optical axis
at point O. Ray 2 originates from point P and hits th e mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. The back extensions of
1 prime and 2 prime intersect at point Q behind the mirror. The angle formed by rays 2 and 2 prime is bise cted by OX, the normal
at X. Figure b shows the cross section of a concave mirro r. Point P lies above the axis, further away from the mirror than point F.
Ray 1 originates from P and hits the mirror. Reflecte d ray 1 prime travels back along the same line as ray 1 and intersects the
optical axis at point O. Ray 2 originates from point P and hits the mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. Rays 1
prime and 2 prime intersect at point Q in front of t he mirror. The angle formed by rays 2 and 2 prime is bisected by OX, the normal
at X.
129., upright
131. proof
133.

1.A.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76669
Figure shows a bi-convex lens, an object placed at poin t A on the optical axis and an inverted image formed at point on the axis
behind the lens. The top of the object is a distance h from the origin. Three rays originate from the top of the object, strike the lens
and converge on the other side at the top of the inv erted image. It passes the focal point in front of the lens and is parallel to the
optical axis behind the lens.
Triangles BAO and are similar triangles. Thus,. Triangles NOF and are similar
triangles. Thus,. Noting that gives or. Inverting th is
gives. Equating the two expressions for the ratio g ives. Dividing through by
gives or.
135. 70 cm
137. The plane mirror has an infinite focal point, so tha t. The total apparent distance of the man in the m irror will be
his actual distance, plus the apparent image distance, or. If this distance must be less than 20 cm, he sh ould
stand at.
139. Here we want. If near point,. Thus,
. Using gives, so the near point is 25.3 cm.
141. Assuming a lens at 2.00 cm from the boy’s eye, the im age distance must be. For an
infinite-distance object, the required power is. Ther efore, the lens will correct the
nearsightedness.
143.
145. Use,. The image distance for the objective is. Using,
, and gives. We want this image to be at the focal point of the eyepiece so that the eyepiece
forms an image at infinity for comfortable viewing. Thus, the distance d between the lenses should be
147. a. focal length of the corrective lens;
b. −1.25 D
149.
151.
This page titled 1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766449.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
1.1 The Propagation of Light
1. Under what conditions can light be modeled like a ray? Like a wave?
2. Why is the index of refraction always greater than or equa l to 1?
3. Does the fact that the light flash from lightning re aches you before its sound prove that the speed of lig ht is extremely
large or simply that it is greater than the speed of sound? Discuss how you could use this effect to get an e stimate of the
speed of light.
4. Speculate as to what physical process might be responsible f or light traveling more slowly in a medium than in a vacuu m.
1.2 The Law of Reflection
5. Using the law of reflection, explain how powder takes the shine off of a person’s nose. What is the name of the optical
effect?
1.3 Refraction
6. Diffusion by reflection from a rough surface is des cribed in this chapter. Light can also be diffused by refraction. Describe
how this occurs in a specific situation, such as light interac ting with crushed ice.
7. Will light change direction toward or away from the perpendicular when it goes from air to water? Water t o glass? Glass to
air?
8. Explain why an object in water always appears to be at a depth sh allower than it actually is?
9. Explain why a person’s legs appear very short when wad ing in a pool. Justify your explanation with a ray di agram
showing the path of rays from the feet to the eye of an o bserver who is out of the water.
10. Explain why an oar that is partially submerged in water appears bent.
1.4 Total Internal Reflection
11. A ring with a colorless gemstone is dropped into water. The gemstone becomes invisible when submerged. Can i t be a
diamond? Explain.
12. The most common type of mirage is an illusion that l ight from faraway objects is reflected by a pool of wat er that is not
really there. Mirages are generally observed in deser ts, when there is a hot layer of air near the ground. Given that the
refractive index of air is lower for air at higher temper atures, explain how mirages can be formed.
13. How can you use total internal reflection to estimate the i ndex of refraction of a medium?
1.5 Dispersion
14. Is it possible that total internal reflection plays a role in rainbows? Explain in terms of indices of re fraction and angles,
perhaps referring to that shown below. Some of us have seen the formation of a double rainbow; is it physica lly possible to
observe a triple rainbow? A photograph of a double rainbow.

9.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76644
15. A high-quality diamond may be quite clear and color less, transmitting all visible wavelengths with little ab sorption.
Explain how it can sparkle with flashes of brilliant color when illuminated by white light.
1.6 Huygens’s Principle
16. How do wave effects depend on the size of the object with which the wave interacts? For example, why does sound bend
around the corner of a building while light does not?
17. Does Huygens’s principle apply to all types of waves?
18. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it i s evidence that the phenomenon is a wave. Does the reve rse hold
true? That is, if diffraction is not observed, does that me an the phenomenon is not a wave?
1.7 Polarization
19. Can a sound wave in air be polarized? Explain.
20. No light passes through two perfect polarizing filter s with perpendicular axes. However, if a third polarizin g filter is
placed between the original two, some light can pass. Why is this? Under what circumstances does most of the light pass?
21. Explain what happens to the energy carried by light that it is dimmed by passing it through two crossed polarizing f ilters.
22. When particles scattering light are much smaller tha n its wavelength, the amount of scattering is proport ional to. Does
this mean there is more scattering for small than large? How does this relate to the fact that the sky is blue?
23. Using the information given in the preceding question, expl ain why sunsets are red.
24. When light is reflected at Brewster’s angle from a smo oth surface, it is polarized parallel to the surface. Part of the
light will be refracted into the surface. Describe how you would do an experiment to determine the polariza tion of the
refracted light. What direction would you expect the po larization to have and would you expect it to be?
25. If you lie on a beach looking at the water with your head tipped slightly sideways, your polarized sunglasse s do not work
very well. Why not?
Problems
1.1 The Propagation of Light
26. What is the speed of light in water? In glycerine?
27. What is the speed of light in air? In crown glass?
28. Calculate the index of refraction for a medium in which the speed of light is, and identify the most li kely
substance based on Table 1.1.
29. In what substance in Table 1.1 is the speed of light?
30. There was a major collision of an asteroid with the Moo n in medieval times. It was described by monks at Cante rbury
Cathedral in England as a red glow on and around the Moon. How long after the asteroid hit the Moon, which is
away, would the light first arrive on Earth?

9.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664431. Components of some computers communicate with each o ther through optical fibers having an index of refra ction
. What time in nanoseconds is required for a signal to trave l 0.200 m through such a fiber?
32. Compare the time it takes for light to travel 1000 m o n the surface of Earth and in outer space.
33. How far does light travel underwater during a time interval of?
1.2 The Law of Reflection
34. Suppose a man stands in front of a mirror as shown below. His eyes are 1.65 m above the floor and the top of his head is
0.13 m higher. Find the height above the floor of th e top and bottom of the smallest mirror in which he can see both the top
of his head and his feet. How is this distance related to th e man’s height?
The figure is a drawing of a man standing in front of a mirror and looking at his image. The mirror is about half
as tall as the man, with the top of the mirror above his eyes but belo w the top of his head. The light rays from
his feet reach the bottom of the mirror and reflect to his eye s. The rays from the top of his head reach the top of
the mirror and reflect to his eyes.
35. Show that when light reflects from two mirrors that me et each other at a right angle, the outgoing ray is parallel to the
incoming ray, as illustrated below.
Two mirrors meet each other at a right angle. An incoming ray of light hi ts one mirror at an angle of theta one
to the normal, is reflected at the same angle of theta one on the ot her side of the normal, then hits the other
mirror at an angle of theta two to the normal and reflects at the sa me angle of theta two on the other side of the
normal, such that the outgoing ray is parallel to the incoming ray.

9.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664436. On the Moon’s surface, lunar astronauts placed a corner reflector, off which a laser beam is periodically r eflected. The
distance to the Moon is calculated from the round-tr ip time. What percent correction is needed to accoun t for the delay in
time due to the slowing of light in Earth’s atmospher e? Assume the distance to the Moon is precisely and E arth’s
atmosphere (which varies in density with altitude) is equivalent to a layer 30.0 km thick with a constant index of refraction
37. A flat mirror is neither converging nor diverging. T o prove this, consider two rays originating from the same point and
diverging at an angle (see below). Show that after striking a plane mirror, the angle between their directions remains.
Light rays diverging from a point at an angle theta are incident on a mirror at two different places and their
reflected rays diverge. One ray hits at an angle theta one from the no rmal, and reflects at the same angle theta
one on the other side of the normal. The other ray hits at a larger angle theta two from the normal, and reflects
at the same angle theta two on the other side of the normal. When the r eflected rays are extended backwards
from their points of reflection, they meet at a point behind the mirro r, at the same angle theta with which they
left the source.
1.3 Refraction
Unless otherwise specified, for problems 1 through 10, th e indices of refraction of glass and water should be t aken to be 1.50 and
1.333, respectively.
38. A light beam in air has an angle of incidence of at the surface of a glass plate. What are the angles o f reflection and
refraction?
39. A light beam in air is incident on the surface of a pond, making an angle of 20° with respect to the sur face. What are
the angles of reflection and refraction?
40. When a light ray crosses from water into glass, it eme rges at an angle of with respect to the normal of the interface.
What is its angle of incidence?
41. A pencil flashlight submerged in water sends a light b eam toward the surface at an angle of incidence of. What is the
angle of refraction in air?
42. Light rays from the Sun make a angle to the vertica l when seen from below the surface of a body of water. At what
angle above the horizon is the Sun?
43. The path of a light beam in air goes from an angle of incidence of to an angle of refraction of when it enters a
rectangular block of plastic. What is the index of refra ction of the plastic?
44. A scuba diver training in a pool looks at his instruc tor as shown below. What angle does the ray from the instructor’s face
make with the perpendicular to the water at the point where the ray enters? The angle between the ray in t he water and the
perpendicular to the water is.

9.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76644
A scuba diver and his trainer look at each other. They see each other at the locations given by straight line
extrapolations of the rays reaching their eyes. To the trainer, the scuba diver appears less deep than he actually
is, and to the diver, the trainer appears higher than he actually is. To the tr ainer, the scuba diver's feet appear to
be at a depth of two point zero meters. The incident ray from the trai ner strikes the water surface at a
horizontal distance of two point zero meters from the trainer. The di ver’s head is a vertical distance of d equal
to two point zero meters below the surface of the water.
45. (a) Using information in the preceding problem, find t he height of the instructor’s head above the water, n oting that you
will first have to calculate the angle of incidence.
(b) Find the apparent depth of the diver’s head below water as seen by the instructor.
1.4 Total Internal Reflection
46. Verify that the critical angle for light going from water to air is, as discussed at the end of Example 1.4, regarding
the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air.
47. (a) At the end of Example 1.4, it was stated that the criti cal angle for light going from diamond to air is. Verif y this.
(b) What is the critical angle for light going from zir con to air?
48. An optical fiber uses flint glass clad with crown glass. What is the critical angle?
49. At what minimum angle will you get total internal reflect ion of light traveling in water and reflected from ice?
50. Suppose you are using total internal reflection to mak e an efficient corner reflector. If there is air outsi de and the incident
angle is, what must be the minimum index of refraction of t he material from which the reflector is made?
51. You can determine the index of refraction of a substance by determining its critical angle.
(a) What is the index of refraction of a substance t hat has a critical angle of when submerged in water? What is
the substance, based on Table 1.1?
(b) What would the critical angle be for this substance in a ir?
52. A ray of light, emitted beneath the surface of an u nknown liquid with air above it, undergoes total inte rnal reflection as
shown below. What is the index of refraction for the liqui d and its likely identification?

9.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76644
A light ray travels from an object placed in a medium n 1 at 15.0 c entimeters below the horizontal interface
with medium n 2. This ray gets totally internally reflected with thet a c as critical angle. The horizontal distance
between the object and the point of incidence is 13.4 centimeters.
53. Light rays fall normally on the vertical surface of th e glass prism (shown below.
(a) What is the largest value for such that the ray is t otally reflected at the slanted face?
(b) Repeat the calculation of part (a) if the prism is imm ersed in water.
A right angle triangular prism has a horizontal base and a vertical s ide. The hypotenuse of the triangle makes
an angle of phi with the horizontal base. A horizontal light rays is inc ident normally on the vertical surface of
the prism.
1.5 Dispersion
54. (a) What is the ratio of the speed of red light to viole t light in diamond, based on Table 1.2?
(b) What is this ratio in polystyrene?
(c) Which is more dispersive?
55. A beam of white light goes from air into water at an i ncident angle of. At what angles are the red (660 nm) and
violet (410 nm) parts of the light refracted?
56. By how much do the critical angles for red (660 nm) and viol et (410 nm) light differ in a diamond surrounded by air?
57. (a) A narrow beam of light containing yellow (580 nm) and green (550 nm) wavelengths goes from polystyrene to air,
striking the surface at a incident angle. What is the a ngle between the colors when they emerge?
(b) How far would they have to travel to be separated by 1.00 mm?

9.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664458. A parallel beam of light containing orange (610 nm) and violet (410 nm) wavelengths goes from fused quar tz to water,
striking the surface between them at a incident angle. What is the angle between the two colors in water?
59. A ray of 610-nm light goes from air into fused quar tz at an incident angle of. At what incident angle m ust 470 nm
light enter flint glass to have the same angle of refra ction?
60. A narrow beam of light containing red (660 nm) and b lue (470 nm) wavelengths travels from air through a 1.00-cm-thick
flat piece of crown glass and back to air again. The beam strikes at a incident angle.
(a) At what angles do the two colors emerge?
(b) By what distance are the red and blue separated when th ey emerge?
61. A narrow beam of white light enters a prism made of cr own glass at a incident angle, as shown below. At what
angles, and, do the red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) com ponents of the light emerge from the prism?
A blue incident light ray at an angle of incidence equal to 45 degrees to the normal falls on an equilateral
triangular prism whose corners are all at angles equal to 60 degrees. At the first surface, the ray refracts and
splits into red and violet rays. These rays hit the second surface and emerge from the prism. The red light with
660 nanometers bends less than the violet light with 410 nanometers.
1.7 Polarization
62. What angle is needed between the direction of polarized l ight and the axis of a polarizing filter to cut its inten sity in half?
63. The angle between the axes of two polarizing filters is. By how much does the second filter reduce the int ensity of
the light coming through the first?
64. Two polarizing sheets and are placed together with t heir transmission axes oriented at an angle to each other.
What is when only of the maximum transmitted light in tensity passes through them?
65. Suppose that in the preceding problem the light inc ident on is unpolarized. At the determined value of, what fraction
of the incident light passes through the combination?
66. If you have completely polarized light of intensity, what will its intensity be after passing through a p olarizing
filter with its axis at an angle to the light’s polarizat ion direction?
67. What angle would the axis of a polarizing filter nee d to make with the direction of polarized light of i ntensity
to reduce the intensity to?
68. At the end of Example 1.7, it was stated that the inte nsity of polarized light is reduced to of its origi nal value by
passing through a polarizing filter with its axis at an angle of to the direction of polarization. Verify t his statement.
69. Show that if you have three polarizing filters, with the second at an angle of to the first and the thi rd at an angle of
to the first, the intensity of light passed by the f irst will be reduced to of its value. (This is in co ntrast to having
only the first and third, which reduces the intensity to zero, so that placing the second between them inc reases the intensity of
the transmitted light.)
70. Three polarizing sheets are placed together such th at the transmission axis of the second sheet is orient ed at to the
axis of the first, whereas the transmission axis of the third sheet is oriented at (in the same sense) to the axis of the first.
What fraction of the intensity of an incident unpolariz ed beam is transmitted by the combination?

9.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664471. In order to rotate the polarization axis of a beam of linearly polarized light by, a student places shee ts and
with their transmission axes at and, respectively, to th e beam’s axis of polarization.
(a) What fraction of the incident light passes through and
(b) through the combination?
(c) Repeat your calculations for part (b) for transmission -axis angles of and, respectively.
72. It is found that when light traveling in water falls on a plastic block, Brewster’s angle is. What is the refractive
index of the plastic?
73. At what angle will light reflected from diamond be comple tely polarized?
74. What is Brewster’s angle for light traveling in water that is reflected from crown glass?
75. A scuba diver sees light reflected from the water’s surfac e. At what angle will this light be completely polarized?
Additional Problems
76. From his measurements, Roemer estimated that it took 22 min for light to travel a distance equal to the diameter of
Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
(a) Use this estimate along with the known diameter of Earth’s orbit to obtain a rough value of the speed of light.
(b) Light actually takes 16.5 min to travel this distance. Use this time to calculate the speed of light.
77. Cornu performed Fizeau’s measurement of the speed of light using a wheel of diameter 4.00 cm that contai ned 180 teeth.
The distance from the wheel to the mirror was 22.9 km. Assuming he measured the speed of light accurately, wh at was the
angular velocity of the wheel?
78. Suppose you have an unknown clear substance immersed in water, and you wish to identify it by finding its in dex of
refraction. You arrange to have a beam of light ent er it at an angle of, and you observe the angle of refraction to be
. What is the index of refraction of the substance and i ts likely identity?
79. Shown below is a ray of light going from air through crown glass into water, such as going into a fish tank. Calculate the
amount the ray is displaced by the glass, given that the i ncident angle is. and the glass is 1.00 cm thick.
The figure illustrates refraction occurring when light travels fro m medium to through an intermediate
medium. The incident ray makes an angle with a perpendicular drawn at the point of incidence at the
interface between and. The light ray entering bends towards the perpendicul ar line making an angle
with it on the side. The ray arrives at the interface between and at an angle of to a perpendicular
drawn at the point of incidence at this interface, and the transmitted ray be nds away from the perpendicular,
making an angle of theta three to the perpendicular on the side. A straig ht line extrapolation of the original

9.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76644incident ray is shown as a dotted line. This line is parallel to the refra cted ray in the third medium,, and is
shifted a distance delta x from the refracted ray. The extrapolated r ay is at the same angle theta three to the
perpendicular in medium as the refracted ray.
80. Considering the previous problem, show that is the s ame as it would be if the second medium were not present.
81. At what angle is light inside crown glass completely polarize d when reflected from water, as in a fish tank?
82. Light reflected at from a window is completely polar ized. What is the window’s index of refraction and the likely
substance of which it is made?
83. (a) Light reflected at from a gemstone in a ring is comp letely polarized. Can the gem be a diamond?
(b) At what angle would the light be completely polarized if the gem was in water?
84. If is Brewster’s angle for light reflected from the top of an interface between two substances, and is B rewster’s angle
for light reflected from below, prove that.
85. Unreasonable results Suppose light travels from water to another substance, with an angle of incidence of and an
angle of refraction of.
(a) What is the index of refraction of the other substanc e?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
86. Unreasonable results Light traveling from water to a gemstone strikes th e surface at an angle of and has an angle
of refraction of.
(a) What is the speed of light in the gemstone?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
87. If a polarizing filter reduces the intensity of pol arized light to of its original value, by how much a re the electric and
magnetic fields reduced?
88. Suppose you put on two pairs of polarizing sunglasses wi th their axes at an angle of. How much longer will it take
the light to deposit a given amount of energy in yo ur eye compared with a single pair of sunglasses? Assume the lenses are
clear except for their polarizing characteristics.
89. (a) On a day when the intensity of sunlight is, a ci rcular lens 0.200 m in diameter focuses light onto water in
a black beaker. Two polarizing sheets of plastic are p laced in front of the lens with their axes at an ang le of. Assuming
the sunlight is unpolarized and the polarizers are eff icient, what is the initial rate of heating of the wate r in,
assuming it is absorbed? The aluminum beaker has a ma ss of 30.0 grams and contains 250 grams of water.
(b) Do the polarizing filters get hot? Explain.
Challenge Problems
90. Light shows staged with lasers use moving mirrors to s wing beams and create colorful effects. Show that a li ght ray
reflected from a mirror changes direction by when the m irror is rotated by an angle.
91. Consider sunlight entering Earth’s atmosphere at su nrise and sunset—that is, at a. incident angle. Taking the
boundary between nearly empty space and the atmosphe re to be sudden, calculate the angle of refraction for sunlight. This
lengthens the time the Sun appears to be above the h orizon, both at sunrise and sunset. Now construct a probl em in which
you determine the angle of refraction for different models of the atmosphere, such as various layers of varying density. Your
instructor may wish to guide you on the level of com plexity to consider and on how the index of refractio n varies with air
density.

9.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7664492. A light ray entering an optical fiber surrounded b y air is first refracted and then reflected as shown b elow. Show that if
the fiber is made from crown glass, any incident ray will be totally internally reflected.
The figure shows light traveling from and incident onto the left face of a rectangular block of material.
The ray is incident at an angle of incidence, measured relative to the no rmal to the surface where the ray
enters. The angle of refraction is, again, relative to the normal to the surface. The refracted ray falls onto the
upper face of the block and gets totally internally reflected with as the angle of incidence.
93. A light ray falls on the left face of a prism (see b elow) at the angle of incidence for which the emergi ng beam has an
angle of refraction at the right face. Show that the index of refraction n of the glass prism is given by
where is the vertex angle of the prism and is the ang le through which the beam has been deviated. If and t he
base angles of the prism are each, what is n?
A light ray falls on the left face of a triangular prism whose upper vert ex has an angle of phi and whose index of
refraction is n. The angle of incidence of the ray relative to the nor mal to the left face is theta. The ray refracts
in the prism. The refracted ray is horizontal, parallel to the base of the prism. The refracted ray reaches the
right face of the prism and refracts as it emerges out of the prism. The emerging ray makes an angle of theta
with the normal to the right face.
94. If the apex angle in the previous problem is and, wh at is the value of?
95. The light incident on polarizing sheet is linearly polarized at an angle of with respect to the trans mission axis of
. Sheet is placed so that its axis is parallel to the polarization axis of the incident light, that is, also at with respect
to.
(a) What fraction of the incident light passes through?
(b) What fraction of the incident light is passed by the combination?
(c) By rotating, a maximum in transmitted intensity is obtained. What is the ratio of this maximum intens ity to the
intensity of transmitted light when is at with respect to?
96. Prove that if I is the intensity of light transmitted by two polari zing filters with axes at an angle and is the inten sity
when the axes are at an angle, then, the original i ntensity. (Hint: Use the trigonometric identities
and.)
This page titled 9.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766441.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766701.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
1. What are the differences between real and virtual i mages? How can you tell (by looking) whether an image formed by a
single lens or mirror is real or virtual?
2. Can you see a virtual image? Explain your response.
3. Can you photograph a virtual image?
4. Can you project a virtual image onto a screen?
5. Is it necessary to project a real image onto a screen to s ee it?
6. Devise an arrangement of mirrors allowing you to see the back of your head. What is the minimum number of mirrors
needed for this task?
7. If you wish to see your entire body in a flat mirror (from head to toe), how tall should the mirror be? Do es its size depend
upon your distance away from the mirror? Provide a sketch.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
8. At what distance is an image always located: at, or?
9. Under what circumstances will an image be located at the foc al point of a spherical lens or mirror?
10. What is meant by a negative magnification? What is mean t by a magnification whose absolute value is less than on e?
11. Can an image be larger than the object even though its magnification is negative? Explain.
2.3 Images Formed by Refraction
12. Derive the formula for the apparent depth of a fish in a f ish tank using Snell’s law.
13. Use a ruler and a protractor to find the image by r efraction in the following cases. Assume an air-glass interface. Use a
refractive index of 1 for air and of 1.5 for glass. (Hint: Us e Snell’s law at the interface.)
(a) A point object located on the axis of a concave in terface located at a point within the focal length from t he vertex.
(b) A point object located on the axis of a concave interface located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.
(c) A point object located on the axis of a convex inte rface located at a point within the focal length from th e vertex.
(d) A point object located on the axis of a convex interface located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.
(e) Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis.
2.4 Thin Lenses
14. You can argue that a flat piece of glass, such as in a window, is like a lens with an infinite focal leng th. If so, where does
it form an image? That is, how are and related?
15. When you focus a camera, you adjust the distance of the lens from the film. If the camera lens acts like a thin lens, why
can it not be a fixed distance from the film for both near and distant objects?
16. A thin lens has two focal points, one on either side of the lens at equal distances from its center, and sh ould behave the
same for light entering from either side. Look backwa rd and forward through a pair of eyeglasses and comme nt on whether
they are thin lenses.
17. Will the focal length of a lens change when it is submerged in water? Explain.

1.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766702.5 The Eye
18. If the lens of a person’s eye is removed because of cataracts (as has been done since ancient times), wh y would you
expect an eyeglass lens of about 16 D to be prescribed?
19. When laser light is shone into a relaxed normal-visio n eye to repair a tear by spot-welding the retina to the back of the
eye, the rays entering the eye must be parallel. Why?
20. Why is your vision so blurry when you open your eyes while swimming under water? How does a face mask enable c lear
vision?
21. It has become common to replace the cataract-cloud ed lens of the eye with an internal lens. This intraoc ular lens can be
chosen so that the person has perfect distant vision. Will the person be able to read without glasses? If t he person was
nearsighted, is the power of the intraocular lens greater or less than the removed lens?
22. If the cornea is to be reshaped (this can be done surgically or with contact lenses) to correct myopia, sho uld its curvature
be made greater or smaller? Explain.
2.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
23. Geometric optics describes the interaction of light wi th macroscopic objects. Why, then, is it correct to use geometric
optics to analyze a microscope’s image?
24. The image produced by the microscope in Figure 2.38 cannot be projected. Could extra lenses or mirrors project it?
Explain.
25. If you want your microscope or telescope to project a real image onto a screen, how would you change the pl acement of
the eyepiece relative to the objective?
Problems
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
26. Consider a pair of flat mirrors that are positioned s o that they form an angle of 120°. An object is place d on the bisector
between the mirrors. Construct a ray diagram as in Figure 2.4 to show how many images are formed.
27. Consider a pair of flat mirrors that are positioned so that they form an angle of 60°. An object is placed on the bisector
between the mirrors. Construct a ray diagram as in Figure 2.4 to show how many images are formed.
28. By using more than one flat mirror, construct a ray dia gram showing how to create an inverted image.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
29. The following figure shows a light bulb between two sph erical mirrors. One mirror produces a beam of light with parallel
rays; the other keeps light from escaping without be ing put into the beam. Where is the filament of the light in relation to the
focal point or radius of curvature of each mirror?

1.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670A light bulb is shown in the centre, with a small concave mirror to its left and a bigger one to its right. The light
rays originating from the bulb that hit the smaller mirror are refl ected back to the bulb. Light rays from the
bulb that hit the bigger mirror are reflected. These reflected ray s are parallel and travel towards the left.
30. Why are diverging mirrors often used for rearview mir rors in vehicles? What is the main disadvantage of u sing such a
mirror compared with a flat one?
31. Some telephoto cameras use a mirror rather than a le ns. What radius of curvature mirror is needed to rep lace a 800 mmfocal length telephoto lens?
32. Calculate the focal length of a mirror formed by the shiny back of a spoon that has a 3.00 cm radius of curvatu re.
33. Electric room heaters use a concave mirror to refle ct infrared (IR) radiation from hot coils. Note that I R radiation follows
the same law of reflection as visible light. Given tha t the mirror has a radius of curvature of 50.0 cm a nd produces an image
of the coils 3.00 m away from the mirror, where are the coils?
34. Find the magnification of the heater element in the previous problem. Note that its large magnitude helps spread out the
reflected energy.
35. What is the focal length of a makeup mirror that p roduces a magnification of 1.50 when a person’s face is 12.0 cm away?
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Example 2.2.
36. A shopper standing 3.00 m from a convex security mirror sees his image with a magnification of 0.250.
(a) Where is his image?
(b) What is the focal length of the mirror?
(c) What is its radius of curvature?
37. An object 1.50 cm high is held 3.00 cm from a person’s corne a, and its reflected image is measured to be 0.167 cm high.
(a) What is the magnification?
(b) Where is the image?
(c) Find the radius of curvature of the convex mirror formed by the cornea. (Note that this technique is u sed by
optometrists to measure the curvature of the cornea fo r contact lens fitting. The instrument used is calle d a keratometer,
or curve measurer.)
38. Ray tracing for a flat mirror shows that the image is located a distance behind the mirror equal to the distance of the
object from the mirror. This is stated as, since t his is a negative image distance (it is a virtual i mage). What is the
focal length of a flat mirror?
39. Show that, for a flat mirror,, given that the image is the same distance behind the mirror as the distan ce of the
object from the mirror.
40. Use the law of reflection to prove that the focal le ngth of a mirror is half its radius of curvature. Th at is, prove that
. Note this is true for a spherical mirror only if its diameter is small compared with its radius of curvature.
41. Referring to the electric room heater considered i n problem 5, calculate the intensity of IR radiatio n in projected
by the concave mirror on a person 3.00 m away. Assume that the heating element radiates 1500 W and has an area of,
and that half of the radiated power is reflected and foc used by the mirror.
42. Two mirrors are inclined at an angle of 60° and an o bject is placed at a point that is equidistant from the two mirrors. Use
a protractor to draw rays accurately and locate all images. You may have to draw several figures so that t hat rays for different
images do not clutter your drawing.
43. Two parallel mirrors are facing each other and are separated by a distance of 3 cm. A point object is pla ced between the
mirrors 1 cm from one of the mirrors. Find the coordinates of a ll the images.

1.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766702.3 Images Formed by Refraction
44. An object is located in air 30 cm from the vertex of a concave surface made of glass with a radius of curva ture 10 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification? Use and.
45. An object is located in air 30 cm from the vertex of a convex surface made of glass with a radius of curva ture 80 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification?
46. An object is located in water 15 cm from the vertex o f a concave surface made of glass with a radius of cu rvature 10 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification? Use and.
47. An object is located in water 30 cm from the vertex of a convex surface made of Plexiglas with a radius of c urvature of
80 cm. Where does the image form by refraction and what is its magnification? and.
48. An object is located in air 5 cm from the vertex of a concave surface made of glass with a radius of curv ature 20 cm.
Where does the image form by refraction and what is its ma gnification? Use and.
49. Derive the spherical interface equation for refracti on at a concave surface. (Hint: Follow the derivation in the text for the
convex surface.)
2.4 Thin Lenses
50. How far from the lens must the film in a camera be, i f the lens has a 35.0-mm focal length and is being u sed to
photograph a flower 75.0 cm away? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Figure 2.27.
51. A certain slide projector has a 100 mm-focal length len s.
(a) How far away is the screen if a slide is placed 103 mm fro m the lens and produces a sharp image?
(b) If the slide is 24.0 by 36.0 mm, what are the dimensi ons of the image? Explicitly show how you follow the st eps in
the Figure 2.27.
52. A doctor examines a mole with a 15.0-cm focal length mag nifying glass held 13.5 cm from the mole.
(a) Where is the image?
(b) What is its magnification?
(c) How big is the image of a 5.00 mm diameter mole?
53. A camera with a 50.0-mm focal length lens is being used to photograph a person standing 3.00 m away.
(a) How far from the lens must the film be?
(b) If the film is 36.0 mm high, what fraction of a 1.75-m- tall person will fit on it?
(c) Discuss how reasonable this seems, based on your experience i n taking or posing for photographs.
54. A camera lens used for taking close-up photographs has a focal length of 22.0 mm. The farthest it can be placed from the
film is 33.0 mm.
(a) What is the closest object that can be photographed?
(b) What is the magnification of this closest object?
55. Suppose your 50.0 mm-focal length camera lens is 51.0 mm away from the film in the camera.
(a) How far away is an object that is in focus?
(b) What is the height of the object if its image is 2.00 c m high?
56. What is the focal length of a magnifying glass that p roduces a magnification of 3.00 when held 5.00 cm fro m an object,
such as a rare coin?
57. The magnification of a book held 7.50 cm from a 10.0 cm-fo cal length lens is 4.00.
(a) Find the magnification for the book when it is held 8.50 cm from the magnifier.

1.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670(b) Repeat for the book held 9.50 cm from the magnifier.
(c) Comment on how magnification changes as the object dist ance increases as in these two calculations.
58. Suppose a 200 mm-focal length telephoto lens is being used to photograph mountains 10.0 km away.
(a) Where is the image?
(b) What is the height of the image of a 1000 m high clif f on one of the mountains?
59. A camera with a 100 mm-focal length lens is used to p hotograph the sun. What is the height of the image of the sun on
the film, given the sun is in diameter and is away?
60. Use the thin-lens equation to show that the magnificati on for a thin lens is determined by its focal length and the object
distance and is given by.
61. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed 5.0 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm and obs erved from the
other side. Where and how large is the image?
62. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed at 5.0 cm in fron t of a diverging lens of focal length 20 cm and obs erved from the
other side. Where and how large is the image?
63. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed at 25 cm in fron t of a diverging lens of focal length 20 cm. Behind the diverging
lens, there is a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. The distance between the lenses is 5.0 cm. Find the lo cation and size of
the final image.
64. Two convex lenses of focal lengths 20 cm and 10 cm ar e placed 30 cm apart, with the lens with the longer fo cal length on
the right. An object of height 2.0 cm is placed midway between them and observed through each lens from the left and from
the right. Describe what you will see, such as where the image(s) will appear, whether they will be upright or i nverted and
their magnifications.
2.5 The Eye
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance is 2.00 cm.
65. What is the power of the eye when viewing an object 50.0 c m away?
66. Calculate the power of the eye when viewing an object 3.00 m away.
67. The print in many books averages 3.50 mm in height. Ho w high is the image of the print on the retina when the book is
held 30.0 cm from the eye?
68. Suppose a certain person’s visual acuity is such that he can see objects clearly that form an image high on his
retina. What is the maximum distance at which he can read th e 75.0-cm-high letters on the side of an airplane?
69. People who do very detailed work close up, such as jewe lers, often can see objects clearly at much closer dist ance than
the normal 25 cm.
(a) What is the power of the eyes of a woman who can see an obje ct clearly at a distance of only 8.00 cm?
(b) What is the image size of a 1.00-mm object, such as lett ering inside a ring, held at this distance?
(c) What would the size of the image be if the object were he ld at the normal 25.0 cm distance?
70. What is the far point of a person whose eyes have a rel axed power of 50.5 D?
71. What is the near point of a person whose eyes have an accom modated power of 53.5 D?
72. (a) A laser reshaping the cornea of a myopic patien t reduces the power of his eye by 9.00 D, with a uncert ainty in
the final correction. What is the range of diopters for ey eglass lenses that this person might need after this proce dure?
(b) Was the person nearsighted or farsighted before t he procedure? How do you know?
73. The power for normal close vision is 54.0 D. In a vision-cor rection procedure, the power of a patient’s eye is incr eased by
3.00 D. Assuming that this produces normal close vision, wh at was the patient’s near point before the procedure?

1.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667074. For normal distant vision, the eye has a power of 50.0 D. What was the previous far point of a patient who ha d laser
vision correction that reduced the power of her eye by 7.00 D, producing normal distant vision?
75. The power for normal distant vision is 50.0 D. A sever ely myopic patient has a far point of 5.00 cm. By how many
diopters should the power of his eye be reduced in laser visi on correction to obtain normal distant vision for him?
76. A student’s eyes, while reading the blackboard, have a power of 51.0 D. How far is the board from his eyes?
77. The power of a physician’s eyes is 53.0 D while examini ng a patient. How far from her eyes is the object that is being
examined?
78. The normal power for distant vision is 50.0 D. A young woman with normal distant vision has a 10.0% ability to
accommodate (that is, increase) the power of her eyes. What is the closest object she can see clearly?
79. The far point of a myopic administrator is 50.0 cm.
(a) What is the relaxed power of his eyes?
(b) If he has the normal 8.00% ability to accommodate, wh at is the closest object he can see clearly?
80. A very myopic man has a far point of 20.0 cm. What power co ntact lens (when on the eye) will correct his distant visio n?
81. Repeat the previous problem for eyeglasses held 1.50 cm f rom the eyes.
82. A myopic person sees that her contact lens prescription is –4.00 D. What is her far point?
83. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are 1.75 cm fro m the eyes.
84. The contact lens prescription for a mildly farsight ed person is 0.750 D, and the person has a near point of 29.0 cm. What
is the power of the tear layer between the cornea and the le ns if the correction is ideal, taking the tear layer in to account?
2.7 The Simple Magnifier
85. If the image formed on the retina subtends an angle of and the object subtends an angle of, what is th e
magnification of the image?
86. What is the magnification of a magnifying lens with a focal length of 10 cm if it is held 3.0 cm from th e eye and the
object is 12 cm from the eye?
87. How far should you hold a 2.1 cm-focal length magnify ing glass from an object to obtain a magnification o f?
Assume you place your eye 5.0 cm from the magnifying glass.
88. You hold a 5.0 cm-focal length magnifying glass as c lose as possible to your eye. If you have a normal nea r point, what is
the magnification?
89. You view a mountain with a magnifying glass of focal length. What is the magnification?
90. You view an object by holding a 2.5 cm-focal length m agnifying glass 10 cm away from it. How far from your e ye
should you hold the magnifying glass to obtain a magnifica tion of?
91. A magnifying glass forms an image 10 cm on the oppos ite side of the lens from the object, which is 10 cm away. What is
the magnification of this lens for a person with a normal ne ar point if their eye 12 cm from the object?
92. An object viewed with the naked eye subtends a angle. If you view the object through a magnifying glass, wha t
angle is subtended by the image formed on your retina?
93. For a normal, relaxed eye, a magnifying glass produce s an angular magnification of 4.0. What is the larges t magnification
possible with this magnifying glass?
94. What range of magnification is possible with a 7.0 cm-f ocal length converging lens?
95. A magnifying glass produces an angular magnificatio n of 4.5 when used by a young person with a near point of 18 cm.
What is the maximum angular magnification obtained by an older person with a near point of 45 cm?

1.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766702.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
96. A microscope with an overall magnification of 800 has an objective that magnifies by 200.
(a) What is the angular magnification of the eyepiece?
(b) If there are two other objectives that can be use d, having magnifications of 100 and 400, what other to tal
magnifications are possible?
97. (a) What magnification is produced by a 0.150 cm-foca l length microscope objective that is 0.155 cm from the object
being viewed?
(b) What is the overall magnification if an eyepiece (o ne that produces an angular magnification of 8.00) is u sed?
98. Where does an object need to be placed relative to a microscope for its 0.50 cm-focal length objective to produce a
magnification of −400?
99. An amoeba is 0.305 cm away from the 0.300 cm-focal lengt h objective lens of a microscope.
(a) Where is the image formed by the objective lens?
(b) What is this image’s magnification?
(c) An eyepiece with a 2.00-cm focal length is placed 20.0 cm from the objective. Where is the final image?
(d) What angular magnification is produced by the eyep iece?
(e) What is the overall magnification? (See Figure 2.39.)
100. Unreasonable Results Your friends show you an image through a microscope. They tell you that the microscope has an
objective with a 0.500-cm focal length and an eyepiec e with a 5.00-cm focal length. The resulting overall magnification is
250,000. Are these viable values for a microscope?
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance is 2.00 cm.
101. What is the angular magnification of a telescope th at has a 100 cm-focal length objective and a 2.50 cm -focal length
eyepiece?
102. Find the distance between the objective and eyepiece lenses in the telescope in the above problem needed to produce a
final image very far from the observer, where vision i s most relaxed. Note that a telescope is normally used to view very
distant objects.
103. A large reflecting telescope has an objective mirr or with a 10.0-m radius of curvature. What angular mag nification does
it produce when a 3.00 m-focal length eyepiece is used?
104. A small telescope has a concave mirror with a 2.00-m r adius of curvature for its objective. Its eyepiece i s a 4.00 cmfocal length lens.
(a) What is the telescope’s angular magnification?
(b) What angle is subtended by a 25,000 km-diameter sunsp ot?
(c) What is the angle of its telescopic image?
105. A 7.5×7.5× binocular produces an angular magnifica tion of −7.50, acting like a telescope. (Mirrors are us ed to make the
image upright.) If the binoculars have objective lens es with a 75.0-cm focal length, what is the focal lengt h of the eyepiece
lenses?
106. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a telescope of the type used by Galileo, hav ing a convex objective and a
concave eyepiece as illustrated in part (a) of Figure 2.40. Construct a problem in which you calculate the location and size of
the image produced. Among the things to be considere d are the focal lengths of the lenses and their rela tive placements as
well as the size and location of the object. Verify th at the angular magnification is greater than one. T hat is, the angle
subtended at the eye by the image is greater than the ang le subtended by the object.

1.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670107. Trace rays to find which way the given ray will emerge after refraction through the thin lens in the followi ng figure.
Assume thin-lens approximation. (Hint: Pick a point P on the given ray in each case. Treat t hat point as an object. Now, find
its image Q. Use the rule: All rays on the other side of the lens will either go through Q or appear to be coming from Q.)
Figure a shows a ray not parallel to the optical axis st riking a bi-convex lens. Figure a shows a ray not para llel to the optical axis
striking a bi-concave lens.
108. Copy and draw rays to find the final image in the fol lowing diagram. (Hint: Find the intermediate image thr ough lens
alone. Use the intermediate image as the object for the m irror and work with the mirror alone to find the final imag e.)
Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O on the optical axis and tip P, a bi-convex lens and a concave mirror with
center of curvature C. The focal point of the bi-co nvex on the object side is labeled F subscript 1 and tha t on the mirror side is
labeled F subscript 2.
109. A concave mirror of radius of curvature 10 cm is pl aced 30 cm from a thin convex lens of focal length 1 5 cm. Find the
location and magnification of a small bulb sitting 50 c m from the lens by using the algebraic method.
110. An object of height 3 cm is placed at 25 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. Behind the lens there is
a concave mirror of focal length 20 cm. The distance between the lens and the mirror is 5 cm. Find the loca tion, orientation
and size of the final image.
111. An object of height 3 cm is placed at a distance of 2 5 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 2 0 cm, to be
referred to as the first lens. Behind the lens there is another converging lens of focal length 20 cm pl aced 10 cm from the first
lens. There is a concave mirror of focal length 15 cm placed 50 cm from the second lens. Find the location, orientation, and
size of the final image.
112. An object of height 2 cm is placed at 50 cm in front of a diverging lens of focal length 40 cm. Behind the lens, there is a
convex mirror of focal length 15 cm placed 30 cm fr om the converging lens. Find the location, orientatio n, and size of the
final image.
113. Two concave mirrors are placed facing each other. One of them has a small hole in the middle. A penny is p laced on the
bottom mirror (see the following figure). When you l ook from the side, a real image of the penny is obse rved above the hole.
Explain how that could happen.

1.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670
Figure shows the side view of two concave mirrors placed one on top of the other, facing each other. The to p one has a small hole
in the middle. A penny is placed on the bottom mirro r. An image of the penny is shown above the top mirro r, just above the hole.
114. A lamp of height 5 cm is placed 40 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. There is a pl ane mirror 15 cm
behind the lens. Where would you find the image when yo u look in the mirror?
115. Parallel rays from a faraway source strike a converging l ens of focal length 20 cm at an angle of 15 degrees with the
horizontal direction. Find the vertical position of the real image observed on a screen in the focal plane.
116. Parallel rays from a faraway source strike a divergi ng lens of focal length 20 cm at an angle of 10 deg rees with the
horizontal direction. As you look through the lens, wher e in the vertical plane the image would appear?
117. A light bulb is placed 10 cm from a plane mirror, wh ich faces a convex mirror of radius of curvature 8 c m. The plane
mirror is located at a distance of 30 cm from the ve rtex of the convex mirror. Find the location of two im ages in the convex
mirror. Are there other images? If so, where are they loca ted?
118. A point source of light is 50 cm in front of a conv erging lens of focal length 30 cm. A concave mirror with a focal length
of 20 cm is placed 25 cm behind the lens. Where does the fi nal image form, and what are its orientation and magnificat ion?
119. Copy and trace to find how a horizontal ray from S comes out after the lens. Use for the prism material.
Figure shows two prisms with their bases parallel to each other at an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal. T o the right of this is a
bi-convex lens. A ray along the optical axis enters th is set up from the left.
120. Copy and trace how a horizontal ray from S comes out afte r the lens. Use for the glass.
Figure shows the cross section of a hemisphere to the left and that of a bi-convex lens to the right. A ray al ong the optical axis
enters this setup from the left.
121. Copy and draw rays to figure out the final image.
Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O on the axis and tip P. A bi-concave lens with focal p oint and on the left
and right respectively and a concave mirror with cen tre of curvature C.
122. By ray tracing or by calculation, find the place in side the glass where rays from S converge as a result of refraction
through the lens and the convex air-glass interface. Use a ru ler to estimate the radius of curvature.

1.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670
Figure shows a bi-convex lens on the left and a glass wit h a convex surface on the right. The lens has focal po ints F on both sides.
The center of curvature of convex glass is C and its ra dius of curvature is R. Point S is between the lens and its focal point on the
left.
123. A diverging lens has a focal length of 20 cm. What is the power of the lens in diopters?
124. Two lenses of focal lengths of and are glued together with transparent material of negligible thic kness. Show that
the total power of the two lenses simply add.
125. What will be the angular magnification of a convex lens wi th the focal length 2.5 cm?
126. What will be the formula for the angular magnificat ion of a convex lens of focal length f if the eye i s very close to the
lens and the near point is located a distance D from the eye?
Additional Problems
127. Use a ruler and a protractor to draw rays to find images in t he following cases.
(a) A point object located on the axis of a concave mi rror located at a point within the focal length from the ve rtex.
(b) A point object located on the axis of a concave mirror located at a point farther than the focal l ength from the
vertex.
(c) A point object located on the axis of a convex mirr or located at a point within the focal length from the ve rtex.
(d) A point object located on the axis of a convex mirror located at a point farther than the focal length from the v ertex.
(e) Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis.
128. Where should a 3 cm tall object be placed in front of a concave mirror of radius 20 cm so that its image is real and 2 cm
tall?
129. A 3 cm tall object is placed 5 cm in front of a con vex mirror of radius of curvature 20 cm. Where is t he image formed?
How tall is the image? What is the orientation of the imag e?
130. You are looking for a mirror so that you can see a four-fold magnified virtual image of an object when the object is
placed 5 cm from the vertex of the mirror. What kin d of mirror you will need? What should be the radius of curvature of the
mirror?
131. Derive the following equation for a convex mirror:, where VO is the distance to the object O from
vertex V, VI the distance to the image I from V, and VF is the distance to the focal point F from V. (Hint: use two sets of
similar triangles.)
132. (a) Draw rays to form the image of a vertical object on the optical axis and farther than the focal poi nt from a
converging lens.
(b) Use plane geometry in your figure and prove that the m agnification m is given by.
133. Use another ray-tracing diagram for the same situation as given in the previous problem to derive the thi n-lens equation,
134. You photograph a 2.0-m-tall person with a camera tha t has a 5.0 cm-focal length lens. The image on the fil m must be no
more than 2.0 cm high.
(a) What is the closest distance the person can stand t o the lens?
(b) For this distance, what should be the distance from the lens to the film?

1.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670135. Find the focal length of a thin plano-convex lens. The front surface of this lens is flat, and the rear surface has a radius
of curvature of. Assume that the index of refraction of the lens is 1.5.
136. Find the focal length of a meniscus lens with and. As sume that the index of refraction of the lens
is 1.5.
137. A nearsighted man cannot see objects clearly beyond 20 cm from his eyes. How close must he stand to a mirro r in order
to see what he is doing when he shaves?
138. A mother sees that her child’s contact lens prescription is 0.750 D. What is the child’s near point?
139. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are 2.20 c m from the eyes.
140. The contact-lens prescription for a nearsighted per son is −4.00 D and the person has a far point of 22.5 cm. What is the
power of the tear layer between the cornea and the lens if t he correction is ideal, taking the tear layer into accoun t?
141. Unreasonable Results A boy has a near point of 50 cm and a far point of 500 cm. Will a −4.00 D lens correct his far
point to infinity?
142. Find the angular magnification of an image by a magn ifying glass of if the object is placed from
the lens and the lens is close to the eye.
143. Let objective and eyepiece of a compound microscope have focal lengths of 2.5 cm and 10 cm, respectivel y and be
separated by 12 cm. A object is placed 6.0 cm from the objective. How large is the virtual image formed b y the
objective-eyepiece system?
144. Draw rays to scale to locate the image at the retina if the eye lens has a focal length 2.5 cm and the nea r point is 24 cm.
(Hint: Place an object at the near point.)
145. The objective and the eyepiece of a microscope have the focal lengths 3 cm and 10 cm respectively. Decide about the
distance between the objective and the eyepiece if we need a magnification from the objective/eyepiece compound
system.
146. A far-sighted person has a near point of 100 cm. How f ar in front or behind the retina does the image of an object placed
25 cm from the eye form? Use the cornea to retina distance o f 2.5 cm.
147. A near-sighted person has afar point of 80 cm.
(a) What kind of corrective lens the person will need i f the lens is to be placed 1.5 cm from the eye?
(b) What would be the power of the contact lens needed? Ass ume distance to contact lens from the eye to be zero.
148. In a reflecting telescope the objective is a concav e mirror of radius of curvature 2 m and an eyepiece is a convex lens of
focal length 5 cm. Find the apparent size of a 25-m t ree at a distance of 10 km that you would perceive wh en looking through
the telescope.
149. Two stars that are apart are viewed by a telescope a nd found to be separated by an angle of radians. If the
eyepiece of the telescope has a focal length of 1.5 c m and the objective has a focal length of 3 meters, ho w far away are the
stars from the observer?
150. What is the angular size of the Moon if viewed from a binocular that has a focal length of 1.2 cm for the eyepiece and a
focal length of 8 cm for the objective? Use the radi us of the moon and the distance of the moon from the
observer to be.
151. An unknown planet at a distance of from Earth is obse rved by a telescope that has a focal length of the ey epiece
of 1 cm and a focal length of the objective of 1 m. If the far away planet is seen to subtend an angle o f radian at the
eyepiece, what is the size of the planet?
This page titled 1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

1.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76670

9.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766459.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)

9.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76645Key Terms
birefringentrefers to crystals that split an unpolarized beam of li ght into two
beams
Brewster’s angleangle of incidence at which the reflected light is co mpletely
polarized
Brewster’s law, where is the medium in which the incident and
reflected light travel and is the index of refracti on of the
medium that forms the interface that reflects the lig ht
corner reflectorobject consisting of two (or three) mutually perpendi cular
reflecting surfaces, so that the light that enters is re flected back
exactly parallel to the direction from which it came
critical angle incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of 90°
direction of polarization direction parallel to the electric field for EM wav es
dispersion spreading of light into its spectrum of wavelengths
geometric optics part of optics dealing with the ray aspect of light
horizontally polarized oscillations are in a horizontal plane
Huygens’s principleevery point on a wave front is a source of wavelets th at spread out
in the forward direction at the same speed as the wave itself; the
new wave front is a plane tangent to all of the wavel ets
index of refractionfor a material, the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to that in
a material
law of reflection angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence
law of refractionwhen a light ray crosses from one medium to another, i t changes
direction by an amount that depends on the index of refraction of
each medium and the sines of the angle of incidence a nd angle of
refraction
Malus’s lawwhere is the intensity of the polarized wave before p assing
through the filter
optically activesubstances that rotate the plane of polarization of li ght passing
through them
polarizationattribute that wave oscillations have a definite dire ction relative to
the direction of propagation of the wave
polarizedrefers to waves having the electric and magnetic fiel d oscillations
in a definite direction
ray straight line that originates at some point
refractionchanging of a light ray’s direction when it passes thro ugh
variations in matter
total internal reflectionphenomenon at the boundary between two media such th at all the
light is reflected and no refraction occurs
unpolarized refers to waves that are randomly polarized
vertically polarized oscillations are in a vertical plane

9.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76645wave optics part of optics dealing with the wave aspect of light
Key Equations
Speed of light
Index of refraction
Law of reflection
Law of refraction (Snell’s law)
Critical angle for
Malus’s law
Brewster’s law
Summary
1.1: The Propagation of Light
The speed of light in a vacuum is.
The index of refraction of a material is, where v is the s peed of light in a material and c is the speed of light in a
vacuum.
The ray model of light describes the path of light as stra ight lines. The part of optics dealing with the ray aspe ct of light is called
geometric optics.
Light can travel in three ways from a source to another lo cation: (1) directly from the source through empty space; (2) through
various media; and (3) after being reflected from a mirro r.
1.2: The Law of Reflection
When a light ray strikes a smooth surface, the angle o f reflection equals the angle of incidence.
A mirror has a smooth surface and reflects light at specific angles.
Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough surface.
1.3: Refraction
The change of a light ray’s direction when it passes thr ough variations in matter is called refraction.
The law of refraction, also called Snell’s law, relates th e indices of refraction for two media at an interface to the change in
angle of a light ray passing through that interface.
1.4: Total Internal Reflection
The incident angle that produces an angle of refractio n of 90° is called the critical angle.
Total internal reflection is a phenomenon that occurs at the boundary between two media, such that if the incide nt angle in the
first medium is greater than the critical angle, then all the light is reflected back into that medium.
Fiber optics involves the transmission of light down fiber s of plastic or glass, applying the principle of total in ternal reflection.
Cladding prevents light from being transmitted between f ibers in a bundle.
Diamonds sparkle due to total internal reflection coupled wi th a large index of refraction.
1.5: Dispersion
The spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavel engths is called dispersion.
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and r eflection, and involve the dispersion of sunlight into a continuous
distribution of colors.
Dispersion produces beautiful rainbows but also causes pro blems in certain optical systems.

9.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766451.6: Huygens’s Principle
According to Huygens’s principle, every point on a wave fro nt is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forward dir ection at
the same speed as the wave itself. The new wave front is tange nt to all of the wavelets.
A mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law of reflection.
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Huygen s’s principle to a wave front passing from one medium to a nother.
The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called diffraction.
1.7: Polarization
Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations hav e a definite direction relative to the direction of propag ation of the wave.
The direction of polarization is defined to be the direct ion parallel to the electric field of the EM wave.
Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having random pol arization directions.
Unpolarized light can be polarized by passing it through a po larizing filter or other polarizing material. The proces s of
polarizing light decreases its intensity by a factor o f 2.
The intensity, I, of polarized light after passing through a polarizin g filter is, where is the incident intensity and
is the angle between the direction of polarization and the axis of the filter.
Polarization is also produced by reflection.
Brewster’s law states that reflected light is completely pol arized at the angle of reflection, known as Brewster’s ang le.
Polarization can also be produced by scattering.
Several types of optically active substances rotate the direc tion of polarization of light passing through them.
This page titled 9.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766711.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)

1.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76671Key Terms
aberrationdistortion in an image caused by departures from the sm all-angle
approximation
accommodationuse of the ciliary muscles to adjust the shape of the ey e lens for
focusing on near or far objects
angular magnificationratio of the angle subtended by an object observed wit h a
magnifier to that observed by the naked eye
apparent depthdepth at which an object is perceived to be located with respect to
an interface between two media
Cassegrain designarrangement of an objective and eyepiece such that t he lightgathering concave mirror has a hole in the middle, a nd light then is
incident on an eyepiece lens
charge-coupled device (CCD)semiconductor chip that converts a light image into t iny pixels that
can be converted into electronic signals of color and intensity
comasimilar to spherical aberration, but arises when the in coming rays
are not parallel to the optical axis
compound microscopemicroscope constructed from two convex lenses, the first serving
as the eyepiece and the second serving as the objective lens
concave mirrorspherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the in ner side of the
sphere; the mirror forms a “cave”
converging (or convex) lenslens in which light rays that enter it parallel conver ge into a single
point on the opposite side
convex mirrorspherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the ou ter side of the
sphere
curved mirrormirror formed by a curved surface, such as spherical, e lliptical, or
parabolic
diverging (or concave) lens lens that causes light rays to bend away from its optical axis
eyepiecelens or combination of lenses in an optical instrument nearest to
the eye of the observer
far point furthest point an eye can see in focus
farsightedness (or hyperopia)visual defect in which near objects appear blurred bec ause their
images are focused behind the retina rather than on t he retina; a
farsighted person can see far objects clearly but near objects
appear blurred
first focus or object focusobject located at this point will result in an image c reated at
infinity on the opposite side of a spherical interface between two
media
focal lengthdistance along the optical axis from the focal point to the optical
element that focuses the light rays
focal planeplane that contains the focal point and is perpendicu lar to the
optical axis
focal point for a converging lens or mirror, the point at which c onverging light
rays cross; for a diverging lens or mirror, the point f rom which

1.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76671diverging light rays appear to originate
image distancedistance of the image from the central axis of the op tical element
that produces the image
linear magnification ratio of image height to object height
magnification ratio of image size to object size
near point closest point an eye can see in focus
nearsightedness (or myopia)visual defect in which far objects appear blurred beca use their
images are focused in front of the retina rather than on the retina; a
nearsighted person can see near objects clearly but far objects
appear blurred
net magnification(MnetMnet) of the compound microscope is the product of the
linear magnification of the objective and the angul ar magnification
of the eyepiece
Newtonian designarrangement of an objective and eyepiece such that t he focused
light from the concave mirror was reflected to one si de of the tube
into an eyepiece
object distancedistance of the object from the central axis of the o ptical element
that produces its image
objective lens nearest to the object being examined.
optical axisaxis about which the mirror is rotationally symmetric; you can
rotate the mirror about this axis without changing an ything
optical power(P) inverse of the focal length of a lens, with the foc al length
expressed in meters. The optical power P of a lens is ex pressed in
units of diopters D; that is,
plane mirror plane (flat) reflecting surface
ray tracingtechnique that uses geometric constructions to find and
characterize the image formed by an optical system
real imageimage that can be projected onto a screen because the rays
physically go through the image
second focus or image focusfor a converging interface, the point where a bundl e of parallel
rays refracting at a spherical interface; for a diver ging interface,
the point at which the backward continuation of the refracted rays
will converge between two media will focus
simple magnifier (or magnifying glass)converging lens that produces a virtual image of an o bject that is
within the focal length of the lens
small-angle approximationapproximation that is valid when the size of a spheric al mirror is
significantly smaller than the mirror’s radius; in this
approximation, spherical aberration is negligible and the mirror
has a well-defined focal point
spherical aberrationdistortion in the image formed by a spherical mirror when rays are
not all focused at the same point
thin-lens approximationassumption that the lens is very thin compared to the f irst image
distance

1.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76671vertex point where the mirror’s surface intersects with the opt ical axis
virtual imageimage that cannot be projected on a screen because th e rays do not
physically go through the image, they only appear to originate
from the image
Key Equations
Image distance in a plane mirror
Focal length for a spherical mirror
Mirror equation
Magnification of a spherical mirror
Sign convention for mirrors
Focal length +for concave mirror
−for conve x mirror
Object distance +for real object
−for virtual object
Image distance +for real image
−for virtual image
Magnification +for upright image
−for inverted image
Apparent depth equation
Spherical interface equation
The thin-lens equation
The lens maker’s equation
The magnification m of an object
Optical power
Optical power of thin, closely spaced lenses
Angular magnification M of a simple magnifier
Angular magnification of an object a distance L from the eye for a
convex lens of focal length f held a distance ℓ from the eye
Range of angular magnification for a given lens for a person with
a near point of 25 cm
Net magnification of compound microscope
Summary
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
A plane mirror always forms a virtual image (behind the mirror).

1.S.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76671The image and object are the same distance from a fla t mirror, the image size is the same as the object size, and the image is
upright.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
Spherical mirrors may be concave (converging) or convex (d iverging).
The focal length of a spherical mirror is one-half of its radius of curvature:.
The mirror equation and ray tracing allow you to give a c omplete description of an image formed by a spherical mi rror.
Spherical aberration occurs for spherical mirrors but n ot parabolic mirrors; comatic aberration occurs for bo th types of mirrors.
2.3 Images Formed by Refraction
This section explains how a single refracting interface forms images.
When an object is observed through a plane interface between two media, then it appears at an apparent distance that
differs from the actual distance.
An image is formed by the refraction of light at a spheri cal interface between two media of indices of refraction and
Image distance depends on the radius of curvature of the interface, location of the object, and the indices of r efraction of
the media.
2.4 Thin Lenses
Two types of lenses are possible: converging and diverging. A lens that causes light rays to bend toward (away from) its op tical
axis is a converging (diverging) lens.
For a converging lens, the focal point is where the conve rging light rays cross; for a diverging lens, the focal po int is the point
from which the diverging light rays appear to originate.
The distance from the center of a thin lens to its focal point is called the focal length f.
Ray tracing is a geometric technique to determine the pat hs taken by light rays through thin lenses.
A real image can be projected onto a screen.
A virtual image cannot be projected onto a screen.
A converging lens forms either real or virtual images, d epending on the object location; a diverging lens form s only virtual
images.
2.5 The Eye
Image formation by the eye is adequately described by the thin-lens equation.
The eye produces a real image on the retina by adjusti ng its focal length in a process called accommodation.
Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see far o bjects and is corrected with a diverging lens to reduce th e optical power
of the eye.
Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to see near objects and is corrected with a converging lens to increa se the optical
power of the eye.
In myopia and hyperopia, the corrective lenses produce i mages at distances that fall between the person’s near an d far points so
that images can be seen clearly.
2.6 The Camera
Cameras use combinations of lenses to create an image for rec ording.
Digital photography is based on charge-coupled devices (CCDs) that break an image into tiny “pixels” that can be c onverted
into electronic signals.
2.7 The Simple Magnifier
A simple magnifier is a converging lens and produces a magn ified virtual image of an object located within the focal l ength of
the lens.
Angular magnification accounts for magnification of an im age created by a magnifier. It is equal to the ratio of th e angle
subtended by the image to that subtended by the object wh en the object is observed by the unaided eye.
Angular magnification is greater for magnifying lenses with sm aller focal lengths.

1.S.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76671Simple magnifiers can produce as great as tenfold (10×) magnification.
2.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
Many optical devices contain more than a single lens or mir ror. These are analyzed by considering each element sequ entially.
The image formed by the first is the object for the secon d, and so on. The same ray-tracing and thin-lens technique s developed
in the previous sections apply to each lens element.
The overall magnification of a multiple-element syste m is the product of the linear magnifications of its indiv idual elements
times the angular magnification of the eyepiece. For a two -element system with an objective and an eyepiece, this is
(2.41)
where is the linear magnification of the objective an d is the angular magnification of the eyepiece.
The microscope is a multiple-element system that conta ins more than a single lens or mirror. It allows us to see detail that we
could not to see with the unaided eye. Both the eyepiece an d objective contribute to the magnification. The magn ification of a
compound microscope with the image at infinity is
. (2.42)
In this equation, 16 cm is the standardized distance b etween the image-side focal point of the objective l ens and the
object-side focal point of the eyepiece, 25 cm is t he normal near point distance, and are the focal d istances for
the objective lens and the eyepiece, respectively.
Simple telescopes can be made with two lenses. They are used for viewing objects at large distances.
The angular magnification M for a telescope is given by
, (2.43)
where and are the focal lengths of the objective lens an d the eyepiece, respectively.
This page titled 1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Physical Optics
The most certain indication of a wave is interferenc e. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with an
object that is not large compared with the wavelength. Interference is observed for water waves, sound waves, l ight waves, and, in
fact, all types of waves.
10.1: Interference and Diffraction
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
10.5: Interference in Thin Films
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction
10.11: Holography
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
10.A: Interference (Answers)
1.A: Diffraction (Answers)
10.E: Interference (Exercises)
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
10.S: Interference (Summary)
1.S: Diffraction (Summary)
This page titled 10: Physical Optics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667310.1: Interference and Diffraction
Interference
The most certain indication of a wave is interferenc e. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with an
object that is not large compared with the wavelength. Interference is observed for water waves, sound waves, l ight waves, and, in
fact, all types of waves.
Figure: Soap bubbles are blown from clear fluid into very thin films. The colors we see are not due to any pigmentation but
are the result of light interference, which enhances specific wavelengths for a given thickness of the film.
If you have ever looked at the reds, blues, and gre ens in a sunlit soap bubble and wondered how straw-colored soapy water could
produce them, you have hit upon one of the many phe nomena that can only be explained by the wave charac ter of light (Figure
). The same is true for the colors seen in an oil s lick or in the light reflected from a DVD disc. These an d other interesting
phenomena cannot be explained fully by geometric op tics. In these cases, light interacts with objects and e xhibits wave
characteristics. The branch of optics that considers the behavior of light when it exhibits wave characteri stics is called wave optics
(sometimes called physical optics). It is the topic of this chapter.
Diffraction
Imagine passing a monochromatic light beam through a narrow opening—a slit just a little wider than the wa velength of the light.
Instead of a simple shadow of the slit on the screen, you will see that an interference pattern appears, ev en though there is only one
slit.
Figure: A steel ball bearing illuminated by a laser d oes not cast a sharp, circular shadow. Instead, a series o f diffraction
fringes and a central bright spot are observed. Known as Poisson’s spot, the effect was first predicted by August in-Jean Fresnel
(1788–1827) as a consequence of diffraction of light waves. Based on principles of ray optics, Siméon-Denis Po isson (1781–1840)
argued against Fresnel’s prediction. (credit: modificat ion of work by Harvard Natural Science Lecture Demon strations)
One might wonhder, how can there be an interference pat tern when we have only one slit? Based on Huygens’s prin ciple, when
dealing with light, we can imagine a wave front as equiv alent to infinitely many point sources of waves. Thus, a wave from a slit

10.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76673can behave not as one wave but as an infinite number of point sources. These waves can interfere with each other, resulting in an
interference pattern without the presence of a second sl it. This phenomenon is called diffraction.
Another way to view this is to recognize that a slit has a small but finite width. In the preceding chapter, we implicitly regarded
slits as objects with positions but no size. The widths of the slits were considered negligible. When the slits have finite widths, each
point along the opening can be considered a point s ource of light—a foundation of Huygens’s principle. B ecause real-world optical
instruments must have finite apertures (otherwise, n o light can enter), diffraction plays a major role i n the way we interpret the
output of these optical instruments. For example, diffra ction places limits on our ability to resolve images o r objects. This is a
problem that we will study later in this chapter.

This page titled 10.1: Interference and Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.1: Prelude to Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
4.1: Prelude to Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667410.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the phenomenon of interference
Define constructive and destructive interference for a dou ble slit
The Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) thought that light was a wave, but Isaac Ne wton did not. Newton thought
that there were other explanations for color, and fo r the interference and diffraction effects that were observable at the time. Owing
to Newton’s tremendous reputation, his view generally prevailed; the fact that Huygens’s principle worked wa s not considered
direct evidence proving that light is a wave. The acc eptance of the wave character of light came many yea rs later in 1801, when the
English physicist and physician Thomas Young (1773–1829) demonstrated optical interference with his now-classic double-slit
experiment.
If there were not one but two sources of waves, the wave s could be made to interfere, as in the case of waves on water (Figure
). If light is an electromagnetic wave, it must theref ore exhibit interference effects under appropriate circumstances. In
Young’s experiment, sunlight was passed through a pinho le on a board. The emerging beam fell on two pinholes on a second board.
The light emanating from the two pinholes then fell o n a screen where a pattern of bright and dark spots was observed. This
pattern, called fringes, can only be explained through interference, a wave phenomenon.
Figure: Photograph of an interference pattern produ ced by circular water waves in a ripple tank. Two th in plungers are
vibrated up and down in phase at the surface of the w ater. Circular water waves are produced by and emana te from each plunger.
We can analyze double-slit interference with the help of Figure, which depicts an apparatus analogous to Young’s. Light from
a monochromatic source falls on a slit. The light e manating from is incident on two other slits and t hat are equidistant
from. A pattern of interference fringes on the screen is then produced by the light emanati ng from and. All slits are
assumed to be so narrow that they can be considered secondary point sources for Huygens’ wavelets (The Nature of Light). Slits
and are a distance d apart (), and the distance between the screen and the slits i s D(≈1m), which is much greater than d.Learning Objectives

10.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76674
Figure: The double-slit interference experiment using monochromatic light and narrow slits. Fringes produced by interfering
Huygens wavelets from slits and are observed on the scr een.
Since is assumed to be a point source of monochromat ic light, the secondary Huygens wavelets leaving and always
maintain a constant phase difference (zero in this c ase because and are equidistant from) and have th e same frequency. The
sources and are then said to be coherent. By cohere nt waves, we mean the waves are in phase or have a defin ite phase
relationship. The term incoherent means the waves have random phase relationships, which would be the case if and were
illuminated by two independent light sources, rather than a single source. Two independent light sources (which may be two
separate areas within the same lamp or the Sun) would g enerally not emit their light in unison, that is, not coherently. Also, because
and are the same distance from, the amplitudes of th e two Huygens wavelets are equal.
Young used sunlight, where each wavelength forms its own pattern, making the effect more difficult to see. In t he following
discussion, we illustrate the double-slit experiment wi th monochromatic light (single λ) to clarify the ef fect. Figure shows the
pure constructive and destructive interference of two wa ves having the same wavelength and amplitude.
Figure: The amplitudes of waves add. (a) Pure construc tive interference is obtained when identical waves ar e in phase. (b)
Pure destructive interference occurs when identical wa ves are exactly out of phase, or shifted by half a wav elength.
When light passes through narrow slits, the slits act a s sources of coherent waves and light spreads out as se micircular waves, as
shown in Figure. Pure constructive interference occurs where the waves are crest to crest or trough t o trough. Pure
destructive interference occurs where they are crest to trough. The light must fall on a screen and be scattered into our eyes fo r us
to see the pattern. An analogous pattern for water wave s is shown in Figure. Note that regions of constructive and destructive
interference move out from the slits at well-defined a ngles to the original beam. These angles depend on wa velength and the
distance between the slits, as we shall see below.

10.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76674
Figure: Double slits produce two coherent sources of wa ves that interfere. (a) Light spreads out (diffracts) f rom each slit,
because the slits are narrow. These waves overlap and in terfere constructively (bright lines) and destructivel y (dark regions). We
can only see this if the light falls onto a screen and is scattered into our eyes. (b) When light that has passe d through double slits
falls on a screen, we see a pattern such as this.
To understand the double-slit interference pattern, consider how two waves travel from the slits to the sc reen (Figure). Each
slit is a different distance from a given point on the screen. Thus, different numbers of wavelengths fi t into each path. Waves start
out from the slits in phase (crest to crest), but they may end up out of phase (crest to trough) at the scr een if the paths differ in
length by half a wavelength, interfering destructivel y. If the paths differ by a whole wavelength, then th e waves arrive in phase
(crest to crest) at the screen, interfering constructiv ely. More generally, if the path length difference b etween the two waves is
any half-integral number of wavelengths [(1 / 2)λ, (3 / 2)λ, (5 / 2)λ, etc.], then destructive interferenc e occurs. Similarly, if the path
length difference is any integral number of waveleng ths (λ, 2λ, 3λ, etc.), then constructive interference occurs. These conditions
can be expressed as equations:
for
for

10.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76674
Figure: Waves follow different paths from the slits to a common point P on a screen. Destructive interferenc e occurs where
one path is a half wavelength longer than the other— the waves start in phase but arrive out of phase. Constr uctive interference
occurs where one path is a whole wavelength longer th an the other—the waves start out and arrive in phase.
This page titled 10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

10.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667510.3: Mathematics of Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the angles for bright and dark fringes for doub le slit interference
Calculate the positions of bright fringes on a screen
Figure shows how to determine the path length differe nce for waves traveling from two slits to a common po int on a
screen. If the screen is a large distance away compa red with the distance between the slits, then the angl e θ between the path and a
line from the slits to the screen () is nearly the s ame for each path. In other words, and are essentia lly parallel. The
lengths of and differ by, as indicated by the two dashe d lines in the.
Figure: (a) To reach P, the light waves from and m ust travel different distances. (b) The path differenc e between the two
rays is.
Simple trigonometry shows
where d is the distance between the slits. Combining this with th e interference equations discussed previously, we obtain
constructive interference for a double slit when the path l ength difference is an integral multiple of the wavelength, or
and
where
is the wavelength of the light,
is the distance between slits, and
is the angle from the original direction of the beam as di scussed above.Learning Objectives

10.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76675We call the order of the interference. For example, is fourth-order interference.
Equations and for double-slit interference imply t hat a series of bright and dark lines are formed. For vertical slits, the
light spreads out horizontally on either side of the incident beam into a pattern called interference f ringes (Figure). The closer
the slits are, the more the bright fringes spread apar t. We can see this by examining the Equation. For fi xed and, the
smaller is, the larger must be, since. This is con sistent with our contention that wave effects are mos t noticeable
when the object the wave encounters (here, slits a distance d apart) is small. Small gives large, hence, a large effec t.
Referring back to Figure, is typically small enough tha t
where is the distance from the central maximum to t he m-th bright fringe and D is the distance between the slit and the screen.
Equation may then be written as
or
Figure: The interference pattern for a double slit h as an intensity that falls off with angle. The image sh ows multiple bright
and dark lines, or fringes, formed by light passing thr ough a double slit.
Suppose you pass light from a He-Ne laser through two sli ts separated by 0.0100 mm and find that the third bri ght line on a
screen is formed at an angle of 10.95° relative to the in cident beam. What is the wavelength of the light?
Strategy
The phenomenon is two-slit interference as illustrated in Figure and the third bright line is due to third -order constructive
interference, which means that. We are given and. The wavelength can thus be found using
Equation for constructive interference.
Solution
Solving Equation for the wavelength givesExample: Finding a Wavelength from an Interference Pattern

10.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76675Substituting known values yields
Significance
To three digits, this is the wavelength of light emitte d by the common He-Ne laser. Not by coincidence, this red color is similar
to that emitted by neon lights. More important, however, is the fact that interference patterns can be used to measure
wavelength. Young did this for visible wavelengths. This analytical technique is still widely used to measure electromagnetic
spectra. For a given order, the angle for constructive interference increases with, so that spectra (measurem ents of intensity
versus wavelength) can be obtained.
Interference patterns do not have an infinite number of lines, since there is a limit to how big m can be. What is the highestorder constructive interference possible with the system d escribed in the preceding example?
Strategy
Equation describes constructive interference from two slits. For fixed values of and, the larger is, th e larger is.
However, the maximum value that can have is 1, for an a ngle of 90°. (Larger angles imply that light goes b ackward and
does not reach the screen at all.) Let us find what valu e of corresponds to this maximum diffraction angle.
Solution
Solving the equation for m gives
Taking and substituting the values of d and λ from the preceding example gives
Therefore, the largest integer can be is 15, or.
Significance
The number of fringes depends on the wavelength and s lit separation. The number of fringes is very large for large slit
separations. However, recall (see The Propagation of Light) that wave interference is only prominent when the wav e interacts
with objects that are not large compared to the wavel ength. Therefore, if the slit separation and the siz es of the slits become
much greater than the wavelength, the intensity patte rn of light on the screen changes, so there are simp ly two bright lines cast
by the slits, as expected, when light behaves like ray s. We also note that the fringes get fainter farther away from the center.
Consequently, not all 15 fringes may be observable.
In the system used in the preceding examples, at what angles a re the first and the second bright fringes formed?
Answer
and, respectively
This page titled 10.3: Mathematics of Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Example: Calculating the Highest Order Possible
Exercise

10.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766753.3: Mathematics of Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

10.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667610.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the locations and intensities of secondary m axima for multiple-slit interference
Analyzing the interference of light passing through t wo slits lays out the theoretical framework of interf erence and gives us a
historical insight into Thomas Young’s experiments. However, much of the modern-day application of slit i nterference uses not just
two slits but many, approaching infinity for practic al purposes. The key optical element is called a diffraction grating, an
important tool in optical analysis, which we discuss in d etail in chapter on Diffraction. Here, we start the analysis of multiple-slit
interference by taking the results from our analysis o f the double slit (N=2) and extending it to configura tions with three, four, and
much larger numbers of slits.
Figure shows the simplest case of multiple-slit interf erence, with three slits, or N=3. The spacing between sl its is d, and the
path length difference between adjacent slits is d sin θ, same as the case for the double slit. What is new is that the path length
difference for the first and the third slits is 2d sin θ. The condition for constructive interference i s the same as for the double slit,
that is
When this condition is met, 2d sin θ is automatical ly a multiple of λ, so all three rays combine construct ively, and the bright fringes
that occur here are called principal maxima. But what happens when the path length difference between adjac ent slits is only λ/2?
We can think of the first and second rays as interf ering destructively, but the third ray remains unalte red. Instead of obtaining a dark
fringe, or a minimum, as we did for the double slit, we see a se condary maximum with intensity lower than the principal ma xima.
Figure: Interference with three slits. Different pair s of emerging rays can combine constructively or destru ctively at the same
time, leading to secondary maxima.
In general, for N slits, these secondary maxima occur whenever an unpai red ray is present that does not go away due to destr uctive
interference. This occurs at (N−2) evenly spaced posit ions between the principal maxima. The amplitude of the electromagnetic
wave is correspondingly diminished to 1/N of the wave a t the principal maxima, and the light intensity, being proportional to the
square of the wave amplitude, is diminished to of th e intensity compared to the principal maxima. As Figu re
Interference fringe patterns for two, three and four slits. As the number of slits increases, more secondary m axima appear, but the
principal maxima shows, a dark fringe is located betwe en every maximum (principal or secondary). As N grows larger and the
number of bright and dark fringes increase, the width s of the maxima become narrower due to the closely loc ated neighboring dark
fringes. Because the total amount of light energy rem ains unaltered, narrower maxima require that each max imum reaches a
correspondingly higher intensity.Learning Objectives

10.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76676
Figure: Interference fringe patterns for two, three and four slits. As the number of slits increases, more seco ndary maxima
appear, but the principal maxima become brighter an d narrower. (a) Graph and (b) photographs of fringe patterns.
This page titled 10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.4: Multiple-Slit Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667710.5: Interference in Thin Films
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the phase changes that occur upon reflection
Describe fringes established by reflected rays of a comm on source
Explain the appearance of colors in thin films
The bright colors seen in an oil slick floating on wat er or in a sunlit soap bubble are caused by interfe rence. The brightest colors are
those that interfere constructively. This interfere nce is between light reflected from different surfaces of a thin film; thus, the effect
is known as thin-film interference.
As we noted before, interference effects are most promi nent when light interacts with something having a siz e similar to its
wavelength. A thin film is one having a thickness sma ller than a few times the wavelength of light,. Since color is associated
indirectly with and because all interference depend s in some way on the ratio of to the size of the obje ct involved, we should
expect to see different colors for different thicknesses o f a film, as in Figure.
Figure: These soap bubbles exhibit brilliant colors whe n exposed to sunlight. (credit: Scott Robinson)
What causes thin-film interference? Figure shows how lig ht reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a film can
interfere. Incident light is only partially reflect ed from the top surface of the film (ray 1). The rem ainder enters the film and is itself
partially reflected from the bottom surface. Part of the light reflected from the bottom surface can eme rge from the top of the film
(ray 2) and interfere with light reflected from the top (ray 1). The ray that enters the film travels a greater distance, so it may be in
or out of phase with the ray reflected from the top. However, consider for a moment, again, the bubbles in Fi gure. The
bubbles are darkest where they are thinnest. Furthermor e, if you observe a soap bubble carefully, you will no te it gets dark at the
point where it breaks. For very thin films, the differen ce in path lengths of rays 1 and 2 in Figure is negli gible, so why should
they interfere destructively and not constructively? T he answer is that a phase change can occur upon reflection, as discussed next.Learning Objectives

10.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76677
Figure: Light striking a thin film is partially refle cted (ray 1) and partially refracted at the top surf ace. The refracted ray is
partially reflected at the bottom surface and emerge s as ray 2. These rays interfere in a way that depends o n the thickness of the
film and the indices of refraction of the various med ia.
Changes in Phase due to Reflection
We saw earlier (Waves) that reflection of mechanical waves can involve a 180° phase change. For example, a traveling wave on a
string is inverted (i.e., a 180° phase change) upon reflection at a boundary to which a heavier string i s tied. However, if the second
string is lighter (or more precisely, of a lower line ar density), no inversion occurs. Light waves produce the same effect, but the
deciding parameter for light is the index of refract ion. Light waves undergo a 180° or radians phase cha nge upon reflection at an
interface beyond which is a medium of higher index o f refraction. No phase change takes place when reflectin g from a medium of
lower refractive index (Figure). Because of the peri odic nature of waves, this phase change or inversion is e quivalent to
in distance travelled, or path length. Both the path lengt h and refractive indices are important factors in thin -film interference.
Figure: Reflection at an interface for light travel ing from a medium with index of refraction to a me dium with index of
refraction,, causes the phase of the wave to change by radians.
If the film in Figure is a soap bubble (essentially water with air on both sides), then a phas e shift of occurs for ray 1 but
not for ray 2. Thus, when the film is very thin and t he path length difference between the two rays is negl igible, they are exactly out
of phase, and destructive interference occurs at all wavelengths. Thus, the soap bubble is dark here. The thi ckness of the film
relative to the wavelength of light is the other cru cial factor in thin-film interference. Ray 2 in Figu re travels a greater
distance than ray 1. For light incident perpendicular to the surface, ray 2 travels a distance approximat ely farther than ray 1.
When this distance is an integral or half-integral m ultiple of the wavelength in the medium (, where λ is the wavelength in
vacuum and is the index of refraction), constructi ve or destructive interference occurs, depending als o on whether there is a phase
change in either ray.

10.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76677Sophisticated cameras use a series of several lenses. Light can reflect from the surfaces of these vario us lenses and degrade
image clarity. To limit these reflections, lenses a re coated with a thin layer of magnesium fluoride, whi ch causes destructive
thin-film interference. What is the thinnest this f ilm can be, if its index of refraction is 1.38 and it is designed to limit the
reflection of 550-nm light, normally the most intense vis ible wavelength? Assume the index of refraction of the glas s is 1.52.
Strategy
Refer to Figure and use for air,, and. Both ray 1 and ray 2 have a λ/2 shift upon reflection.
Thus, to obtain destructive interference, ray 2 needs to travel a half wavelength farther than ray 1. For ra ys incident
perpendicularly, the path length difference is 2 t.
Solution
To obtain destructive interference here,
where is the wavelength in the film and is given by. T hus,
Solving for t and entering known values yields
Significance
Films such as the one in this example are most effective in producing destructive interference when the thinn est layer is used,
since light over a broader range of incident angles is reduced in intensity. These films are called nonreflective coatings; this is
only an approximately correct description, though, since other wavelengths are only partially cancelled. Nonreflective coatings
are also used in car windows and sunglasses.
Combining Path Length Difference with Phase Change
Thin-film interference is most constructive or most de structive when the path length difference for the two rays is an integral or
half-integral wavelength. That is, for rays incident perpe ndicularly,
To know whether interference is constructive or destru ctive, you must also determine if there is a phase ch ange upon reflection.
Thin-film interference thus depends on film thickne ss, the wavelength of light, and the refractive indices. For white light incident
on a film that varies in thickness, you can observe r ainbow colors of constructive interference for various wavelengths as the
thickness varies.
a. What are the three smallest thicknesses of a soap bubble that produce constructive interference for red light wi th a
wavelength of 650 nm? The index of refraction of soap is ta ken to be the same as that of water.
b. What three smallest thicknesses give destructive inte rference?
Strategy
Use Figure to visualize the bubble, which acts as a thin film between two layers of air. Thus for air, and
for soap (equivalent to water). There is a λ/2 shift for ray 1 reflected from the top surface of the bub ble and no shift for
ray 2 reflected from the bottom surface. To get const ructive interference, then, the path length differenc e (2t) must be a half-Example: Calculating the Thickness of a Nonreflective Lens Coating
Example: Soap Bubbles

10.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76677integral multiple of the wavelength—the first three b eing, and. To get destructive interference, the p ath
length difference must be an integral multiple of the wavel ength—the first three being 0,, and.
Solution
a. Constructive interference occurs here when
Thus, the smallest constructive thickness is
The next thickness that gives constructive interferen ce is, so that
Finally, the third thickness producing constructive inte rference is, so that
b. For destructive interference, the path length diffe rence here is an integral multiple of the wavelength. The first occurs for
zero thickness, since there is a phase change at the top sur face, that is,
the very thin (or negligibly thin) case discussed above. The first non-zero thickness producing destructive in terference is
Substituting known values gives
Finally, the third destructive thickness is, so that
Significance
If the bubble were illuminated with pure red light, we would see bright and dark bands at very uniform incr eases in thickness.
First would be a dark band at 0 thickness, then bright at 122 nm thickness, then dark at 244 nm, bright at 3 66 nm, dark at 488
nm, and bright at 610 nm. If the bubble varied smoothl y in thickness, like a smooth wedge, then the bands would be evenly
spaced.
Going further with Example, what are the next two thicknesse s of soap bubble that would lead to
a. constructive interference, and
b. destructive interference?
Answer a
853 nm and 1097 nm
Answer b
731 nm and 975 nmExercise

10.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76677Another example of thin-film interference can be seen when microscope slides are separated (see Figure). Th e slides are very
flat, so that the wedge of air between them increases in thickness very uniformly. A phase change occurs at t he second surface but
not the first, so a dark band forms where the slides t ouch. The rainbow colors of constructive interference repeat, going from violet
to red again and again as the distance between the sl ides increases. As the layer of air increases, the bands become more difficult to
see, because slight changes in incident angle have g reater effects on path length differences. If monochr omatic light instead of
white light is used, then bright and dark bands are obtaine d rather than repeating rainbow colors.
Figure: (a) The rainbow-color bands are produced by thin-film interference in the air between the two g lass slides. (b)
Schematic of the paths taken by rays in the wedge of a ir between the slides. (c) If the air wedge is illumin ated with monochromatic
light, bright and dark bands are obtained rather tha n repeating rainbow colors.
An important application of thin-film interference i s found in the manufacturing of optical instruments. A lens or mirror can be
compared with a master as it is being ground, allowing it to be shaped to an accuracy of less than a wavele ngth over its entire
surface. Figure illustrates the phenomenon called Newto n’s rings, which occurs when the plane surfaces of two l enses are
placed together. (The circular bands are called Newto n’s rings because Isaac Newton described them and their use in detail.
Newton did not discover them; Robert Hooke did, and Newton did not believe they were due to the wave character of light.) Each
successive ring of a given color indicates an increa se of only half a wavelength in the distance between t he lens and the blank, so
that great precision can be obtained. Once the lens is per fect, no rings appear.

10.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76677
Figure:“Newton’s rings” interference fringes are produ ced when two plano-convex lenses are placed together with their
plane surfaces in contact. The rings are created by in terference between the light reflected off the two surfaces as a result of a slight
gap between them, indicating that these surfaces are n ot precisely plane but are slightly convex. (credit: Ulf Seifert)
Thin-film interference has many other applications, bo th in nature and in manufacturing. The wings of certai n moths and butterflies
have nearly iridescent colors due to thin-film inter ference. In addition to pigmentation, the wing’s col or is affected greatly by
constructive interference of certain wavelengths ref lected from its film-coated surface. Some car manufa cturers offer special paint
jobs that use thin-film interference to produce col ors that change with angle. This expensive option is based on variation of thinfilm path length differences with angle. Security feat ures on credit cards, banknotes, driving licenses, and similar items prone to
forgery use thin-film interference, diffraction grat ings, or holograms. As early as 1998, Australia led the wa y with dollar bills
printed on polymer with a diffraction grating securi ty feature, making the currency difficult to forge. Ot her countries, such as
Canada, New Zealand, and Taiwan, are using similar technolog ies, while US currency includes a thin-film interference ef fect.
This page titled 10.5: Interference in Thin Films is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.5: Interference in Thin Films by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668410.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the phenomenon of diffraction and the conditi ons under which it is observed
Describe diffraction through a single slit
After passing through a narrow aperture (opening), a wa ve propagating in a specific direction tends to spre ad out. For example,
sound waves that enter a room through an open door ca n be heard even if the listener is in a part of the room where the geometry of
ray propagation dictates that there should only be silence. Similarly, ocean waves passing through an open ing in a breakwater can
spread throughout the bay inside. (Figure). The sprea ding and bending of sound and ocean waves are two exa mples of
diffraction, which is the bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle—a phenomenon ex hibited by all types of
waves.
Figure: Because of the diffraction of waves, ocean wa ves entering through an opening in a breakwater can spread throughout
the bay. (credit: modification of map data from Goo gle Earth)
The diffraction of sound waves is apparent to us becau se wavelengths in the audible region are approximate ly the same size as the
objects they encounter, a condition that must be sat isfied if diffraction effects are to be observed ea sily. Since the wavelengths of
visible light range from approximately 390 to 770 n m, most objects do not diffract light significantly. Howe ver, situations do occur
in which apertures are small enough that the diffracti on of light is observable. For example, if you place y our middle and index
fingers close together and look through the opening at a light bulb, you can see a rather clear diffrac tion pattern, consisting of light
and dark lines running parallel to your fingers.
Diffraction through a Single Slit
Light passing through a single slit forms a diffrac tion pattern somewhat different from those formed by double slits or diffraction
gratings, which we discussed in the chapter on interfe rence. Figure shows a single-slit diffraction pattern. Note that the
central maximum is larger than maxima on either side and that the intensity decreases rapidly on either side. In contrast, a
diffraction grating produces evenly spaced lines that dim slowly on either side of the center.Learning Objectives

10.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684
Figure: Single-slit diffraction pattern. (a) Monochro matic light passing through a single slit has a central maximum and many
smaller and dimmer maxima on either side. The central maximum is six times higher than shown. (b) The diagra m shows the bright
central maximum, and the dimmer and thinner maxima on either side.
The analysis of single-slit diffraction is illustrated in Figure. Here, the light arrives at the slit, illu minating it uniformly and is
in phase across its width. We then consider light pr opagating onwards from different parts of the same slit. According to Huygens’s
principle, every part of the wave front in the slit emits wave lets, as we discussed in The Nature of Light. These are like rays that
start out in phase and head in all directions. (Eac h ray is perpendicular to the wave front of a wavelet.) Assuming the screen is very
far away compared with the size of the slit, rays heading toward a common destination are nearly parallel. Whe n they travel
straight ahead, as in part (a) of the figure, they r emain in phase, and we observe a central maximum. Howev er, when rays travel at
an angle θ relative to the original direction of th e beam, each ray travels a different distance to a c ommon location, and they can
arrive in or out of phase. In part (b), the ray from the bottom travels a distance of one wavelength λ f arther than the ray from the
top. Thus, a ray from the center travels a distance λ/2 less than the one at the bottom edge of the sli t, arrives out of phase, and
interferes destructively. A ray from slightly above t he center and one from slightly above the bottom als o cancel one another. In
fact, each ray from the slit interferes destructivel y with another ray. In other words, a pair-wise cancellat ion of all rays results in a
dark minimum in intensity at this angle. By symmetry, another minimum occurs at the same angle to the r ight of the incident
direction (toward the bottom of the figure) of the ligh t.
Figure: Light passing through a single slit is diffracte d in all directions and may interfere constructively or destructively,
depending on the angle. The difference in path leng th for rays from either side of the slit is seen to be a.
At the larger angle shown in part (c), the path length s differ by for rays from the top and bottom of th e slit. One ray travels a
distance different from the ray from the bottom an d arrives in phase, interfering constructively. Two rays, each from slightly

10.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684above those two, also add constructively. Most rays from the slit have another ray to interfere with construct ively, and a maximum
in intensity occurs at this angle. However, not all ray s interfere constructively for this situation, so t he maximum is not as intense as
the central maximum. Finally, in part (d), the angle s hown is large enough to produce a second minimum. As seen in the figure, the
difference in path length for rays from either side o f the slit is, and we see that a destructive minimum is obtained when this
distance is an integral multiple of the wavelength.
Thus, to obtain destructive interference for a single slit,
where
is the slit width,
is the light’s wavelength,
is the angle relative to the original direction of t he light, and
is the order of the minimum.
Figure shows a graph of intensity for single-slit in terference, and it is apparent that the maxima on ei ther side of the central
maximum are much less intense and not as wide. This effe ct is explored in Double-Slit Diffraction.
Figure: A graph of single-slit diffraction intensity sh owing the central maximum to be wider and much more intense than
those to the sides. In fact, the central maximum is six times higher than shown here.
Visible light of wavelength 550 nm falls on a single slit and produces its second diffraction minimum at an angle of 45.0°
relative to the incident direction of the light, as in Fig ure.
a. What is the width of the slit?
b. At what angle is the first minimum produced?Example: Calculating Single-Slit Diffraction

10.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684
Figure: In this example, we analyze a graph of the si ngle-slit diffraction pattern.
Strategy
From the given information, and assuming the screen is far away from the slit, we can use the equation first to find
, and again to find the angle for the first minimum.
Solution
a. We are given that,, and. Solving the equation for and substituting known values
gives
b. Solving the equation for and substituting the known values gives
Thus the angle is
Significance
We see that the slit is narrow (it is only a few times greater than the wavelength of light). This is consisten t with the fact that
light must interact with an object comparable in siz e to its wavelength in order to exhibit significant wave effects such as this
single-slit diffraction pattern. We also see that the central maximum extends 20.7° on either side of th e original beam, for a
width of about 41°. The angle between the first and sec ond minima is only about 24°(45.0°−20.7°). Thus, th e second maximum
is only about half as wide as the central maximum.
Suppose the slit width in Example is increased to. Wh at are the new angular positions for the first, secon d,
and third minima? Would a fourth minimum exist?Exercise

10.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684Answer
,,; no
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the intensity relative to the central maximum of the single-slit diffraction peaks
Calculate the intensity relative to the central maximum of an arbitrary point on the screen
To calculate the intensity of the diffraction patte rn, we follow the phasor method used for calculations with ac circuits in
Alternating-Current Circuits. If we consider that there are Huygens sources acros s the slit shown previously, with each source
separated by a distance a/N from its adjacent neighbor s, the path difference between waves from adjacent so urces reaching the
arbitrary point on the screen is. This distance is equivalent to a phase difference of. The phasor
diagram for the waves arriving at the point whose ang ular position is is shown in Figure. The amplitude of the phasor for
each Huygens wavelet is, the amplitude of the resulta nt phasor is, and the phase difference between the wavelets from the
first and the last sources is
With, the phasor diagram approaches a circular arc of length and radius. Since the length of the arc is for
any, the radius of the arc must decrease as increases (or equivalently, as the phasors form tighter spirals).
Figure: (a) Phasor diagram corresponding to the angula r position θθ in the single-slit diffraction pattern. The phase difference
between the wavelets from the first and last sources is. (b) The geometry of the phasor diagram.
The phasor diagram for ϕ = 0 (the center of the diffraction pattern) is sho wn in Figure using N=30. In this case, the phasors
are laid end to end in a straight line of length, the radius r goes to infinity, and the resultant has its maximu m value
. The intensity of the light can be obtained using the relation from Electromagnetic Waves. The intensity of the
maximum is then
where. The phasor diagrams for the first two zeros of the diffraction pattern are shown in Figure and Figur e
. In both cases, the phasors add to zero, after rotating through rad for m = 1 and rad for m = 2.Learning Objectives

10.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684
Figure: Phasor diagrams (with 30 phasors) for various poi nts on the single-slit diffraction pattern. Multiple r otations around a
given circle have been separated slightly so that the phasors can be seen. (a) Central maximum, (b) first min imum, (c) first
maximum beyond central maximum, (d) second minimum, and (e) second maximum beyond central maximum.
The next two maxima beyond the central maxima are re presented by the phasor diagrams of parts (c) and (e). In part (c), the
phasors have rotated through rad and have formed a resultant phasor of magnitude. The length of the a rc formed by the
phasors is. Since this corresponds to 1.5 rotations aroun d a circle of diameter, we have
so
and
where
In part (e), the phasors have rotated through rad, c orresponding to 2.5 rotations around a circle of diame ter and arc length
. This results in. The proof is left as an exercise for th e student (Exercise 4.119).
These two maxima actually correspond to values of ϕ slightly less than rad and rad. Since the total len gth of the arc of the
phasor diagram is always, the radius of the arc dec reases as increases. As a result, and turn out to be slightly larger
for arcs that have not quite curled through rad an d rad, respectively. The exact values of for the max ima are investigated in
Exercise 4.120. In solving that problem, you will find that they are less than, but very close to, … rad.
To calculate the intensity at an arbitrary point on the screen, we return to the phasor diagram of Figure. Since the arc
subtends an angle ϕ at the center of the circle,
and
where is the amplitude of the resultant field. Solvi ng the Equation for and then substituting from E quation, we
find

10.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684Now defining
we obtain
Equation relates the amplitude of the resultant fiel d at any point in the diffraction pattern to the amp litude at the
central maximum. The intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude, so
where is the intensity at the center of the pattern.
For the central maximum, ϕ = 0, β is also zero and we see from l’Hôpital’s rule that, so that. For
the next maximum, rad, we have rad and when substituted into Equation, it yields
in agreement with what we found earlier in this sectio n using the diameters and circumferences of phasor d iagrams. Substituting
rad into Equation yields a similar result for.
A plot of Equation is shown in Figure and directly below it is a photograph of an actual diffraction pa ttern. Notice that
the central peak is much brighter than the others, and that the zeros of the pattern are located at th ose points where, which
occurs when rad. This corresponds to
or
which we derived for the destructive interference ro a single slit previously.

10.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684
Figure: (a) The calculated intensity distribution of a single-slit diffraction pattern. (b) The actual dif fraction pattern.
Light of wavelength 550 nm passes through a slit of wid th 2.00 μm and produces a diffraction pattern similar to that shown in
Figure.
a. Find the locations of the first two minima in terms of the a ngle from the central maximum.
b. Determine the intensity relative to the central maxim um at a point halfway between these two minima.
Strategy
The minima are given by Equation 4.2.1,. The first two minima are for m = 1 and m = 2. Eq uation and
Equation can be used to determine the intensity once the an gle has been worked out.
Solution
1. Solving Equation 4.2.1 for θ gives us, so that
and
2. The halfway point between and is
Equation gives
From Equation, we can calculateExample: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction

10.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76684Significance
This position, halfway between two minima, is very close to t he location of the maximum, expected near, or.
For the experiment in Example, at what angle from th e center is the third maximum and what is its intensi ty relative to
the central maximum?
Answer
If the slit width is varied, the intensity distribut ion changes, as illustrated in Figure. The central p eak is distributed over the
region from to. For small θ, this corresponds to an a ngular width. Hence, an increase in the
slit width results in a decrease in the width of the central peak. For a slit with a ≫ λ, the central peak is very sharp, whereas if a ≈
λ, it becomes quite broad.
Figure: Single-slit diffraction patterns for various sl it widths. As the slit width a increases from a=λ to 5λ and then to 10λ, the
width of the central peak decreases as the angles for t he first minima decrease as predicted by Equation 4.2.1.
A diffraction experiment in optics can require a lo t of preparation but this simulation by Andrew Duffy o ffers not only a quick
set up but also the ability to change the slit width instantly. Run the simulation and select “Single sli t.” You can adjust the slit
width and see the effect on the diffraction pattern on a scre en and as a graph.
This page titled 10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.2: Single-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
4.3: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.Exercise
Diffraction Simulation

10.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668610.7: Double-Slit Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the combined effect of interference and diffra ction with two slits, each with finite width
Determine the relative intensities of interference fri nges within a diffraction pattern
Identify missing orders, if any
When we studied interference in Young’s double-slit experiment, we ignored the diffraction effect in eac h slit. We assumed that the
slits were so narrow that on the screen you saw only th e interference of light from just two point sources. I f the slit is smaller than
the wavelength, then Figure 4.3.4a shows that there is just a spreading of light and no peaks or troughs on the screen. Therefore, it
was reasonable to leave out the diffraction effect i n that chapter. However, if you make the slit wider, Figure 4.3.4b and (c) show
that you cannot ignore diffraction. In this section, we study the complications to the double-slit experi ment that arise when you also
need to take into account the diffraction effect of each slit.
To calculate the diffraction pattern for two (or any number of) slits, we need to generalize the method we just used for a single slit.
That is, across each slit, we place a uniform distrib ution of point sources that radiate Huygens wavelets, and then we sum the
wavelets from all the slits. This gives the intensity a t any point on the screen. Although the details of that calculation can be
complicated, the final result is quite simple:
Two-Slit Diffraction Pattern
The diffraction pattern of two slits of width that a re separated by a distance d is the interference pattern of two point sources
separated by d multiplied by the diffraction pattern of a slit of width.
In other words, the locations of the interference fringes are given by the equatio n
the same as when we considered the slits to be point so urces, but the intensities of the fringes are now reduced by diffraction
effects, according to Equation 4.3.11. [Note that in the chapter on interference, we wrote and used the integer to
refer to interference fringes. Equation 4.2.1 also uses, but this time to refer to diffraction m inima. If both equations are used
simultaneously, it is good practice to use a different vari able (such as) for one of these integers in order to keep them distinct.]
Interference and diffraction effects operate simulta neously and generally produce minima at different a ngles. This gives rise to a
complicated pattern on the screen, in which some of the maxima of interference from the two slits are miss ing if the maximum of
the interference is in the same direction as the mi nimum of the diffraction. We refer to such a missing peak as a missing order. One
example of a diffraction pattern on the screen is sh own in Figure. The solid line with multiple peaks of v arious heights is the
intensity observed on the screen. It is a product of the interference pattern of waves from separate slits and the diffraction of waves
from within one slit.Learning Objectives

10.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76686
Figure: Diffraction from a double slit. The purple l ine with peaks of the same height are from the interf erence of the waves
from two slits; the blue line with one big hump in th e middle is the diffraction of waves from within one slit; and the thick red line
is the product of the two, which is the pattern observ ed on the screen. The plot shows the expected result fo r a slit width and
slit separation. The maximum of order for the inter ference is missing because the minimum of the diffracti on occurs
in the same direction.
Figure shows that the intensity of the fringe for m=3 is zero, but what about the other fringes? Calculate the intensity for
the fringe at m=1 relative to, the intensity of the cen tral peak.
Strategy
Determine the angle for the double-slit interference fringe, using the equation from Interference, then determine the relative
intensity in that direction due to diffraction by using E quation 4.3.11.
Solution
From the chapter on interference, we know that the bright i nterference fringes occur at, or
From Equation 4.3.11,
where
Substituting from above,
For, and,
Then, the intensity is
SignificanceExample: Intensity of the Fringes

10.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76686Note that this approach is relatively straightforward and gives a result that is almost exactly the same as the more complicated
analysis using phasors to work out the intensity val ues of the double-slit interference (thin line in Fi gure). The phasor
approach accounts for the downward slope in the diffrac tion intensity (blue line) so that the peak near m=1 occurs at a value of
θ ever so slightly smaller than we have shown here.
Suppose that in Young’s experiment, slits of width 0.020 mm are separated by 0.20 mm. If the slits are illuminat ed by
monochromatic light of wavelength 500 nm, how many br ight fringes are observed in the central peak of the diffraction
pattern?
Solution
From Equation 4.2.1, the angular position of the first diffraction minimum i s.
Using for, we find
which is the maximum interference order that fits in side the central peak. We note that are missing orde rs as
matches exactly. Accordingly, we observe bright fringes for
m = −9, −8, −7, −6, −5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, +3, +4, +5, +6, +7, +8, and +9
for a total of 19 bright fringes.
For the experiment in Example, show that m=20 is also a m issing order.
Solution
From, the interference maximum occurs at for. From Equation 4.2.1, this is also the angle for the
second diffraction minimum. (Note: Both equations use the index m but they refer to separate phenomena.)
Explore the effects of double-slit diffraction. In t his simulation written by Fu-Kwun Hwang, select N=2 using the slider and see
what happens when you control the slit width, slit separation and the wavelength. Can you make an order go “missing?”
This page titled 10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.4: Double-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Example: Two-Slit Diffraction
Exercise

10.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668710.8: Diffraction Gratings
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the pattern obtained from diffraction gratings
Explain diffraction grating effects
Analyzing the interference of light passing through t wo slits lays out the theoretical framework of interf erence and gives us a
historical insight into Thomas Young’s experiments. However, most modern-day applications of slit interfer ence use not just two
slits but many, approaching infinity for practical p urposes. The key optical element is called a diffra ction grating, an important tool
in optical analysis.
Diffraction Gratings: An Infinite Number of Slits
The analysis of multi-slit interference in Interference allows us to consider what happens when the number of slits N approaches
infinity. Recall that secondary maxima appear betwee n the principal maxima. We can see there will be an i nfinite number of
secondary maxima that appear, and an infinite number of dark fringes between them. This makes the spacing between the fringes,
and therefore the width of the maxima, infinitesimall y small. Furthermore, because the intensity of the seco ndary maxima is
proportional to, it approaches zero so that the sec ondary maxima are no longer seen. What remains are o nly the principal
maxima, now very bright and very narrow (Figure).
Figure: (a) Intensity of light transmitted through a large number of slits. When N approaches infinity, onl y the principal
maxima remain as very bright and very narrow lines. (b) A laser beam passed through a diffraction grating. (credit b: modification
of work by Sebastian Stapelberg)
In reality, the number of slits is not infinite, but it can be very large—large enough to produce the eq uivalent effect. A prime
example is an optical element called a diffraction grating. A diffraction grating can be manufactured by carving glass with a sharp
tool in a large number of precisely positioned para llel lines, with untouched regions acting like slits (Figure). This type of
grating can be photographically mass produced rathe r cheaply. Because there can be over 1000 lines per m illimeter across theLearning Objectives

10.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76687grating, when a section as small as a few millimeters i s illuminated by an incoming ray, the number of ill uminated slits is
effectively infinite, providing for very sharp principa l maxima.
Figure: A diffraction grating can be manufactured b y carving glass with a sharp tool in a large number of precisely positioned
parallel lines.
Diffraction gratings work both for transmission of lig ht, as in Figure, and for reflection of light, as on butterfly wings and the
Australian opal in Figure. Natural diffraction grating s also occur in the feathers of certain birds such as the hummingbird.
Tiny, finger-like structures in regular patterns act as reflection gratings, producing constructive inte rference that gives the feathers
colors not solely due to their pigmentation. This is called iridescence.
Figure: (a) Light passing through a diffraction grati ng is diffracted in a pattern similar to a double slit, with bright regions at
various angles. (b) The pattern obtained for white li ght incident on a grating. The central maximum is wh ite, and the higher-order
maxima disperse white light into a rainbow of colors.
Figure: (a) This Australian opal and (b) butterfly wi ngs have rows of reflectors that act like reflection g ratings, reflecting
different colors at different angles. (credit a: modi fication of work by "Opals-On-Black"/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by
“whologwhy”/Flickr)

10.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76687Applications of Diffraction Gratings
Where are diffraction gratings used in applications? Diffraction gratings are commonly used for spectroscopic dispersion and
analysis of light. What makes them particularly use ful is the fact that they form a sharper pattern than double slits do. That is, their
bright fringes are narrower and brighter while their dark regions are darker. Diffraction gratings are key components of
monochromators used, for example, in optical imaging o f particular wavelengths from biological or medical samples. A diffraction
grating can be chosen to specifically analyze a wave length emitted by molecules in diseased cells in a biopsy sample or to help
excite strategic molecules in the sample with a select ed wavelength of light. Another vital use is in optica l fiber technologies where
fibers are designed to provide optimum performance a t specific wavelengths. A range of diffraction gratin gs are available for
selecting wavelengths for such use.
Diffraction gratings with 10,000 lines per centimeter are readily available. Suppose you have one, and you s end a beam of
white light through it to a screen 2.00 m away.
a. Find the angles for the first-order diffraction of the sho rtest and longest wavelengths of visible light (380 and 760 nm,
respectively).
b. What is the distance between the ends of the rainbow of v isible light produced on the screen for first-order interf erence?
(Figure).
c.
Figure: (a) The diffraction grating considered in th is example produces a rainbow of colors on a screen a d istance
from the grating. The distances along the screen are measured perpendicular to the x-direction. In other words, the
rainbow pattern extends out of the page.
(b) In a bird’s-eye view, the rainbow pattern can be seen o n a table where the equipment is placed.
Strategy
Once a value for the diffraction grating’s slit spaci ng has been determined, the angles for the sharp lin es can be found using
the equation
for.
Since there are 10,000 lines per centimeter, each li ne is separated by 1/10,000 of a centimeter. Once we kn ow the angles, we an
find the distances along the screen by using simple trigo nometry.Example: Calculating Typical Diffraction Grating Effects

10.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76687Solution
1. The distance between slits is or. Let us call the two angl es for violet
(380 nm) and for red (760 nm). Solving the equation for,
where m = 1 for the first-order and. Substituting these valu es gives
Thus the angle is
Similarly,
Thus the angle is
Notice that in both equations, we reported the results of th ese intermediate calculations to four significant fig ures to use
with the calculation in part (b).
2. The distances on the screen are labeled and in Figure. Notice that. We can solve for and. That
is,
and
The distance between them is therefore
Significance
The large distance between the red and violet ends o f the rainbow produced from the white light indicates the potential this
diffraction grating has as a spectroscopic tool. The m ore it can spread out the wavelengths (greater dispersi on), the more detail
can be seen in a spectrum. This depends on the qualit y of the diffraction grating—it must be very precis ely made in addition to
having closely spaced lines.
If the line spacing of a diffraction grating is no t precisely known, we can use a light source with a well -determined
wavelength to measure it. Suppose the first-order con structive fringe of the emission line of hydrogen () is
measured at 11.36° using a spectrometer with a diffraction grating. What is the line spacing of this grating?
Answer
or 300 lines per millimeter
Take the same simulation we used for double-slit diffra ction and try increasing the number of slits from to. The
primary peaks become sharper, and the secondary peak s become less and less pronounced. By the time you reac h the maximum
number of, the system is behaving much like a diffract ion grating.Exercise

10.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76687This page titled 10.8: Diffraction Gratings is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.5: Diffraction Gratings by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668810.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the diffraction limit on resolution
Describe the diffraction limit on beam propagation
Light diffracts as it moves through space, bending ar ound obstacles, interfering constructively and destruct ively. This can be used
as a spectroscopic tool—a diffraction grating dispe rses light according to wavelength, for example, and i s used to produce spectra
—but diffraction also limits the detail we can obtain in im ages.
Figure shows the effect of passing light through a sma ll circular aperture. Instead of a bright spot with sharp edges, we
obtain a spot with a fuzzy edge surrounded by circles of light. This pattern is caused by diffraction, sim ilar to that produced by a
single slit. Light from different parts of the circu lar aperture interferes constructively and destruct ively. The effect is most
noticeable when the aperture is small, but the effect is there for large apertures as well.
Figure: (a) Monochromatic light passed through a small circular aperture produces this diffraction pattern. (b) Two pointlight sources that are close to one another produce ov erlapping images because of diffraction. (c) If the so urces are closer together,
they cannot be distinguished or resolved.
How does diffraction affect the detail that can be obse rved when light passes through an aperture? Figure sho ws the
diffraction pattern produced by two point-light sourc es that are close to one another. The pattern is simi lar to that for a single point
source, and it is still possible to tell that there ar e two light sources rather than one. If they are close r together, as in Figure,
we cannot distinguish them, thus limiting the detail or resolution we can obtain. This limit is an inescapable consequen ce of the
wave nature of light.
Diffraction limits the resolution in many situations. The acuity of our vision is limited because light p asses through the pupil, which
is the circular aperture of the eye. Be aware that t he diffraction-like spreading of light is due to th e limited diameter of a light beam,
not the interaction with an aperture. Thus, light passi ng through a lens with a diameter shows this effect an d spreads, blurring the
image, just as light passing through an aperture of di ameter does. Thus, diffraction limits the resolution of any system having a
lens or mirror. Telescopes are also limited by diffract ion, because of the finite diameter of the primary mir ror.
Just what is the limit? To answer that question, consi der the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture, which has a central maximum
that is wider and brighter than the maxima surroundi ng it (similar to a slit) (Figure). It can be shown t hat, for a circular
aperture of diameter, the first minimum in the diff raction pattern occurs at (providing the aperture is large compared
with the wavelength of light, which is the case for mos t optical instruments). The accepted criterion for d etermining the diffraction
limit to resolution based on this angle is known as th e Rayleigh criterion, which was developed by Lord Rayleigh in the
nineteenth century.
The diffraction limit to resolution states that two images are just resolvable when the center of the dif fraction pattern of one is
directly over the first minimum of the diffraction pa ttern of the other (Figure).Learning Objectives
Rayleigh Criterion

10.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76688The first minimum is at an angle of, so that two point ob jects are just resolvable if they are separated by the an gle
where is the wavelength of light (or other electroma gnetic radiation) and is the diameter of the apert ure, lens, mirror, etc., with
which the two objects are observed. In this expression, has units of radians. This angle is also commonly kn own as the
diffraction limit.
Figure: (a) Graph of intensity of the diffraction pa ttern for a circular aperture. Note that, similar to a single slit, the central
maximum is wider and brighter than those to the sides. (b) Two point objects produce overlapping diffractio n patterns. Shown here
is the Rayleigh criterion for being just resolvable. T he central maximum of one pattern lies on the first m inimum of the other.
All attempts to observe the size and shape of object s are limited by the wavelength of the probe. Even th e small wavelength of light
prohibits exact precision. When extremely small wave length probes are used, as with an electron microscop e, the system is
disturbed, still limiting our knowledge. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle asserts that this limit is fu ndamental and inescapable, as
we shall see in the chapter on quantum mechanics.
The primary mirror of the orbiting Hubble Space Teles cope has a diameter of 2.40 m. Being in orbit, this telescope avoids the
degrading effects of atmospheric distortion on its reso lution. (a) What is the angle between two just-resolva ble point light
sources (perhaps two stars)? Assume an average light wav elength of 550 nm. (b) If these two stars are at a dis tance of 2 million
light-years, which is the distance of the Andromeda Galax y, how close together can they be and still be resolv ed? (A light-year,
or ly, is the distance light travels in 1 year.)
Strategy
The Rayleigh criterion stated in Equation,, gives the smallest possible angle θ between point sources, o r the
best obtainable resolution. Once this angle is known, we can calculate the distance between the stars, since we are given how
far away they are.
Solution
1. The Rayleigh criterion for the minimum resolvable a ngle is
Entering known values givesExample: Calculating Diffraction Limits of the Hubble Space Telescope

10.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766882. The distance s between two objects a distance r away and separated by an angle θ is. Substituting known va lues
gives
Significance
The angle found in part (a) is extraordinarily small (less than 1/50,000 of a degree), because the primary mirror is so large
compared with the wavelength of light. As noticed, diff raction effects are most noticeable when light inter acts with objects
having sizes on the order of the wavelength of light. However, the effect is still there, and there is a di ffraction limit to what is
observable. The actual resolution of the Hubble Teles cope is not quite as good as that found here. As with a ll instruments, there
are other effects, such as nonuniformities in mirrors or a berrations in lenses that further limit resolution. However, Figure
gives an indication of the extent of the detail obser vable with the Hubble because of its size and quality, and especially because
it is above Earth’s atmosphere.
Figure: These two photographs of the M82 Galaxy give an idea of the observable detail using (a) a ground-b ased
telescope and (b) the Hubble Space Telescope. (credit a: modification of work by “Ricnun”/Wikimedia Comm ons)
The answer in part (b) indicates that two stars separat ed by about half a light-year can be resolved. The av erage distance
between stars in a galaxy is on the order of five lig ht-years in the outer parts and about one light-yea r near the galactic center.
Therefore, the Hubble can resolve most of the individu al stars in Andromeda Galaxy, even though it lies at suc h a huge
distance that its light takes 2 million years to reac h us. Figure shows another mirror used to observe radi o waves from
outer space.
Figure: A 305-m-diameter paraboloid at Arecibo in P uerto Rico is lined with reflective material, making it into a radio
telescope. It is the largest curved focusing dish in the world. Although for Arecibo is much larger than fo r the Hubble
Telescope, it detects radiation of a much longer wave length and its diffraction limit is significantly poor er than Hubble’s. The
Arecibo telescope is still very useful, because importan t information is carried by radio waves that is not ca rried by visible
light. (credit: Jeff Hitchcock)

10.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76688What is the angular resolution of the Arecibo telescop e shown in Figure when operated at 21-cm wavelength? Ho w does
it compare to the resolution of the Hubble Telescope?
Answer
, 3000 times broader than the Hubble Telescope
Diffraction is not only a problem for optical instrum ents but also for the electromagnetic radiation itse lf. Any beam of light having
a finite diameter and a wavelength λ exhibits diffra ction spreading. The beam spreads out with an angle θ given by Equation
,. Take, for example, a laser beam made of rays as parallel as possible (angles between rays as close to θ = 0° as
possible) instead spreads out at an angle, where is the diameter of the beam and λ is its wavelength. Th is spreading
is impossible to observe for a flashlight because its beam is not very parallel to start with. However, for l ong-distance transmission
of laser beams or microwave signals, diffraction spre ading can be significant (Figure). To avoid this, we can increase D. This
is done for laser light sent to the moon to measure i ts distance from Earth. The laser beam is expanded th rough a telescope to make
much larger and θ smaller.
Figure: The beam produced by this microwave transmissio n antenna spreads out at a minimum angle due to
diffraction. It is impossible to produce a near-parall el beam because the beam has a limited diameter.
In most biology laboratories, resolution is an issue whe n the use of the microscope is introduced. The smaller the distance x by
which two objects can be separated and still be seen as distinct, the greater the resolution. The resolvin g power of a lens is defined
as that distance x. An expression for resolving power is obtained from th e Rayleigh criterion. Figure shows two point
objects separated by a distance x. According to the Rayleigh criterion, resolution is possible when the minimum angular separation
is
where is the distance between the specimen and the o bjective lens, and we have used the small angle appro ximation (i.e., we
have assumed that x is much smaller than d), so that. Therefore, the resolving power is
Another way to look at this is by the concept of nume rical aperture (NA), which is a measure of the maximum acceptance angle at
which a lens will take light and still contain it within the lens. Figure shows a lens and an object at point P. The NA here is a
measure of the ability of the lens to gather light and resolve fine detail. The angle subtended by the l ens at its focus is defined to be
. From the figure and again using the small angle approxima tion, we can write
The NA for a lens is, where n is the index of refraction of the medium between th e objective lens and the object at
point P. From this definition for NA, we can see thatExercise

10.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76688In a microscope, NA is important because it relates to the resolving power of a lens. A lens with a large NA is able to resolve finer
details. Lenses with larger NA are also able to collect more light and so give a b righter image. Another way to describe this
situation is that the larger the NA, the larger the cone of light that can be brought into the lens, so more of the diffraction modes are
collected. Thus the microscope has more information to fo rm a clear image, and its resolving power is higher.
Figure: (a) Two points separated by a distance x and p ositioned a distance away from the objective. (b) Te rms and symbols
used in discussion of resolving power for a lens and an o bject at point P (credit a: modification of work by “Infopro”/Wikimedia
Commons).
One of the consequences of diffraction is that the foc al point of a beam has a finite width and intensity distribution. Imagine
focusing when only considering geometric optics, as in Figure. The focal point is regarded as an infini tely small point with
a huge intensity and the capacity to incinerate most samples, irrespective of the NA of the objective lens—an unphysical
oversimplification. For wave optics, due to diffractio n, we take into account the phenomenon in which the f ocal point spreads to
become a focal spot (Figure) with the size of the spo t decreasing with increasing NA. Consequently, the intensity in the
focal spot increases with increasing NA. The higher the NA, the greater the chances of photodegrading the spec imen. However, the
spot never becomes a true point.
Figure:(a) In geometric optics, the focus is modelled as a point, but it is not physically possible to produce such a point
because it implies infinite intensity. (b) In wave opt ics, the focus is an extended region.
In a different type of microscope, molecules within a specimen are made to emit light through a mechanism called fluorescence. By
controlling the molecules emitting light, it has beco me possible to construct images with resolution much f iner than the Rayleigh
criterion, thus circumventing the diffraction limit. The development of super-resolved fluorescence micro scopy led to the 2014
Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

10.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76688In this Optical Resolution Model, two diffraction patter ns for light through two circular apertures are shown side by side in this
simulation by Fu-Kwun Hwang. Watch the patterns merge as you de crease the aperture diameters.
This page titled 10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.6: Circular Apertures and Resolution by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.Optical Resolution Simulation

10.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668910.10: X-Ray Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe interference and diffraction effects exhibite d by X-rays in interaction with atomic-scale structures
Since X-ray photons are very energetic, they have rela tively short wavelengths, on the order of m to m. Th us, typical Xray photons act like rays when they encounter macros copic objects, like teeth, and produce sharp shadows. Ho wever, since atoms
are on the order of 0.1 nm in size, X-rays can be used t o detect the location, shape, and size of atoms and mo lecules. The process is
called X-ray diffraction, and it involves the interference of X-rays to prod uce patterns that can be analyzed for information abo ut
the structures that scattered the X-rays.
Perhaps the most famous example of X-ray diffraction is the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA in 1953 by an
international team of scientists working at England’s Cavendish Laboratory—American James Watson, Englishm an Francis Crick,
and New Zealand-born Maurice Wilkins. Using X-ray diffract ion data produced by Rosalind Franklin, they were the f irst to model
the double-helix structure of DNA that is so crucial to life. For this work, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins were awarded the 1962 Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine. (There is some debate and controversy over the issue that Rosalind Frankli n was not included in
the prize, although she died in 1958, before the prize was a warded.)
Figure shows a diffraction pattern produced by the s cattering of X-rays from a crystal. This process is known as X-ray
crystallography because of the information it can y ield about crystal structure, and it was the type of data Rosalind Franklin
supplied to Watson and Crick for DNA. Not only do X-rays confirm the size and shape of atoms, they give informa tion about the
atomic arrangements in materials. For example, more rec ent research in high-temperature superconductors inv olves complex
materials whose lattice arrangements are crucial to o btaining a superconducting material. These can be studi ed using X-ray
crystallography.
Figure: X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a prot ein (hen egg lysozyme) produced this interference pat tern. Analysis of the
pattern yields information about the structure of the protein. (credit: “Del45”/Wikimedia Commons)
Historically, the scattering of X-rays from crystals wa s used to prove that X-rays are energetic electromag netic (EM) waves. This
was suspected from the time of the discovery of X-rays in 1895, but it was not until 1912 that the German Ma x von Laue (1879–
1960) convinced two of his colleagues to scatter X-rays from crystals. If a diffraction pattern is obtained, h e reasoned, then the Xrays must be waves, and their wavelength could be determ ined. (The spacing of atoms in various crystals was r easonably well
known at the time, based on good values for Avogadro ’s number.) The experiments were convincing, and the 19 14 Nobel Prize in
Physics was given to von Laue for his suggestion leadin g to the proof that X-rays are EM waves. In 1915, the unique father-and-Learning Objectives

10.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76689son team of Sir William Henry Bragg and his son Sir William Lawrence Bragg were awarded a jo int Nobel Prize for inventing the
X-ray spectrometer and the then-new science of X-ray analy sis.
In ways reminiscent of thin-film interference, we con sider two plane waves at X-ray wavelengths, each one refl ecting off a
different plane of atoms within a crystal’s lattice, as shown in Figure. From the geometry, the difference in path lengths is
. Constructive interference results when this distance is an integer multiple of the wavelength. This condit ion is captured by
the Bragg equation,
for.
where is a positive integer and is the spacing betwe en the planes. Following the Law of Reflection, both t he incident and
reflected waves are described by the same angle,, bu t unlike the general practice in geometric optics, i s measured with respect to
the surface itself, rather than the normal.
Figure: X-ray diffraction with a crystal. Two incide nt waves reflect off two planes of a crystal. The diff erence in path
lengths is indicated by the dashed line.
Common table salt is composed mainly of crystals. In a crystal, there is a family of planes 0.252 nm apar t. If the
first-order maximum is observed at an incidence ang le of 18.1°, what is the wavelength of the X-ray scatter ing from this
crystal?
Strategy:
Use the Bragg equation, Equation, to solve for.
Solution
For first-order,, and the plane spacing is known. Solving t he Bragg equation for wavelength yields
Significance
The determined wavelength fits within the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Once again, the wave nature of light
makes itself prominent when the wavelength () is comp arable to the size of the physical structures ()
it interacts with.Example: X-Ray Diffraction with Salt Crystals

10.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76689For the experiment described in Example, what are th e two other angles where interference maxima may be o bserved?
What limits the number of maxima?
Answer
and; Between, orders 1, 2, and 3, are all that exist.
Although Figure depicts a crystal as a two-dimensiona l array of scattering centers for simplicity, real c rystals are structures
in three dimensions. Scattering can occur simultaneo usly from different families of planes at different orientations and spacing
patterns known as called Bragg planes, as shown in Figure. The resulting interference pattern ca n be quite complex.
Figure: Because of the regularity that makes a crystal structure, one crystal can have many families of plan es within its
geometry, each one giving rise to X-ray diffraction.
This page titled 10.10: X-Ray Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.7: X-Ray Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

10.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669010.11: Holography
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how a three-dimensional image is recorded as a hologram
Describe how a three-dimensional image is formed from a hologram
A hologram, such as the one in Figure, is a true thr ee-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers. Holo grams are used for
amusement; decoration on novelty items and magazine covers; security on credit cards and driver’s license s (a laser and other
equipment are needed to reproduce them); and for se rious three-dimensional information storage. You can s ee that a hologram is a
true three-dimensional image because objects change re lative position in the image when viewed from different angle s.
Figure: Credit cards commonly have holograms for logo s, making them difficult to reproduce. (credit: Domi nic Alves)
The name hologram means “entire picture” (from the Gr eek holo, as in holistic) because the image is three-dimensiona l.
Holography is the process of producing holograms and, although t hey are recorded on photographic film, the process is quite
different from normal photography. Holography uses l ight interference or wave optics, whereas normal photo graphy uses geometric
optics. Figure shows one method of producing a holog ram. Coherent light from a laser is split by a mirror, with part of the
light illuminating the object. The remainder, calle d the reference beam, shines directly on a piece of film. Light scattered from the
object interferes with the reference beam, producing constructive and destructive interference. As a resul t, the exposed film looks
foggy, but close examination reveals a complicated interference pattern stored on it. Where the interfer ence was constructive, the
film (a negative actually) is darkened. Holography i s sometimes called lens-less photography, because it u ses the wave
characteristics of light, as contrasted to normal phot ography, which uses geometric optics and requires lens es.
Figure: Production of a hologram. Single-wavelength coherent light from a laser produces a well-defined i nterference
pattern on a piece of film. The laser beam is split by a partially silvered mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object and the
remainder shining directly on the film. (credit: mod ification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)Learning Objectives

10.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76690Light falling on a hologram can form a three-dimensi onal image of the original object. The process is comp licated in detail, but the
basics can be understood, as shown in Figure, in which a laser of the same type that exposed the film is no w used to
illuminate it. The myriad tiny exposed regions of th e film are dark and block the light, whereas less expo sed regions allow light to
pass. The film thus acts much like a collection of di ffraction gratings with various spacing patterns. Light passing through the
hologram is diffracted in various directions, produc ing both real and virtual images of the object used to expose the film. The
interference pattern is the same as that produced by the object. Moving your eye to various places in the i nterference pattern gives
you different perspectives, just as looking directly at the object would. The image thus looks like the ob ject and is three
dimensional like the object.
Figure: A transmission hologram is one that produces rea l and virtual images when a laser of the same type as t hat which
exposed the hologram is passed through it. Diffraction from various parts of the film produces the same interf erence pattern that
was produced by the object that was used to expose it. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa rreal)
The hologram illustrated in Figure is a transmission hologram. Holograms that are viewed with reflected lig ht, such as the
white light holograms on credit cards, are reflection holograms and are more common. White light hologram s often appear a little
blurry with rainbow edges, because the diffraction patt erns of various colors of light are at slightly diffe rent locations due to their
different wavelengths. Further uses of holography inclu de all types of three-dimensional information storag e, such as of statues in
museums, engineering studies of structures, and images of h uman organs.
Invented in the late 1940s by Dennis Gabor (1900–1970), who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work, hologr aphy
became far more practical with the development of th e laser. Since lasers produce coherent single-waveleng th light, their
interference patterns are more pronounced. The prec ision is so great that it is even possible to record nu merous holograms on a
single piece of film by just changing the angle of t he film for each successive image. This is how the holog rams that move as you
walk by them are produced—a kind of lens-less movie.
In a similar way, in the medical field, holograms have allowed complete three-dimensional holographic displ ays of objects from a
stack of images. Storing these images for future use is relatively easy. With the use of an endoscope, high-re solution, threedimensional holographic images of internal organs and tissues can be made.
This page titled 10.11: Holography is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.8: Holography by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667810.12: The Michelson Interferometer
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain changes in fringes observed with a Michelson interfer ometer caused by mirror movements
Explain changes in fringes observed with a Michelson interfer ometer caused by changes in medium
The Michelson interferometer (invented by the American physicist Albert A. Michelson, 1852–1931) is a precision instrument
that produces interference fringes by splitting a li ght beam into two parts and then recombining them af ter they have traveled
different optical paths. Figure depicts the interferom eter and the path of a light beam from a single poi nt on the extended
source S, which is a ground-glass plate that diffuses t he light from a monochromatic lamp of wavelength. Th e beam strikes the
half-silvered mirror M, where half of it is reflected to the side and half passes through the mirror. The r eflected light travels to the
movable plane mirror, where it is reflected back th rough M to the observer. The transmitted half of the original beam is
reflected back by the stationary mirror and then toward the observer by M.
Figure: (a) The Michelson interferometer. The extend ed light source is a ground-glass plate that diffuses the light from a
laser. (b) A planar view of the interferometer.
Because both beams originate from the same point on the source, they are coherent and therefore interfer e. Notice from the figure
that one beam passes through M three times and the ot her only once. To ensure that both beams traverse th e same thickness of
glass, a compensator plate C of transparent glass is pl aced in the arm containing. This plate is a duplica te of M (without the
silvering) and is usually cut from the same piece o f glass used to produce M. With the compensator in plac e, any phase difference
between the two beams is due solely to the difference in t he distances they travel.
The path difference of the two beams when they recomb ine is, where is the distance between M and, and i s the
distance between M and. Suppose this path difference i s an integer number of wavelengths. Then, constructiv e interference
occurs and a bright image of the point on the source is seen at the observer. Now the light from any other po int on the source whose
two beams have this same path difference also undergoe s constructive interference and produces a bright im age. The collection of
these point images is a bright fringe corresponding t o a path difference of (Figure). When is moved a di stance
, this path difference changes by, and each fringe moves to the position previously occupied by an adja cent fringe.
Consequently, by counting the number of fringes m passing a given point as is moved, an observer can measure minute
displacements that are accurate to a fraction of a wavele ngth, as shown by the relationLearning Objectives

10.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76678
Figure: Fringes produced with a Michelson interferomet er. (credit: “SILLAGESvideos”/YouTube)
A red laser light of wavelength 630 nm is used in a Mi chelson interferometer. While keeping the mirror f ixed, mirror is
moved. The fringes are found to move past a fixed cr oss-hair in the viewer. Find the distance the mirror i s moved for a
single fringe to move past the reference line.
Strategy
Refer to Figure for the geometry. We use the result of the Michelson interferometer interference conditio n to find the
distance moved,.
Solution
For a 630-nm red laser light, and for each fringe crossing (), the distance traveled by if you keep fixed is
Significance
An important application of this measurement is the d efinition of the standard meter. As mentioned in Units and Measurement,
the length of the standard meter was once defined as the mirror displacement in a Michelson interferomete r corresponding to
1,650,763.73 wavelengths of the particular fringe of kryp ton-86 in a gas discharge tube.
Measuring the Refractive Index of a Gas
In one arm of a Michelson interferometer, a glass cham ber is placed with attachments for evacuating the in side and putting
gases in it. The space inside the container is 2 cm wi de. Initially, the container is empty. As gas is slowl y let into the chamber,
you observe that dark fringes move past a reference l ine in the field of observation. By the time the cha mber is filled to the
desired pressure, you have counted 122 fringes move p ast the reference line. The wavelength of the light use d is 632.8 nm.
What is the refractive index of this gas?
Example: Precise Distance Measurements by Michelson Interferometer

10.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76678Strategy
The m = 122 fringes observed compose the difference b etween the number of wavelengths that fit within the e mpty chamber
(vacuum) and the number of wavelengths that fit withi n the same chamber when it is gas-filled. The waveleng th in the filled
chamber is shorter by a factor of n, the index of refraction.
Solution
The ray travels a distance t = 2 cm to the right thr ough the glass chamber and another distance t to the left upon reflection. The
total travel is L = 2t. When empty, the number of wavelen gths that fit in this chamber is
where nm is the wavelength in vacuum of the light use d. In any other medium, the wavelength is and the
number of wavelengths that fit in the gas-filled chambe r is
The number of fringes observed in the transition is
Solving for (n−1) gives
and
Significance
The indices of refraction for gases are so close to th at of vacuum, that we normally consider them equal to 1. The difference
between 1 and 1.0019 is so small that measuring it req uires a correspondingly sensitive technique such as interferometry. We
cannot, for example, hope to measure this value using tec hniques based simply on Snell’s law.
Although m, the number of fringes observed, is an integer, whic h is often regarded as having zero uncertainty, in p ractical
terms, it is all too easy to lose track when counting fringes. In Example, if you estimate that you might have missed as
many as five fringes when you reported fringes, (a) i s the value for the index of refraction worked out i n Example
too large or too small? (b) By how much?
Answer
a. too small; b. up to
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine that interference is involved. Identify whether slits, thin films, or
interferometers are considered in the problem.
Step 2. If slits are involved, note that diffraction gratings and double slits pro duce very similar interference patterns, but
that gratings have narrower (sharper) maxima. Single-slit pa tterns are characterized by a large central maximum an d
smaller maxima to the sides.Exercise
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: WAVE OPTICS

10.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76678Step 3. If thin-film interference or an interferometer is involved, take note of the path length difference between the
two rays that interfere. Be certain to use the wavelength in the medium involved, si nce it differs from the wavelength in
vacuum. Note also that there is an additional λ/2λ/2 phase shift when light reflects from a medium with a greater index of
refraction.
Step 4. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unkno wns). A written list is useful.
Draw a diagram of the situation. Labeling the diagram is use ful.
Step 5. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as state d (identify the knowns).
Step 6. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown) a nd enter the knowns. Slits,
gratings, and the Rayleigh limit involve equations.
Step 7. For thin-film interference, you have constructive interference for a total shift that is an integral number of
wavelengths. You have destructive interference for a total shif t of a half-integral number of wavelengths. Always
keep in mind that crest to crest is constructive whereas cr est to trough is destructive.
Step 8. Check to see if the answer is reasonable: Does it make sense? Angles in interference patterns cannot be greater
than 90°, for example.
This page titled 10.12: The Michelson Interferometer is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.6: The Michelson Interferometer by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

10.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667910.A: Interference (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
3.1. and, respectively
3.2. a. 853 nm, 1097 nm;
b. 731 nm, 975 nm
3.3. a. too small;
b. up to
Conceptual Questions
1. No. Two independent light sources do not have coherent ph ase.
3. Because both the sodium lamps are not coherent pai rs of light sources. Two lasers operating independen tly are also not
coherent so no interference pattern results.
5. Monochromatic sources produce fringes at angles acc ording to. With white light, each constituent wavele ngth
will produce fringes at its own set of angles, blendin g into the fringes of adjacent wavelengths. This resu lts in rainbow
patterns.
7. Differing path lengths result in different phases at destination resulting in constructive or destructive interference
accordingly. Reflection can cause a phase change, whi ch also affects how waves interfere. Refraction into an other
medium changes the wavelength inside that medium such that a wave can emerge from the medium with a differ ent phase
compared to another wave that travelled the same distance i n a different medium.
9. Phase changes occur upon reflection at the top of glass cov er and the top of glass slide only.
11. The surface of the ham being moist means there is a t hin layer of fluid, resulting in thin-film interfer ence. Because the
exact thickness of the film varies across the piece of ham, which is illuminated by white light, different wa velengths produce
bright fringes at different locations, resulting in rainbow colors.
13. Other wavelengths will not generally satisfy for the s ame value of t so reflections will result in completely
destructive interference. For an incidence angle, th e path length inside the coating will be increased b y a factor so
the new condition for destructive interference becomes.
15. In one arm, place a transparent chamber to be filled with the gas. See Example 3.6.
Problems
17.
19.
21.
23. 62.5; since m must be an integer, the highest order is then.
25.
27. a.;
b.;
c. 5.76, the highest order is.
29. a. 2.37 cm;
b. 1.78 cm
31. 560 nm

10.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7667933. 1.2 mm
35. a.;
b.
37. 1:9
39. 532 nm (green)
41.
43. 620 nm (orange)
45. 380 nm
47. a. Assuming n for the plane is greater than 1.20, then there are two ph ase changes: 0.833 cm.
b. It is too thick, and the plane would be too heavy.
c. It is unreasonable to think the layer of material could be any thickness when used on a real aircraft.
49.
51.
Additional Problems
53. and
55. a. 4.26 cm;
b. 2.84 cm
57. 6
59. 0.20 m
61. 0.0839 mm
63. a. 9.8, 10.4, 11.7, and 15.7 cm;
b. 3.9 cm
65.
67. 700 nm
69. 189 nm
71. a. green (504 nm);
b. magenta (white minus green)
73. 1.29
75. and
77. 125 nm
79. 413 nm and 689 nm
81.
83. 47
85.
87.

10.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76679Challenge Problems
89. Bright and dark fringes switch places.
91. The path length must be less than one-fourth of the shortest visible wavelength in oil. The thickness of the oil is half the
path length, so it must be less than one-eighth of t he shortest visible wavelength in oil. If we take 380 n m to be the shortest
visible wavelength in air, 33.9 nm.
93.
95. for one phase change: 950 nm (infrared); for three p hase changes: 317 nm (ultraviolet); Therefore, the o il film will appear
black, since the reflected light is not in the visible p art of the spectrum.
This page titled 10.A: Interference (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.A: Interference (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766911.A: Diffraction (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
4.1.; no
4.2.
4.3. From, the interference maximum occurs at for. From Equation 4.1, this is also the angle for the
second diffraction minimum. (Note: Both equations use the index m but they refer to separate phenomena.)
4.4. or 300 lines per millimeter
4.5., 3000 times broader than the Hubble Telescope
4.6. and; Between, orders 1, 2, and 3, are all that exist.
Conceptual Questions
1. The diffraction pattern becomes wider.
3. Walkie-talkies use radio waves whose wavelengths are comparable to the size of the hill and are thus abl e to diffract
around the hill. Visible wavelengths of the flashlight tra vel as rays at this size scale.
5. The diffraction pattern becomes two-dimensional, with main fringes, which are now spots, running in perpendicu lar
directions and fainter spots in intermediate directions.
7. The parameter is the arc angle shown in the phasor d iagram in Figure 4.7. The phase difference between the first
and last Huygens wavelet across the single slit is and is related to the curvature of the arc that forms th e resultant phasor
that determines the light intensity.
9. blue; The shorter wavelength of blue light results in a smaller angle for diffraction limit.
11. No, these distances are three orders of magnitude smal ler than the wavelength of visible light, so visible li ght makes a
poor probe for atoms.
13. UV wavelengths are much larger than lattice spacing in crystals such that there is no diffraction. The Bragg equation
implies a value for sin θ greater than unity, which has no so lution.
15. Image will appear at slightly different location an d/or size when viewed using shorter wavelength but at exactly half
the wavelength, a higher-order interference reconstruct s the original image, different color.
Problems
17. a.;
b. no
19. a.;
b.
21. 750 nm
23. 2.4 mm, 4.7 mm
25. a.;
b.;
c.
27. 1.92 m
29.
31.

1.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669133.
35. 0.200
37. 3
39. 9
41.
43.
45. 707 nm
47. a.;
b.; c. Decreasing the number of lines per centimeter by a factor of x means that the angle for the
x-order maximum is the same as the original angle for the fi rst-order maximum.
49. a. using;
b. using
51. a. 26,300 lines/cm;
b. yes;
c. no
53.
55. 107 m
57. a.;
b. 23.2 m;
c. 590 km
59. a.;
b. 5.81 km;
c. 0.179 mm;
d. can resolve details 0.2 mm apart at arm’s length
61.
63. 6.0 cm
65. 7.71 km
67. 1.0 m
69. 1.2 cm or closer
71. no
73. 0.120 nm
75.
77.
Additional Problems
79. a. 2.2 mm;
b., second-order yellow and third-order violet coincid e
81. 2.2 km

1.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669183. 1.3 cm
85. a. 0.28 mm;
b. 0.28 m;
c. 280 m;
d. 113 km
87. 33 m
89. a. vertically;
b.;
c.;
d. 89 cm;
e. 71 cm
91. 0.98 cm
93.
95. 340 nm
97. a. 0.082 rad and 0.087 rad;
b. 480 nm and 660 nm
99. two orders
101. yes and N/A
103. 600 nm
105. a.;
b.
107. 0.63 m
109. 1
111. for only, no higher orders
113.
115. a. 42.3 nm;
b. This wavelength is not in the visible spectrum.
c. The number of slits in this diffraction grating is too large. Etching in integrated circuits can be do ne to a resolution
of 50 nm, so slit separations of 400 nm are at the lim it of what we can do today. This line spacing is too s mall to
produce diffraction of light.
117. a. 549 km;
b. This is an unreasonably large telescope.
c. Unreasonable to assume diffraction limit for optical tele scopes unless in space due to atmospheric effects.
Challenge Problems
119. a.;
b.
121. 12,800

1.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76691123.
This page titled 1.A: Diffraction (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.A: Diffraction (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668010.E: Interference (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
3.1 Young's Double-Slit Interference
1. Young’s double-slit experiment breaks a single light b eam into two sources. Would the same pattern be obtain ed for two
independent sources of light, such as the headlights of a distant car? Explain.
2. Is it possible to create a experimental setup in which there is only destructive interference? Explain.
3. Why won’t two small sodium lamps, held close together, produce an interference pattern on a distant scree n? What if the
sodium lamps were replaced by two laser pointers held close together?
3.2 Mathematics of Interference
4. Suppose you use the same double slit to perform Young ’s double-slit experiment in air and then repeat th e experiment in
water. Do the angles to the same parts of the interfe rence pattern get larger or smaller? Does the color of the light change?
Explain.
5. Why is monochromatic light used in the double slit exper iment? What would happen if white light were used?
3.4 Interference in Thin Films
6. What effect does increasing the wedge angle have on t he spacing of interference fringes? If the wedge ang le is too large,
fringes are not observed. Why?
7. How is the difference in paths taken by two originally in-phase light waves related to whether they interfer e constructively
or destructively? How can this be affected by reflectio n? By refraction?
8. Is there a phase change in the light reflected from e ither surface of a contact lens floating on a perso n’s tear layer? The
index of refraction of the lens is about 1.5, and its top surface is dry.
9. In placing a sample on a microscope slide, a glass cover is placed over a water drop on the glass slide. Li ght incident from
above can reflect from the top and bottom of the gl ass cover and from the glass slide below the water dro p. At which surfaces
will there be a phase change in the reflected light?
10. Answer the above question if the fluid between the two pieces o f crown glass is carbon disulfide.
11. While contemplating the food value of a slice of ham, you notice a rainbow of color reflected from its mo ist surface.
Explain its origin.
12. An inventor notices that a soap bubble is dark at it s thinnest and realizes that destructive interferenc e is taking place for
all wavelengths. How could she use this knowledge to ma ke a nonreflective coating for lenses that is effecti ve at all
wavelengths? That is, what limits would there be on the index of refraction and thickness of the coating? Ho w might this be
impractical?
13. A nonreflective coating like the one described in E xample 3.3 works ideally for a single wavelength and f or
perpendicular incidence. What happens for other wavelen gths and other incident directions? Be specific.
14. Why is it much more difficult to see interference f ringes for light reflected from a thick piece of gl ass than from a thin
film? Would it be easier if monochromatic light were use d?
3.5 The Michelson Interferometer
15. Describe how a Michelson interferometer can be used to me asure the index of refraction of a gas (including air).
Problems
3.2 Mathematics of Interference
16. At what angle is the first-order maximum for 450-nm wav elength blue light falling on double slits separated by 0.0500
mm?

10.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668017. Calculate the angle for the third-order maximum of 580-nm wavelength yellow light falling on double slit s separated by
0.100 mm.
18. What is the separation between two slits for which 610-nm o range light has its first maximum at an angle of?
19. Find the distance between two slits that produces the firs t minimum for 410-nm violet light at an angle of.
20. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its third minimum at an angle of when falling on double slits separated by
. Explicitly show how you follow the steps from the Proble m-Solving Strategy: Wave Optics, located at the end of the
chapter.
21. What is the wavelength of light falling on double sl its separated by if the third-order maximum is at an angle of
22. At what angle is the fourth-order maximum for the situation i n the preceding problem?
23. What is the highest-order maximum for 400-nm light fall ing on double slits separated by?
24. Find the largest wavelength of light falling on doub le slits separated by for which there is a first-orde r maximum.
Is this in the visible part of the spectrum?
25. What is the smallest separation between two slits that wil l produce a second-order maximum for 720-nm red light?
26. (a) What is the smallest separation between two slits that wi ll produce a second-order maximum for any visible light?
(b) For all visible light?
27. (a) If the first-order maximum for monochromatic li ght falling on a double slit is at an angle of, at what angle is the
second-order maximum?
(b) What is the angle of the first minimum?
(c) What is the highest-order maximum possible here?
28. Shown below is a double slit located a distance x from a screen, with the distance from the center of the screen given by
y. When the distance d between the slits is relatively large, numerous brigh t spots appear, called fringes. Show that, for small
angles (where, with in radians), the distance between fr inges is given by
Picture shows a double slit located a distance x from a screen, with the distance from the center of the s creen
given by y. Distance between the slits is d.
29. Using the result of the preceding problem,
(a) calculate the distance between fringes for 633-n m light falling on double slits separated by 0.0800 mm, located
3.00 m from a screen.
(b) What would be the distance between fringes if the entire apparatus were submersed in water, whose index of
refraction is 1.33?

10.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668030. Using the result of the problem two problems prior, find the wavelength of light that produces fringes 7.50 m m apart on a
screen 2.00 m from double slits separated by 0.120 mm.
31. In a double-slit experiment, the fifth maximum is 2.8 cm from the central maximum on a screen that is 1.5 m away from
the slits. If the slits are 0.15 mm apart, what is the wav elength of the light being used?
32. The source in Young’s experiment emits at two wavelengt hs. On the viewing screen, the fourth maximum for one
wavelength is located at the same spot as the fifth ma ximum for the other wavelength. What is the ratio of the two
wavelengths?
33. If 500-nm and 650-nm light illuminates two slits tha t are separated by 0.50 mm, how far apart are the second -order
maxima for these two wavelengths on a screen 2.0 m away?
34. Red light of wavelength of 700 nm falls on a double slit sepa rated by 400 nm.
(a) At what angle is the first-order maximum in the diffr action pattern?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
3.3 Multiple-Slit Interference
35. Ten narrow slits are equally spaced 0.25 mm apart and illuminated with yellow light of wavelength 580 nm. (a) What are
the angular positions of the third and fourth princi pal maxima? (b) What is the separation of these max ima on a screen 2.0 m
from the slits?
36. The width of bright fringes can be calculated as the se paration between the two adjacent dark fringes on eit her side. Find
the angular widths of the third- and fourth-order brigh t fringes from the preceding problem.
37. For a three-slit interference pattern, find the ratio of the peak intensities of a secondary maximum to a principal
maximum.
38. What is the angular width of the central fringe of the in terference pattern of
(a) 20 slits separated by?
(b) 50 slits with the same separation? Assume that.
3.4 Interference in Thin Films
39. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident perpendicular to its surface. What wav elength and
color of visible light is most constructively reflected, assuming the same index of refraction as water?
40. An oil slick on water is 120 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident perpendicular to its surfac e. What color does
the oil appear (what is the most constructively reflecte d wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?
41. Calculate the minimum thickness of an oil slick on water that appears blue when illuminated by white ligh t perpendicular
to its surface. Take the blue wavelength to be 470 nm and the index of refraction of oil to be 1.40.
42. Find the minimum thickness of a soap bubble that appe ars red when illuminated by white light perpendicular to its
surface. Take the wavelength to be 680 nm, and assume th e same index of refraction as water.
43. A film of soapy water () on top of a plastic cuttin g board has a thickness of 233 nm. What color is most strongly
reflected if it is illuminated perpendicular to its surfa ce?
44. What are the three smallest non-zero thicknesses of soapy water () on Plexiglas if it appears green (const ructively
reflecting 520-nm light) when illuminated perpendicularl y by white light?
45. Suppose you have a lens system that is to be used pri marily for 700-nm red light. What is the second thinne st coating of
fluorite (magnesium fluoride) that would be nonreflecti ve for this wavelength?
46. (a) As a soap bubble thins it becomes dark, because t he path length difference becomes small compared wit h the
wavelength of light and there is a phase shift at th e top surface. If it becomes dark when the path leng th difference is less

10.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76680than one-fourth the wavelength, what is the thickest the bubble can be and appear dark at all visible wave lengths? Assume
the same index of refraction as water.
(b) Discuss the fragility of the film considering the thickn ess found.
47. To save money on making military aircraft invisible t o radar, an inventor decides to coat them with a non reflective
material having an index of refraction of 1.20, which is between that of air and the surface of the plane. This, he reasons,
should be much cheaper than designing Stealth bombers.
(a) What thickness should the coating be to inhibit the reflection of 4.00-cm wavelength radar?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
3.5 The Michelson Interferometer
48. A Michelson interferometer has two equal arms. A merc ury light of wavelength 546 nm is used for the inter ferometer and
stable fringes are found. One of the arms is moved by. How many fringes will cross the observing field?
49. What is the distance moved by the traveling mirror o f a Michelson interferometer that corresponds to 1500 fringes
passing by a point of the observation screen? Assume that the interferometer is illuminated with a 606 nm spectral line of
krypton-86.
50. When the traveling mirror of a Michelson interferom eter is moved, 90 fringes pass by a point on the
observation screen. What is the wavelength of the light used?
51. In a Michelson interferometer, light of wavelength 632.8 nm from a He-Ne laser is used. When one of the mirrors i s
moved by a distance D, 8 fringes move past the field of view. What is the value of the distance D?
52. A chamber 5.0 cm long with flat, parallel windows at the ends is placed in one arm of a Michelson interferomet er (see
below). The light used has a wavelength of 500 nm in a vacuum. While all the air is being pumped out of th e chamber, 29
fringes pass by a point on the observation screen. What is the refractive index of the air?
Picture shows a schematics of a set-up utilized to measu re the refractive index of a gas. The glass chamber wi th
a gas is placed in the Michelson interferometer betwe en the half-silvered mirror M and mirror M1. The spa ce
inside the container is 5 cm wide.
Additional Problems
53. For 600-nm wavelength light and a slit separation of 0.12 mm, what are the angular positions of the first and third
maxima in the double slit interference pattern?
54. If the light source in the preceding problem is cha nged, the angular position of the third maximum is fo und to be.
What is the wavelength of light being used now?
55. Red light () illuminates double slits separated by a d istance. The screen and the slits are 3.00 m
apart.
(a) Find the distance on the screen between the central m aximum and the third maximum.

10.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76680(b) What is the distance between the second and the fou rth maxima?
56. Two sources as in phase and emit waves with. Determine wh ether constructive or destructive interference
occurs at points whose distances from the two sources are
(a) 0.84 and 0.42 m,
(b) 0.21 and 0.42 m,
(c) 1.26 and 0.42 m,
(d) 1.87 and 1.45 m,
(e) 0.63 and 0.84 m and
(f) 1.47 and 1.26 m.
57. Two slits apart are illuminated by light of wavelengt h 600 nm. What is the highest order fringe in the
interference pattern?
58. Suppose that the highest order fringe that can be obse rved is the eighth in a double-slit experiment where 5 50-nm
wavelength light is used. What is the minimum separation of the slits?
59. The interference pattern of a He-Ne laser light () pass ing through two slits 0.031 mm apart is projected on a
screen 10.0 m away. Determine the distance between the adjac ent bright fringes.
60. Young’s double-slit experiment is performed immersed i n water (). The light source is a He-Ne laser,
in vacuum.
(a) What is the wavelength of this light in water?
(b) What is the angle for the third order maximum for t wo slits separated by 0.100 mm.
61. A double-slit experiment is to be set up so that th e bright fringes appear 1.27 cm apart on a screen 2. 13 m away from the
two slits. The light source was wavelength 500 nm. What should be the separation between the two slits?
62. An effect analogous to two-slit interference can occ ur with sound waves, instead of light. In an open fie ld, two speakers
placed 1.30 m apart are powered by a single-function generator producing sine waves at 1200-Hz frequency. A student walks
along a line 12.5 m away and parallel to the line be tween the speakers. She hears an alternating pattern of loud and quiet, due
to constructive and destructive interference. What i s (a) the wavelength of this sound and (b) the dista nce between the central
maximum and the first maximum (loud) position along t his line?
63. A hydrogen gas discharge lamp emits visible light at four wavelengths, 410, 434, 486, and 656 nm. (a) If l ight from
this lamp falls on a N slits separated by 0.025 mm, how far from the central maximum are the third maxima wh en viewed on
a screen 2.0 m from the slits? (b) By what distance are the second and third maxima separated for?
64. Monochromatic light of frequency falls on 10 slits s eparated by 0.020 mm. What is the separation between
the first and third maxima on a screen that is 2.0 m from th e slits?
65. Eight slits equally separated by 0.149 mm is uniformly illuminated by a monochromatic light at. What is the
width of the central principal maximum on a screen 2.35 m away?
66. Eight slits equally separated by 0.149 mm is uniformly illuminated by a monochromatic light at. What is the
intensity of a secondary maxima compared to that of the principal maxima?
67. A transparent film of thickness 250 nm and index of refraction of 1.40 is surrounded by air. What waveleng th in a beam
of white light at near-normal incidence to the film und ergoes destructive interference when reflected?
68. An intensity minimum is found for 450 nm light transmitt ed through a transparent film () in air.
(a) What is minimum thickness of the film?
(b) If this wavelength is the longest for which the in tensity minimum occurs, what are the next three lower values of
for which this happens?

10.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668069. A thin film with is surrounded by air. What is the minimum thickness of this film such that the reflect ion of
normally incident light with is minimized?
70. Repeat your calculation of the previous problem with the thin film placed on a flat glass () surface.
71. After a minor oil spill, a think film of oil () of th ickness 450 nm floats on the water surface in a bay. (a) What
predominant color is seen by a bird flying overhead? (b) What predominant color is seen by a seal swimming unde rwater?
72. A microscope slide 10 cm long is separated from a gla ss plate at one end by a sheet of paper. As shown below, the other
end of the slide is in contact with the plate. he sli de is illuminated from above by light from a sodium lamp (), and
14 fringes per centimeter are seen along the slide. What is the thickness of the piece of paper? Picture shows a microscope
slide that touches the glass plate at one end and is separated from it at another end by a sheet of paper.
73. Suppose that the setup of the preceding problem is imm ersed in an unknown liquid. If 18 fringes per centim eter are now
seen along the slide, what is the index of refraction of t he liquid?
74. A thin wedge filled with air is produced when two flat glass plates are placed on top of one another and a slip of paper is
inserted between them at one edge. Interference fring es are observed when monochromatic light falling vert ically on the
plates are seen in reflection. Is the first fringe ne ar the edge where the plates are in contact a bright fringe or a dark fringe?
Explain.
75. Two identical pieces of rectangular plate glass are u sed to measure the thickness of a hair. The glass plat es are in direct
contact at one edge and a single hair is placed bet ween them hear the opposite edge. When illuminated wit h a sodium lamp (
), the hair is seen between the 180th and 181st dark fringes. What are the lower and upper limits on the ha ir’s
diameter?
76. Two microscope slides made of glass are illuminated b y monochromatic () light incident perpendicularly. The
top slide touches the bottom slide at one end and r ests on a thin copper wire at the other end, forming a wedge of air. The
diameter of the copper wire is 29.45μm. How many bright fringes are seen across these slides?
77. A good quality camera “lens” is actually a system of lenses, rather than a single lens, but a side effect is that a reflection
from the surface of one lens can bounce around many t imes within the system, creating artifacts in the photo graph. To
counteract this problem, one of the lenses in such a sy stem is coated with a thin layer of material () on o ne side. The
index of refraction of the lens glass is 1.68. What is the smallest thickness of the coating that reduces th e reflection at 640 nm
by destructive interference? (In other words, the coatin g’s effect is to be optimized for.)
78. Constructive interference is observed from directly above an oil slick for wavelengths (in air) 440 nm a nd 616 nm. The
index of refraction of this oil is. What is the film’s minimum possible thickness?
79. A soap bubble is blown outdoors. What colors (indic ate by wavelengths) of the reflected sunlight are se en enhanced? The
soap bubble has index of refraction 1.36 and thickness 380 nm.
80. A Michelson interferometer with a He-Ne laser light sou rce () projects its interference pattern on a screen. I f
the movable mirror is caused to move by, how many fr inges will be observed shifting through a reference p oint on a
screen?
81. An experimenter detects 251 fringes when the movable mirror in a Michelson interferometer is displaced. Th e light
source used is a sodium lamp, wavelength 589 nm. By what distan ce did the movable mirror move?
82. A Michelson interferometer is used to measure the wavel ength of light put through it. When the movable mirr or is moved
by exactly 0.100 mm, the number of fringes observed movi ng through is 316. What is the wavelength of the light?

10.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668083. A 5.08-cm-long rectangular glass chamber is inserte d into one arm of a Michelson interferometer using a 633-nm light
source. This chamber is initially filled with air () a t standard atmospheric pressure but the air is grad ually
pumped out using a vacuum pump until a near perfect vacuum is achieved. How many fringes are observed movin g by
during the transition?
84. Into one arm of a Michelson interferometer, a plastic sheet of thickness is inserted, which causes a shift i n the
interference pattern by 86 fringes. The light source has wavelength of 610 nm in air. What is the index of refraction of this
plastic?
85. The thickness of an aluminum foil is measured using a Michelson interferometer that has its movable mir ror mounted on
a micrometer. There is a difference of 27 fringes in t he observed interference pattern when the micrometer clamps down on
the foil compared to when the micrometer is empty. Calcu late the thickness of the foil?
86. The movable mirror of a Michelson interferometer is a ttached to one end of a thin metal rod of length 23.3 mm. The
other end of the rod is anchored so it does not move. As the temperature of the rod changes from to, a change of 14
fringes is observed. The light source is a He Ne laser,. What is the change in length of the metal bar, and what is
its thermal expansion coefficient?
87. In a thermally stabilized lab, a Michelson interferome ter is used to monitor the temperature to ensure it st ays constant.
The movable mirror is mounted on the end of a 1.00- m-long aluminum rod, held fixed at the other end. Th e light source is a
He Ne laser,. The resolution of this apparatus corres ponds to the temperature difference when a change of just
one fringe is observed. What is this temperature differenc e?
88. A 65-fringe shift results in a Michelson interferom eter when a film made of an unknown material is plac ed in
one arm. The light source has wavelength 632.9 nm. Identify the material using the indices of refraction found in Tabl e 1.1.
Challenge Problems
89. Determine what happens to the double-slit interferen ce pattern if one of the slits is covered with a thi n, transparent film
whose thickness is λ/[2(n−1)]λ/[2(n−1)], where λλ is the wavelength of the incident light and n is the index o f refraction of
the film.
90. Fifty-one narrow slits are equally spaced and separate d by 0.10 mm. The slits are illuminated by blue light of wavelength
400 nm. What is angular position of the twenty-fifth s econdary maximum? What is its peak intensity in com parison with that
of the primary maximum?
91. A film of oil on water will appear dark when it is ver y thin, because the path length difference becomes s mall compared
with the wavelength of light and there is a phase shift at the top surface. If it becomes dark when the path l ength difference is
less than one-fourth the wavelength, what is the thicke st the oil can be and appear dark at all visible wav elengths? Oil has an
index of refraction of 1.40.
92. Figure 3.14 shows two glass slides illuminated by monoch romatic light incident perpendicularly. The top slid e touches
the bottom slide at one end and rests on a 0.100-mm- diameter hair at the other end, forming a wedge of ai r. (a) How far apart
are the dark bands, if the slides are 7.50 cm long and 589-nm light is used? (b) Is there any difference i f the slides are made
from crown or flint glass? Explain.
93. Figure 3.14 shows two 7.50-cm-long glass slides illumina ted by pure 589-nm wavelength light incident perpend icularly.
The top slide touches the bottom slide at one end and rests on some debris at the other end, forming a wedge of air. How
thick is the debris, if the dark bands are 1.00 mm apart?
94. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident at a angle to its surface. What wave length and
color of visible light is most constructively reflected, assuming the same index of refraction as water?
95. An oil slick on water is 120 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident at a angle to its surface. Wh at color does
the oil appear (what is the most constructively reflecte d wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?
This page titled 10.E: Interference (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766803.E: Interference (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766921.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
4.1 Single-Slit Diffraction
1. As the width of the slit producing a single-slit diffr action pattern is reduced, how will the diffraction p attern produced
change?
2. Compare interference and diffraction.
3. If you and a friend are on opposite sides of a hill, you can communicate with walkie-talkies but not with fl ashlights.
Explain.
4. What happens to the diffraction pattern of a single slit wh en the entire optical apparatus is immersed in water?
5. In our study of diffraction by a single slit, we assume that the length of the slit is much larger than the width. What
happens to the diffraction pattern if these two dimensions were comparable?
6. A rectangular slit is twice as wide as it is high. Is t he central diffraction peak wider in the vertical di rection or in the
horizontal direction?
4.2 Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
7. In Equation 4.4, the parameter ββ looks like an ang le but is not an angle that you can measure with a p rotractor in the
physical world. Explain what ββ represents.
4.3 Double-Slit Diffraction
8. Shown below is the central part of the interference p attern for a pure wavelength of red light projected onto a double slit.
The pattern is actually a combination of single- and double-slit interference. Note that the bright spots are evenly spaced. Is
this a double- or single-slit characteristic? Note th at some of the bright spots are dim on either side of the center. Is this a
single- or double-slit characteristic? Which is smal ler, the slit width or the separation between slits? Exp lain your responses.
Figure is an image showing red interference pattern on a black background. The central part has brighter l ines. The lines are
cut off at the top and bottom, seemingly enclosed between t wo sinusoidal waves of opposite phase.
4.5 Circular Apertures and Resolution
9. Is higher resolution obtained in a microscope with red o r blue light? Explain your answer.
10. The resolving power of refracting telescope increases with the size of its objective lens. What other advant age is gained
with a larger lens?
11. The distance between atoms in a molecule is about. Can visibl e light be used to “see” molecules?
12. A beam of light always spreads out. Why can a beam n ot be created with parallel rays to prevent spreadin g? Why can
lenses, mirrors, or apertures not be used to correct the sprea ding?
4.6 X-Ray Diffraction
13. Crystal lattices can be examined with X-rays but not UV. Why?
4.7 Holography
14. How can you tell that a hologram is a true three-dimensional image and that those in three-dimensional movies are not?

1.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669215. If a hologram is recorded using monochromatic ligh t at one wavelength but its image is viewed at anothe r wavelength,
say shorter, what will you see? What if it is viewed using light of exactly half the original wavelength?
16. What image will one see if a hologram is recorded usin g monochromatic light but its image is viewed in whit e light?
Explain.
Problems
4.1 Single-Slit Diffraction
17. (a) At what angle is the first minimum for 550-nm light f alling on a single slit of width?
(b) Will there be a second minimum?
18. (a) Calculate the angle at which a -wide slit produces its fir st minimum for 410-nm violet light.
(b) Where is the first minimum for 700-nm red light?
19. (a) How wide is a single slit that produces its first mini mum for 633-nm light at an angle of?
(b) At what angle will the second minimum be?
20. (a) What is the width of a single slit that produces its f irst minimum at for 600-nm light?
(b) Find the wavelength of light that has its first minim um at.
21. Find the wavelength of light that has its third minimu m at an angle of when it falls on a single slit of width.
22. (a) Sodium vapor light averaging 589 nm in wavelengt h falls on a single slit of width. At what angle does it
produces its second minimum?
(b) What is the highest-order minimum produced?
23. Consider a single-slit diffraction pattern for, pr ojected on a screen that is 1.00 m from a slit of widt h 0.25 mm.
How far from the center of the pattern are the centers of th e first and second dark fringes?
24. (a) Find the angle between the first minima for the t wo sodium vapor lines, which have wavelengths of 589.1 a nd 589.6
nm, when they fall upon a single slit of width.
(b) What is the distance between these minima if the diffra ction pattern falls on a screen 1.00 m from the slit?
(c) Discuss the ease or difficulty of measuring such a distanc e.
25. (a) What is the minimum width of a single slit (in multi ples of) that will produce a first minimum for a wavelengt h?
(b) What is its minimum width if it produces 50 minima?
(c) 1000 minima?
26. (a) If a single slit produces a first minimum at, at wha t angle is the second-order minimum?
(b) What is the angle of the third-order minimum?
(c) Is there a fourth-order minimum?
(d) Use your answers to illustrate how the angular width of the central maximum is about twice the angular wi dth of
the next maximum (which is the angle between the first an d second minima).
27. If the separation between the first and the second mi nima of a single-slit diffraction pattern is 6.0 mm, wh at is the
distance between the screen and the slit? The light wavelengt h is 500 nm and the slit width is 0.16 mm.
28. A water break at the entrance to a harbor consists o f a rock barrier with a 50.0-m-wide opening. Ocean waves of 20.0-m
wavelength approach the opening straight on. At what a ngles to the incident direction are the boats inside the harbor most
protected against wave action?
29. An aircraft maintenance technician walks past a tall hangar door that acts like a single slit for sound en tering the hangar.
Outside the door, on a line perpendicular to the ope ning in the door, a jet engine makes a 600-Hz sound. At what angle with

1.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692the door will the technician observe the first minim um in sound intensity if the vertical opening is 0.800 m wide and the
speed of sound is 340 m/s?
4.2 Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
30. A single slit of width is illuminated by a sodium ye llow light of wavelength 589 nm. Find the intensity at a
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
31. A single slit of width 0.1 mm is illuminated by a m ercury light of wavelength 576 nm. Find the intensity at a 10°10°
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
32. The width of the central peak in a single-slit diffrac tion pattern is 5.0 mm. The wavelength of the light is 600 nm, and the
screen is 2.0 m from the slit. (a) What is the width of the slit? (b) Determine the ratio of the intensity at 4.5 mm from the
center of the pattern to the intensity at the center.
33. Consider the single-slit diffraction pattern for, and. Find the intensity in terms of at
, and.
4.3 Double-Slit Diffraction
34. Two slits of width, each in an opaque material, are separated by a center-to-center distance of. A
monochromatic light of wavelength 450 nm is incident on the double-slit. One finds a combined interference and diffraction
pattern on the screen.
(a) How many peaks of the interference will be observed in th e central maximum of the diffraction pattern?
(b) How many peaks of the interference will be observe d if the slit width is doubled while keeping the dist ance
between the slits same?
(c) How many peaks of interference will be observed if the slits are separated by twice the distance, that i s,,
while keeping the widths of the slits same?
(d) What will happen in (a) if instead of 450-nm ligh t another light of wavelength 680 nm is used?
(e) What is the value of the ratio of the intensity of the central peak to the intensity of the next bright peak in (a)?
(f) Does this ratio depend on the wavelength of the light?
(g) Does this ratio depend on the width or separation of the slits?
35. A double slit produces a diffraction pattern that is a combination of single- and double-slit interferen ce. Find the ratio of
the width of the slits to the separation between them, if the first minimum of the single-slit pattern fa lls on the fifth maximum
of the double-slit pattern. (This will greatly reduce the in tensity of the fifth maximum.)
36. For a double-slit configuration where the slit separati on is four times the slit width, how many interference fringes lie in
the central peak of the diffraction pattern?
37. Light of wavelength 500 nm falls normally on 50 slit s that are wide and spaced apart. How
many interference fringes lie in the central peak of th e diffraction pattern?
38. A monochromatic light of wavelength 589 nm incident on a double slit with slit width and unknown separati on
results in a diffraction pattern containing nine interfer ence peaks inside the central maximum. Find the separat ion of the slits.
39. When a monochromatic light of wavelength 430 nm inci dent on a double slit of slit separation, there ar e 11
interference fringes in its central maximum. How many interference fringes will be in the central maximum of a light of the
same wavelength and slit widths, but a new slit separation of?
40. Determine the intensities of two interference peaks ot her than the central peak in the central maximum of the diffraction,
if possible, when a light of wavelength 628 nm is inci dent on a double slit of width 500 nm and separation 1500 nm. Use the
intensity of the central spot to be.

1.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766924.4 Diffraction Gratings
41. A diffraction grating has 2000 lines per centimeter. At what angle will the first-order maximum be for 520 -nmwavelength green light?
42. Find the angle for the third-order maximum for 580-n m-wavelength yellow light falling on a difraction gra ting having
1500 lines per centimeter.
43. How many lines per centimeter are there on a diffract ion grating that gives a first-order maximum for 470 -nm blue light
at an angle of?
44. What is the distance between lines on a diffraction g rating that produces a second-order maximum for 760-n m red light at
an angle of?
45. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its seco nd-order maximum at when falling on a diffraction g rating that
has 5000 lines per centimeter.
46. An electric current through hydrogen gas produces se veral distinct wavelengths of visible light. What are the
wavelengths of the hydrogen spectrum, if they form fi rst-order maxima at angles and when projected
on a diffraction grating having 10,000 lines per centi meter?
47. (a) What do the four angles in the preceding problem becom e if a 5000-line per centimeter diffraction grating is used?
(b) Using this grating, what would the angles be for the sec ond-order maxima?
(c) Discuss the relationship between integral reducti ons in lines per centimeter and the new angles of va rious order
maxima.
48. What is the spacing between structures in a feather tha t acts as a reflection grating, giving that they pro duce a first-order
maximum for 525-nm light at a angle?
49. An opal such as that shown in Figure 4.15 acts like a r eflection grating with rows separated by about If th e opal is
illuminated normally,
(a) at what angle will red light be seen and
(b) at what angle will blue light be seen?
50. At what angle does a diffraction grating produce a s econd-order maximum for light having a first-order m aximum at
51. (a) Find the maximum number of lines per centimeter a diffraction grating can have and produce a maximu m for the
smallest wavelength of visible light.
(b) Would such a grating be useful for ultraviolet spectra?
(c) For infrared spectra?
52. (a) Show that a 30,000 line per centimeter grating will n ot produce a maximum for visible light.
(b) What is the longest wavelength for which it does produ ce a first-order maximum?
(c) What is the greatest number of line per centimet er a diffraction grating can have and produce a com plete secondorder spectrum for visible light?
53. The analysis shown below also applies to diffraction g ratings with lines separated by a distance d. What is the distance
between fringes produced by a diffraction grating ha ving 125 lines per centimeter for 600-nm light, if t he screen is 1.50 m
away? (Hint: The distance between adjacent fringes is, assuming th e slit separation d is comparable to.)

1.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692
4.5 Circular Apertures and Resolution
54. The 305-m-diameter Arecibo radio telescope pictured in Figure 4.20 detects radio waves with a 4.00-cm ave rage
wavelength.
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable point so urces for this telescope?
(b) How close together could these point sources be at the 2 million light-year distance of the Andromeda Galaxy?
55. Assuming the angular resolution found for the Hubble Telescope in Example 4.6, what is the smallest detail that could be
observed on the moon?
56. Diffraction spreading for a flashlight is insignifica nt compared with other limitations in its optics, such as spherical
aberrations in its mirror. To show this, calculate the minimum angular spreading of a flashlight beam tha t is originally 5.00
cm in diameter with an average wavelength of 600 nm.
57. (a) What is the minimum angular spread of a 633-nm wavelength He-Ne laser beam that is originally 1.00 mm in
diameter? (b) If this laser is aimed at a mountain c liff 15.0 km away, how big will the illuminated spot b e? (c) How big a spot
would be illuminated on the moon, neglecting atmosph eric effects? (This might be done to hit a corner r eflector to measure
the round-trip time and, hence, distance.)
58. A telescope can be used to enlarge the diameter of a laser beam and limit diffraction spreading. The laser beam is sent
through the telescope in opposite the normal directi on and can then be projected onto a satellite or th e moon. (a) If this is
done with the Mount Wilson telescope, producing a 2.54-m- diameter beam of 633-nm light, what is the minimum an gular
spread of the beam? (b) Neglecting atmospheric effect s, what is the size of the spot this beam would make on the moon,
assuming a lunar distance of.?
59. The limit to the eye’s acuity is actually related to diffra ction by the pupil.
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable poin ts of light for a 3.00-mm-diameter pupil, assuming an average
wavelength of 550 nm?
(b) Take your result to be the practical limit for the eye. What is the greatest possible distance a car can be from you if
you can resolve its two headlights, given they are 1.30 m a part?
(c) What is the distance between two just-resolvable point s held at an arm’s length (0.800 m) from your eye?
(d) How does your answer to (c) compare to details you normally observe in everyday circumstances?
60. What is the minimum diameter mirror on a telescope that would allow you to see details as small as 5.00 km on the moon
some 384,000 km away? Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm f or the light received.
61. Find the radius of a star’s image on the retina of a n eye if its pupil is open to 0.65 cm and the distan ce from the pupil to
the retina is 2.8 cm. Assume.
62. (a) The dwarf planet Pluto and its moon, Charon, are separated by 19,600 km. Neglecting atmospheric effects, should the
5.08-m-diameter Palomar Mountain telescope be able t o resolve these bodies when they are from Earth?

1.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm.
(b) In actuality, it is just barely possible to discer n that Pluto and Charon are separate bodies using a gr ound-based
telescope. What are the reasons for this?
63. A spy satellite orbits Earth at a height of 180 km. What is the minimum diameter of the objective lens i n a telescope that
must be used to resolve columns of troops marching 2.0 m apart? Assume λ=550nm.λ=550nm.
64. What is the minimum angular separation of two stars th at are just-resolvable by the 8.1-m Gemini South tele scope, if
atmospheric effects do not limit resolution? Use 550 nm f or the wavelength of the light from the stars.
65. The headlights of a car are 1.3 m apart. What is the maximum distance at which the eye can resolve these two headlights?
Take the pupil diameter to be 0.40 cm.
66. When dots are placed on a page from a laser printe r, they must be close enough so that you do not see t he individual dots
of ink. To do this, the separation of the dots must b e less than Raleigh’s criterion. Take the pupil of th e eye to be 3.0 mm and
the distance from the paper to the eye of 35 cm; fi nd the minimum separation of two dots such that they cannot be resolved.
How many dots per inch (dpi) does this correspond to?
67. Suppose you are looking down at a highway from a jetlin er flying at an altitude of 6.0 km. How far apart must two cars
be if you are able to distinguish them? Assume that and that the diameter of your pupils is 4.0 mm.
68. Can an astronaut orbiting Earth in a satellite at a distance of 180 km from the surface distinguish two s kyscrapers that are
20 m apart? Assume that the pupils of the astronaut’s eyes have a diameter of 5.0 mm and that most of the light is centered
around 500 nm.
69. The characters of a stadium scoreboard are formed wi th closely spaced lightbulbs that radiate primarily ye llow light. (Use
.) How closely must the bulbs be spaced so that an observ er 80 m away sees a display of continuous lines rath er
than the individual bulbs? Assume that the pupil of the observer’s eye has a diameter of 5.0 mm.
70. If a microscope can accept light from objects at an gles as large as, what is the smallest structure that can be
resolved when illuminated with light of wavelength 500 nm and
(a) the specimen is in air?
(b) When the specimen is immersed in oil, with index of ref raction of 1.52?
71. A camera uses a lens with aperture 2.0 cm. What is th e angular resolution of a photograph taken at 700 n m wavelength?
Can it resolve the millimeter markings of a ruler place d 35 m away?
4.6 X-Ray Diffraction
72. X-rays of wavelength 0.103 nm reflects off a crystal and a second-order maximum is recorded at a Bragg a ngle of.
What is the spacing between the scattering planes in this crystal?
73. A first-order Bragg reflection maximum is observed when a monochromatic X-ray falls on a crystal at a an gle to a
reflecting plane. What is the wavelength of this X-ray?
74. An X-ray scattering experiment is performed on a cry stal whose atoms form planes separated by 0.440 nm. Usin g an Xray source of wavelength 0.548 nm, what is the angle (wi th respect to the planes in question) at which the ex perimenter
needs to illuminate the crystal in order to observe a fir st-order maximum?
75. The structure of the NaCl crystal forms reflecting pl anes 0.541 nm apart. What is the smallest angle, meas ured from these
planes, at which X-ray diffraction can be observed, if X-rays o f wavelength 0.085 nm are used?
76. On a certain crystal, a first-order X-ray diffraction maximum is observed at an angle of relative to its surface, using
an X-ray source of unknown wavelength. Additionally, when illuminated with a different, this time of known wavele ngth
0.137 nm, a second-order maximum is detected at. Det ermine (a) the spacing between the reflecting planes, and (b) the
unknown wavelength.
77. Calcite crystals contain scattering planes separated by 0.30 nm. What is the angular separation between first and secondorder diffraction maxima when X-rays of 0.130 nm wavelengt h are used?

1.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669278. The first-order Bragg angle for a certain crystal is. Wh at is the second-order angle?
Additional Problems
79. White light falls on two narrow slits separated by 0.4 0 mm. The interference pattern is observed on a scre en 3.0 m away.
(a) What is the separation between the first maxima for red light () and violet light ()? (b) At what poi nt
nearest the central maximum will a maximum for yello w light () coincide with a maximum for violet light?
Identify the order for each maximum.
80. Microwaves of wavelength 10.0 mm fall normally on a metal p late that contains a slit 25 mm wide.
(a) Where are the first minima of the diffraction pattern?
(b) Would there be minima if the wavelength were 30.0 m m?
81. Quasars, or quasi-stellar radio sources, are astronomical objects discovered in 1960. They are distant but strong
emitters of radio waves with angular size so small, t hey were originally unresolved, the same as stars. The quasar 3C405 is
actually two discrete radio sources that subtend an ang le of 82 arcsec. If this object is studied using radio emissions at a
frequency of 410 MHz, what is the minimum diameter of a rad io telescope that can resolve the two sources?
82. Two slits each of width 1800 nm and separated by the c enter-to-center distance of 1200 nm are illuminated by plane
waves from a krypton ion laser-emitting at wavelength 461.9 nm. Find the number of interference peaks in th e central
diffraction peak.
83. A microwave of an unknown wavelength is incident on a single slit of width 6 cm. The angular width of the ce ntral peak
is found to be. Find the wavelength.
84. Red light (wavelength 632.8 nm in air) from a Helium-Ne on laser is incident on a single slit of width 0.05 m m. The
entire apparatus is immersed in water of refractive inde x 1.333. Determine the angular width of the central peak.
85. A light ray of wavelength 461.9 nm emerges from a 2-m m circular aperture of a krypton ion laser. Due to di ffraction, the
beam expands as it moves out. How large is the central brigh t spot at
(a) 1 m,
(b) 1 km,
(c) 1000 km, and
(d) at the surface of the moon at a distance of 400,000 km fro m Earth.
86. How far apart must two objects be on the moon to be dis tinguishable by eye if only the diffraction effects of the eye’s
pupil limit the resolution? Assume 550 nm for the wav elength of light, the pupil diameter 5.0 mm, and 400, 000 km for the
distance to the moon.
87. How far apart must two objects be on the moon to be re solvable by the 8.1-m-diameter Gemini North telescope at Mauna
Kea, Hawaii, if only the diffraction effects of the teles cope aperture limit the resolution? Assume 550 nm for the wavelength
of light and 400,000 km for the distance to the moon.
88. A spy satellite is reputed to be able to resolve obj ects 10. cm apart while operating 197 km above the s urface of Earth.
What is the diameter of the aperture of the telesco pe if the resolution is only limited by the diffract ion effects? Use 550 nm
for light.
89. Monochromatic light of wavelength 530 nm passes through a horizontal single slit of width in an opaque plat e. A
screen of dimensions is 1.2 m away from the slit.
(a) Which way is the diffraction pattern spread out on the screen?
(b) What are the angles of the minima with respect to the center?
(c) What are the angles of the maxima?
(d) How wide is the central bright fringe on the screen?

1.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692(e) How wide is the next bright fringe on the screen?
90. A monochromatic light of unknown wavelength is incid ent on a slit of width. A diffraction pattern is seen at a
screen 2.5 m away where the central maximum is spread over a distance of 10.0 cm. Find the wavelength.
91. A source of light having two wavelengths 550 nm and 600 nm of equal intensity is incident on a slit of width. Find
the separation of the bright spots of the two wavelengths on a screen 30.0 cm away.
92. A single slit of width 2100 nm is illuminated normall y by a wave of wavelength 632.8 nm. Find the phase diffe rence
between waves from the top and one third from the bot tom of the slit to a point on a screen at a horizont al distance of 2.0 m
and vertical distance of 10.0 cm from the center.
93. A single slit of width is illuminated by a sodium ye llow light of wavelength 589 nm. Find the intensity at a
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
94. A single slit of width 0.10 mm is illuminated by a merc ury lamp of wavelength 576 nm. Find the intensity at a angle
to the axis in terms of the intensity of the central maximum.
95. A diffraction grating produces a second maximum that is 89.7 cm from the central maximum on a screen 2.0 m away. If
the grating has 600 lines per centimeter, what is the wavele ngth of the light that produces the diffraction pattern?
96. A grating with 4000 lines per centimeter is used to diffract light that contains all wavelengths between 400 and 650 nm.
How wide is the first-order spectrum on a screen 3.0 m from the gra ting?
97. A diffraction grating with 2000 lines per centimete r is used to measure the wavelengths emitted by a hyd rogen gas
discharge tube. (a) At what angles will you find the max ima of the two first-order blue lines of wavelengths 4 10 and 434 nm?
(b) The maxima of two other first-order lines are fou nd at rad and rad. What are the wavelengths of these
lines?
98. For white light () falling normally on a diffraction grating, show that the second and third-order
spectra overlap no matter what the grating constant d is.
99. How many complete orders of the visible spectrum () ca n be produced with a diffraction grating that
contains 5000 lines per centimeter?
100. Two lamps producing light of wavelength 589 nm are f ixed 1.0 m apart on a wooden plank. What is the maxim um
distance an observer can be and still resolve the la mps as two separate sources of light, if the resolution is affected solely by
the diffraction of light entering the eye? Assume light enters the eye through a pupil of diameter 4.5 mm.
101. On a bright clear day, you are at the top of a mount ain and looking at a city 12 km away. There are two ta ll towers 20.0
m apart in the city. Can your eye resolve the two towe rs if the diameter of the pupil is 4.0 mm? If not, wh at should be the
minimum magnification power of the telescope needed to resolve the two towers? In your calculations use 55 0 nm for the
wavelength of the light.
102. Radio telescopes are telescopes used for the detecti on of radio emission from space. Because radio waves ha ve much
longer wavelengths than visible light, the diameter of a radio telescope must be very large to provide goo d resolution. For
example, the radio telescope in Penticton, BC in Can ada, has a diameter of 26 m and can be operated at f requencies as high
as 6.6 GHz.
(a) What is the wavelength corresponding to this freque ncy?
(b) What is the angular separation of two radio sources that can be resolved by this telescope?
(c) Compare the telescope’s resolution with the angular size of the moon.

1.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692
Figure:4.30 (credit: Jason Nishiyama)
103. Calculate the wavelength of light that produces its first minimum at an angle of when falling on a single slit of
width.
104. (a) Find the angle of the third diffraction minimum for 633-nm light falling on a slit of width.
(b) What slit width would place this minimum at?
105. As an example of diffraction by apertures of everyday d imensions, consider a doorway of width 1.0 m.
(a) What is the angular position of the first minimum in th e diffraction pattern of 600-nm light?
(b) Repeat this calculation for a musical note of fre quency 440 Hz (A above middle C). Take the speed of s ound to be
343 m/s.
106. What are the angular positions of the first and sec ond minima in a diffraction pattern produced by a sl it of width 0.20
mm that is illuminated by 400 nm light? What is the angu lar width of the central peak?
107. How far would you place a screen from the slit of the previous problem so that the second minimum is a di stance of 2.5
mm from the center of the diffraction pattern?
108. How narrow is a slit that produces a diffraction patte rn on a screen 1.8 m away whose central peak is 1.0 m wide?
Assume.
109. Suppose that the central peak of a single-slit diffra ction pattern is so wide that the first minima can b e assumed to occur
at angular positions of ±90°±90°. For this case, what is the rat io of the slit width to the wavelength of the light?
110. The central diffraction peak of the double-slit in terference pattern contains exactly nine fringes. Wha t is the ratio of the
slit separation to the slit width?
111. Determine the intensities of three interference pea ks other than the central peak in the central maximu m of the
diffraction, if possible, when a light of wavelength 50 0 nm is incident normally on a double slit of width 1 000 nm and
separation 1500 nm. Use the intensity of the central spot to be.
112. The yellow light from a sodium vapor lamp seems to be of pure wavelength, but it produces two first-order m axima at
and when projected on a 10,000 line per centimeter diffraction grating. What are the two wavelengths to an
accuracy of 0.1 nm?

1.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692113. Structures on a bird feather act like a reflection g rating having 8000 lines per centimeter. What is the angle of the firstorder maximum for 600-nm light?
114. If a diffraction grating produces a first-order maxi mum for the shortest wavelength of visible light at, at what angle
will the first-order maximum be for the largest wavelength of visible light?
115. (a) What visible wavelength has its fourth-order maxi mum at an angle of when projected on a 25,000-line per
centimeter diffraction grating?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
116. Consider a spectrometer based on a diffraction grati ng. Construct a problem in which you calculate the d istance between
two wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation in your spectrometer. Among the things to be considered are t he wavelengths
you wish to be able to distinguish, the number of lin es per meter on the diffraction grating, and the di stance from the grating
to the screen or detector. Discuss the practicality of the device in terms of being able to discern between wavelengths of
interest.
117. An amateur astronomer wants to build a telescope with a diffraction limit that will allow him to see if th ere are people
on the moons of Jupiter.
(a) What diameter mirror is needed to be able to see 1.00-m detail on a Jovian moon at a distance of fro m
Earth? The wavelength of light averages 600 nm.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
Challenge Problems
118. Blue light of wavelength 450 nm falls on a slit of width 0.25 mm. A converging lens of focal length 20 cm is placed
behind the slit and focuses the diffraction pattern on a screen.
(a) How far is the screen from the lens?
(b) What is the distance between the first and the third minima of the diffraction pattern?
119. (a) Assume that the maxima are halfway between the mi nima of a single-slit diffraction pattern. The use t he diameter
and circumference of the phasor diagram, as describe d in Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction, to determine the intensities of
the third and fourth maxima in terms of the intensit y of the central maximum.
(b) Do the same calculation, using Equation 4.4.
120. (a) By differentiating Equation 4.4, show that the h igher-order maxima of the single-slit diffraction pa ttern occur at
values of that satisfy.
(b) Plot and versus and find the intersections of these two curves. What information do they give you
about the locations of the maxima?
(c) Convince yourself that these points do not appear exactly at, where but are quite close
to these values.
121. What is the maximum number of lines per centimeter a diffraction grating can have and produce a compl ete first-order
spectrum for visible light?
122. Show that a diffraction grating cannot produce a secon d-order maximum for a given wavelength of light unle ss the firstorder maximum is at an angle less than.
123. A He-Ne laser beam is reflected from the surface of a CD onto a wall. The brightest spot is the reflected b eam at an
angle equal to the angle of incidence. However, fringe s are also observed. If the wall is 1.50 m from the C D, and the first
fringe is 0.600 m from the central maximum, what is the spa cing of grooves on the CD?

1.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76692124. Objects viewed through a microscope are placed very c lose to the focal point of the objective lens. Show that th e
minimum separation x of two objects resolvable through the microscope is given by
where is the focal length and D is the diameter of the objective lens as shown below.
This page titled 1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.E: Diffraction (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7668110.S: Interference (Summary)
Key Terms
coherent waves waves are in phase or have a definite ph ase relationship
fringes bright and dark patterns of interference
incoherent waves have random phase relationships
interferometer instrument that uses interference of waves to make measu rements
monochromatic light composed of one wavelength only
Newton’s ringscircular interference pattern created by interferen ce between the
light reflected off two surfaces as a result of a slight gap between
them
orderinteger m used in the equations for constructive and d estructive
interference for a double slit
principal maximum brightest interference fringes seen with multiple slits
secondary maximumbright interference fringes of intensity lower than th e principal
maxima
thin-film interferenceinterference between light reflected from different surfaces of a
thin film
Key Equations
Constructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Destructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Path length difference for waves from two slits to a co mmon point
on a screen
Constructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Destructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Distance from central maximum to the m-th bright fringe
Displacement measured by a Michelson interferometer
Summary
3.1: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 10.S: Interference (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.S: Interference (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/766931.S: Diffraction (Summary)
Key Terms
Bragg planesfamilies of planes within crystals that can give rise to X-ray
diffraction
destructive interference for a single slitoccurs when the width of the slit is comparable to the wavelength
of light illuminating it
diffraction bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle
diffraction grating large number of evenly spaced parallel slits
diffraction limit fundamental limit to resolution due to diffraction
hologramthree-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers; th e word
hologram means entire picture (from the Greek word ho lo, as in
holistic)
holography process of producing holograms with the use of lasers
missing orderinterference maximum that is not seen because it coinc ides with a
diffraction minimum
Rayleigh criteriontwo images are just-resolvable when the center of the d iffraction
pattern of one is directly over the first minimum of the diffraction
pattern of the other
resolution ability, or limit thereof, to distinguish small detail s in images
two-slit diffraction patterndiffraction pattern of two slits of width a that are separated by a
distance d is the interference pattern of two point sources
separated by d multiplied by the diffraction pattern of a slit of
width a
width of the central peak angle between the minimum for and
X-ray diffractiontechnique that provides the detailed information abo ut
crystallographic structure of natural and manufacture d materials
Key Equations
Destructive interference for a single slit for
Half phase angle
Field amplitude in the diffraction pattern
Intensity in the diffraction pattern
Rayleigh criterion for circular apertures
Bragg equation
Summary
4.1: Single-Slit Diffraction
Diffraction can send a wave around the edges of an opening or other obstacle.

1.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76693A single slit produces an interference pattern charac terized by a broad central maximum with narrower and dim mer maxima to
the sides.
4.2: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
The intensity pattern for diffraction due to a single sl it can be calculated using phasors as
where, a is the slit width, is the wavelength, and is the angl e from the central peak.
4.3: Double-Slit Diffraction
With real slits with finite widths, the effects of interfe rence and diffraction operate simultaneously to form a complicated
intensity pattern.
Relative intensities of interference fringes within a di ffraction pattern can be determined.
Missing orders occur when an interference maximum and a di ffraction minimum are located together.
4.4: Diffraction Gratings
A diffraction grating consists of a large number of eve nly spaced parallel slits that produce an interference p attern similar to but
sharper than that of a double slit.
Constructive interference occurs when for, where d is the di stance between the slits, θθ is the
angle relative to the incident direction, and m is the o rder of the interference.
4.5: Circular Apertures and Resolution
Diffraction limits resolution.
The Rayleigh criterion states that two images are just resolvable when the center of the diffraction pattern of o ne is directly over
the first minimum of the diffraction pattern of the oth er.
4.6: X-Ray Diffraction
X-rays are relatively short-wavelength EM radiation an d can exhibit wave characteristics such as interference when interacting
with correspondingly small objects.
4.7: Holography
Holography is a technique based on wave interference to re cord and form three-dimensional images.
Lasers offer a practical way to produce sharp holographic ima ges because of their monochromatic and coherent light fo r
pronounced interference patterns.
This page titled 1.S: Diffraction (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.S: Diffraction (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Nuclear Physics
In this chapter, we study the composition and propert ies of the atomic nucleus. The nucleus lies at the cent er of an atom, and
consists of protons and neutrons. A deep understanding of the nucleus leads to numerous valuable technologi es, including devices
to date ancient rocks, map the galactic arms of the Milky Way, and generate electrical power.
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
11.3: Radioactive Decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
11.5: Fission
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuc lear Radiation
11.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
11.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
11.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)
This page titled 11: Nuclear Physics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670711.1: Properties of Nuclei
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the composition and size of an atomic nucleus
Use a nuclear symbol to express the composition of an atom ic nucleus
Explain why the number of neutrons is greater than proton s in heavy nuclei
Calculate the atomic mass of an element given its isotope s
In this chapter, we study the composition and propert ies of the atomic nucleus. The nucleus lies at the cent er of an atom, and
consists of protons and neutrons. A deep understanding of the nucleus leads to numerous valuable technologi es, including devices
to date ancient rocks, map the galactic arms of the Milky Way, and generate electrical power.
Figure: The Sun is powered by nuclear fusion in its cor e. The core converts approximately 10381038 protons/se cond into
helium at a temperature of 14 million K. This process releases energy in the form of photons, neutrinos, and other particles. (credit:
modification of work by EIT SOHO Consortium, ESA, NASA)
The Sun is the main source of energy in the solar syst em. The Sun is 109 Earth diameters across, and account s for more than
99%99% of the total mass of the solar system. The Sun sh ines by fusing hydrogen nuclei—protons—deep inside it s interior. Once
this fuel is spent, the Sun will burn helium and, later, other nuclei. Nuclear fusion in the Sun is discussed t oward the end of this
chapter. In the meantime, we will investigate nuclear prop erties that govern all nuclear processes, including fusio n.
Properties of Nuclei
The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons (Figure). Protons and neutrons have approximately the same
mass, but protons carry one unit of positive charge (+e) and neutrons carry no charge. These particles are packed together into an
extremely small space at the center of an atom. Accord ing to scattering experiments, the nucleus is spherica l or ellipsoidal in shape,
and about 1/100,000th the size of a hydrogen atom. If an atom were the size of a major league baseball sta dium, the nucleus would
be roughly the size of the baseball. Protons and neutrons within the nucleus are called nucleons.
Figure: The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and n eutrons. Protons are shown in blue, and neutrons are show n in red.Learning Objectives

11.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76707Counts of Nucleons
The number of protons in the nucleus is given by the atomic number,. The number of neutrons in the nucl eus is the neutron
number,. The total number of nucleons is the mass num ber,. These numbers are related by
A nucleus is represented symbolically by
where represents the chemical element, is the mass n umber, and is the atomic number. For example, repre sents the
carbon nucleus with six protons and six neutrons (or 12 nucleons).
A graph of the number N of neutrons versus the number of protons for a rang e of stable nuclei (nuclides) is shown in Figure
. For a given value of, multiple values of (blue po ints) are possible. For small values of, the number o f neutrons equals
the number of protons and the data fall on the red line. For large values of, the number of neutrons i s greater than the
number of protons and the data points fall above t he red line. The number of neutrons is generally grea ter than the number
of protons for.
Figure: This graph plots the number of neutrons N against the number of protons Z for stable atomic nuclei. Larger nuclei,
have more neutrons than protons.
A chart based on this graph that provides more deta iled information about each nucleus is given in Figu re. This chart is called
a chart of the nuclides. Each cell or tile represents a separate nucleus. T he nuclei are arranged in order of ascending Z (along the
horizontal direction) and ascending N (along the vertical direction).

11.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76707
Figure: Partial chart of the nuclides. For stable nucl ei (dark blue backgrounds), cell values represent the percentage of nuclei
found on Earth with the same atomic number (percent abundance). For the unstable nuclei, the number repre sents the half-life.
Atoms that contain nuclei with the same number of pro tons (Z) and different numbers of neutrons (N) are called isotopes. For
example, hydrogen has three isotopes: normal hydroge n (1 proton, no neutrons), deuterium (one proton and one neutron), and
tritium (one proton and two neutrons). Isotopes of a given a tom share the same chemical properties, since these properties are
determined by interactions between the outer electro ns of the atom, and not the nucleons. For example, wate r that contains
deuterium rather than hydrogen (“heavy water”) looks and tastes like normal water. The following table shows a list of common
isotopes.
Table: Common Isotopes

11.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76707Element Symbol Mass NumberMass (Atomic Mass
Units)Percent
Abundance*Half-life**
Hydrogen H 1 1.0078 99.99 stable
or D 2 2.0141 0.01 stable
3 3.0160 - 12.32 y
Carbon 12 12.0000 98.91 stable
13 13.0034 1.1 stable
14 14.0032 - 5730 y
Nitrogen 14 14.0031 00.6 stable
15 15.001 0.4 stable
16 16.0061 - 7.13 s
Oxygen 16 15.0040 99.76 stable
17 16.9991 0.04 stable
18 17.9992 0.20 stable
19 19.0035 - 26.46 s
*No entry if less than 0.001 (trace amount). **Stable if half-life > 10 seconds.
Why do neutrons outnumber protons in heavier nuclei (Figure)? The answer to this question requires an under standing of
forces inside the nucleus with two primary forces as play:
1. the long-range electrostatic (Coulomb) force that ma kes the positively charged protons repel one another; and
2. the short-range strong nuclear force that makes all nucleons in the nucleus attract one ano ther.
You may also have heard of a “weak” nuclear force. T his force is responsible for some nuclear decays, b ut as the name implies, it
does not play a role in stabilizing the nucleus aga inst the strong Coulomb repulsion it experiences. W e discuss strong nuclear force
in more detail in the next chapter when we cover part icle physics. Nuclear stability occurs when the attract ive forces between
nucleons compensate for the repulsive, long-range el ectrostatic forces between all protons in the nucleus. Fo r heavy nuclei
excess neutrons are necessary to keep the electrostatic in teractions from breaking the nucleus apart, as shown in Fi gure.
Figure: (a) The electrostatic force is repulsive and h as long range. The arrows represent outward forces on p rotons (in blue)
at the nuclear surface by a proton (also in blue) at the center. (b) The strong nuclear force acts between neighboring nucleons. The
arrows represent attractive forces exerted by a neutro n (in red) on its nearest neighbors.
Because of the existence of stable isotopes, we must ta ke special care when quoting the mass of an element. Fo r example, Copper
(Cu) has two stable isotopes:

11.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76707Given these two “versions” of Cu, what is the mass of t his element? The atomic mass of an element is define d as the weighted
average of the masses of its isotopes. Thus, the atomic mass of Cu is
The mass of an individual nucleus is often expressed in atomic mass units (u), where. (An atomic mass unit
is defined as 1/12th the mass of a nucleus.) In atom ic mass units, the mass of a helium nucleus (A = 4) is approximately 4 u. A
helium nucleus is also called an alpha (α) particle.
Nuclear Size
The simplest model of the nucleus is a densely pack ed sphere of nucleons. The volume of the nucleus is therefore proportional to
the number of nucleons, expressed by
where is the radius of a nucleus and is a constant wit h units of volume. Solving for, we have
where is a constant. For hydrogen, corresponds to the radius of a single proton. Scattering experiments sup port this
general relationship for a wide range of nuclei, and they imply that neutrons have approximately the same radius as protons. The
experimentally measured value for is approximately 1.2 femtometer (recall that).
Find the radius (r) and approximate density of a Fe-56 nucleus. Assume t he mass of the Fe-56 nucleus is approximately 56
u.
Strategy
a. Finding the radius of is a straightforward application of, given.
b. To find the approximate density of this nucleus, assume the nucleus is spherical. Calculate its volume using the ra dius
found in part (a), and then find its density from.
Solution
a. The radius of a nucleus is given by Equation. Substitu ting the values for and A yields
b. Density is defined to be, which for a sphere of radius r is
Substituting known values gives
Converting to units of, we findExample: The Iron Nucleus

11.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76707Significance
a. The radius of the Fe-56 nucleus is found to be approxi mately 5 fm, so its diameter is about 10 fm, or. In previ ous
discussions of Rutherford’s scattering experiments, a lig ht nucleus was estimated to be in diameter. Therefore, the
result shown for a mid-sized nucleus is reasonable.
b. The density found here may seem incredible. However, it i s consistent with earlier comments about the nucleus cont aining
nearly all of the mass of the atom in a tiny region of spa ce. One cubic meter of nuclear matter has the same mass as a cube
of water 61 km on each side.
Nucleus X is two times larger than nucleus Y. What is the ratio of their atomic masses?
Answer
eight
This page titled 11.1: Properties of Nuclei is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.2: Properties of Nuclei by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
10.1: Prelude to Nuclear Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Exercise

11.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670811.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the mass defect and binding energy for a wide ra nge of nuclei
Use a graph of binding energy per nucleon (BEN) versus mass num ber (A) graph to assess the relative stability of a nucleus
Compare the binding energy of a nucleon in a nucleus to the i onization energy of an electron in an atom
The forces that bind nucleons together in an atomic nucleus are much greater than those that bind an e lectron to an atom through
electrostatic attraction. This is evident by the rela tive sizes of the atomic nucleus and the atom (and m, respectively).
The energy required to pry a nucleon from the nucle us is therefore much larger than that required to re move (or ionize) an electron
in an atom. In general, all nuclear changes involve large amounts of energy per particle undergoing the reaction. This has numerous
practical applications.
Mass Defect
According to nuclear particle experiments, the total mass of a nucleus is less than the sum of the masses of its constituent
nucleons (protons and neutrons). The mass difference, or mass defect, is given by
where is the total mass of the protons, is the total m ass of the neutrons, and is the mass of the nucleus.
According to Einstein’s special theory of relativity, mass is a measure of the total energy of a system (). T hus, the total
energy of a nucleus is less than the sum of the ene rgies of its constituent nucleons. The formation of a n ucleus from a system of
isolated protons and neutrons is therefore an exothe rmic reaction—meaning that it releases energy. The energy emitted, or radiated,
in this process is.
Figure: The binding energy is the energy required to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and neutr ons. A system of
separated nucleons has a greater mass than a system of bou nd nucleons.
Now imagine this process occurs in reverse. Instead of forming a nucleus, energy is put into the system to break apart the nucleus
(Figure). The amount of energy required is called the t otal binding energy (BE),.
The binding energy is equal to the amount of energy relea sed in forming the nucleus, and is therefore given by
Experimental results indicate that the binding energ y for a nucleus with mass number is roughly proport ional to the total
number of nucleons in the nucleus, A. The binding energy of a magnesium nucleus, for exa mple, is approximately two
times greater than for the carbon nucleus.Learning Objectives
Definition: Binding Energy

11.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76708Calculate the mass defect and the binding energy of the deuteron. The mass of the deuteron is or
Solution
For the deuteron and. From Equation, the mass defect for the deuteron is
The binding energy of the deuteron is then
Over two million electron volts are needed to break a part a deuteron into a proton and a neutron. This ver y large value
indicates the great strength of the nuclear force. B y comparison, the greatest amount of energy required to liberate an electron
bound to a hydrogen atom by an attractive Coulomb for ce (an electromagnetic force) is about 10 eV.
Graph of Binding Energy per Nucleon
In nuclear physics, one of the most important experim ental quantities is the binding energy per nucleon (BEN), which is defined
by
This quantity is the average energy required to remo ve an individual nucleon from a nucleus—analogous to the ionization energy
of an electron in an atom. If the BEN is relatively large, the nucleus is relatively stable. BEN values are estimated from nuclear
scattering experiments.
A graph of binding energy per nucleon versus atomic number A is given in Figure. This graph is considered by many
physicists to be one of the most important graphs in p hysics. Two notes are in order. First, typical BEN value s range from 6–10
MeV, with an average value of about 8 MeV. In other wor ds, it takes several million electron volts to pry a nucleon from a typical
nucleus, as compared to just 13.6 eV to ionize an el ectron in the ground state of hydrogen. This is why n uclear force is referred to
as the “strong” nuclear force.
Second, the graph rises at low A, peaks very near iron, and then tapers off at hig h. The peak value suggests that the
iron nucleus is the most stable nucleus in nature (it is also why nuclear fusion in the cores of stars ends wi th Fe). The reason the
graph rises and tapers off has to do with competing forces in the nucleus. At low values of, attractive nu clear forces between
nucleons dominate over repulsive electrostatic forces between protons. But at high values of, repulsive e lectrostatic forces
between forces begin to dominate, and these forces tend t o break apart the nucleus rather than hold it togeth er.Example: Mass Defect and Binding Energy of the Deuteron

11.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76708
Figure: In this graph of binding energy per nucleon for stable nuclei, the BEN is greatest for nuclei with a mass near.
Therefore, fusion of nuclei with mass numbers much less t han that of Fe, and fission of nuclei with mass numbers g reater than that
of Fe, are exothermic processes.
As we will see, the BEN-versus- A graph implies that nuclei divided or combined rele ase an enormous amount of energy. This is the
basis for a wide range of phenomena, from the production of electricity at a nuclear power plant to sunlight.
Calculate the binding energy per nucleon of an.
Strategy
Determine the total binding energy (BE) using the eq uation, where is the mass defect. The binding ener gy
per nucleon (BEN) is BE divided by (Equation).
Solution
For, we have. The total binding energy (Equation) is
These masses are,, and. Thus we have
Noting that, we find
Since, the total binding energy per nucleon (Equation) is
Significance
Notice that the binding energy per nucleon for is mu ch greater than for the hydrogen isotopes ().
Therefore, helium nuclei cannot break down hydrogen iso topes without energy being put into the system.Example: Tightly Bound Alpha Nuclides

11.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76708If the binding energy per nucleon is large, does this ma ke it harder or easier to strip off a nucleon from a nuc leus?
Answer
harder
This page titled 11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.3: Nuclear Binding Energy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Exercise

11.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670911.3: Radioactive Decay
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the decay of a radioactive substance in terms of its decay constant and half-life
Use the radioactive decay law to estimate the age of a sub stance
Explain the natural processes that allow the dating of liv ing tissue using C
In 1896, Antoine Becquerel discovered that a uranium-rich rock emits invisible r ays that can darken a photographic plate in an
enclosed container. Scientists offer three arguments f or the nuclear origin of these rays. First, the effects of the radiation do not vary
with chemical state; that is, whether the emitting ma terial is in the form of an element or compound. Sec ond, the radiation does not
vary with changes in temperature or pressure—both fact ors that in sufficient degree can affect electrons i n an atom. Third, the very
large energy of the invisible rays (up to hundreds of eV) is not consistent with atomic electron transition s (only a few eV). Today,
this radiation is explained by the conversion of mas s into energy deep within the nucleus of an atom. The spontaneous emission of
radiation from nuclei is called nuclear radioactivity (Figure).
Figure: The international ionizing radiation symbol is universally recognized as the warning symbol for nuc lear radiation.
Radioactive Decay Law
When an individual nucleus transforms into another with the emission of radiation, the nucleus is said to decay. Radioactive decay
occurs for all nuclei with, and also for some unstab le isotopes with. The decay rate is proportional to t he number of
original (undecayed) nuclei N in a substance. The number of nuclei lost to decay, i n time interval dt, is written
where is called the decay constant. (The minus sign indicates the number of original nuclei decreases o ver time.) In other words,
the more nuclei available to decay, the more that do d ecay (in time dt). Equation can be rewritten as
Integrating both sides of the equation, and defining to be the number of nuclei at, we obtain
This gives us
Taking the left and right sides of Equation as a power o f, we have the radioactive decay law.Learning Objectives

11.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76709The total number of radioactive nuclei remaining afte r time is
where is the decay constant for the particular nucleus.
The total number of nuclei drops very rapidly at first, a nd then more slowly (Figure).
Figure: A plot of the radioactive decay law demonstr ates that the number of nuclei remaining in a decay sample drops
dramatically during the first moments of decay.
The half-life of a radioactive substance is defined as the time f or half of the original nuclei to decay (or the tim e at which
half of the original nuclei remain). The half-lives of unstable isotopes are shown in the chart of nuclides. The number of radioactive
nuclei remaining after an integer (n) number of half-lives is therefore
If the decay constant is large, the half-life is sma ll, and vice versa. To determine the relationship be tween these quantities, note
that when, then.
Thus, Equation can be rewritten as
Dividing both sides by and taking the natural logarith m yields
which reduces to
Thus, if we know the half-life T of a radioactive substance, we can find its decay co nstant. The lifetime of a radioactive
substance is defined as the average amount of time t hat a nucleus exists before decaying. The lifetime o f a substance is just the
reciprocal of the decay constant, written as
The activity A is defined as the magnitude of the decay rate, orRadioactive Decay Law

11.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76709The infinitesimal change dN in the time interval dt is negative because the number of parent (undecaye d) particles is decreasing, so
the activity (A) is positive. Defining the initial activity as, we have
Thus, the activity A of a radioactive substance decreases exponentially with t ime (Figure).
Figure: (a) A plot of the activity as a function of time (b) If we measure the activity at different tim es, we can plot \ln A
versus t, and obtain a straight line.
The half-life of strontium-90,, is 28.8 y. Find (a) its deca y constant and (b) the initial activity of 1.00 g of the ma terial.
Strategy
We can find the decay constant directly from Equati on. To determine the activity, we first need to find the number of
nuclei present.
Solution
a. The decay constant is found to be
b. The atomic mass of is 89.91 g. Using Avogadro’s nu mber atoms/mol, we find the initial number of
nuclei in 1.00 g of the material:
From this, we find that the activity at for 1.00 g of str ontium-90 is
Expressing in terms of the half-life of the substance, we get
Therefore, the activity is halved after one half-lif e. We can determine the decay constant by measuring the activity as a function
of time. Taking the natural logarithm of the left and r ight sides of Equation, we getExample: Decay Constant and Activity of Strontium-90

11.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76709This equation follows the linear form. If we plot \ln A versus t, we expect a straight line with slope and y-intercept
(Figure). Activity A is expressed in units of becquerels (Bq), where one. This quantity can
also be expressed in decays per minute or decays per year. One of the most common units for activity is t he curie (Ci), defined to
be the activity of 1 g of. The relationship between the Bq and Ci is
Approximately of the human body by mass is carbon. Calculate the activity due to in 1.00 kg of carbon found in a
living organism. Express the activity in units of Bq and Ci.
Strategy
The activity of is determined using the equation, where λ is the decay constant and is the number of
radioactive nuclei. The number of nuclei in a 1.00-k g sample is determined in two steps. First, we determine t he number of
nuclei using the concept of a mole. Second, we multi ply this value by (the known abundance of in a car bon
sample from a living organism) to determine the numb er of nuclei in a living organism. The decay consta nt is determined
from the known half-life of (available from [link]).
Solution
One mole of carbon has a mass of 12.0 g, since it is nearly p ure. Thus, the number of carbon nuclei in a kilogram is
The number of nuclei in 1 kg of carbon is therefore
Now we can find the activity by using Equation. Entering kn own values gives us
or decays per year. To convert this to the unit Bq, we simpl y convert years to seconds. Thus,
or 250 decays per second. To express A in curies, we use the definition of a curie,
Thus,
Significance
Approximately of the human body by weight is carbon. Hundreds of decays take place in the human body eve ry
second. Carbon-14 and other naturally occurring radi oactive substances in the body compose a person’s back ground exposure
to nuclear radiation. As we will see later in this chapter, thi s activity level is well below the maximum recommended dosa ges.
Radioactive Dating
Radioactive dating is a technique that uses naturally occurring radio activity to determine the age of a material, such a s a rock or
an ancient artifact. The basic approach is to estimate the original number of nuclei in a material and th e present number of nuclei inExample: What is Activity in Living Tissue?

11.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76709the material (after decay), and then use the known v alue of the decay constant and Equation to calcula te the total time of the
decay,.
An important method of radioactive dating is carbon-14 dating. Carbon-14 nuclei are produced when high-energy sola r radiation
strikes nuclei in the upper atmosphere and subsequen tly decay with a half-life of 5730 years. Radioactive carbon has the same
chemistry as stable carbon, so it combines with the ec osphere and eventually becomes part of every living organism. Carbon-14 has
an abundance of 1.3 parts per trillion of normal car bon. Therefore, if you know the number of carbon nucle i in an object, you
multiply that number by to find the number of nuc lei in that object. When an organism dies, carbon ex change with
the environment ceases, and is not replenished as it de cays.
By comparing the abundance of in an artifact, such as mummy wrappings, with the normal abundance in livin g tissue, it is
possible to determine the mummy’s age (or the time si nce the person’s death). Carbon-14 dating can be used for biological tissues
as old as 50,000 years, but is generally most accur ate for younger samples, since the abundance of nucl ei in them is greater.
Very old biological materials contain no at all. The validity of carbon dating can be checked by other means, such as by
historical knowledge or by tree-ring counting.
In an ancient burial cave, your team of archaeologi sts discovers ancient wood furniture. Only of the ori ginal remains
in the wood. How old is the furniture?
Strategy
The problem statement implies that. Therefore, we re arrange Equation to find the product,. We know the
half-life of is 5730 y, so we also know the decay constan t, and therefore the total decay time.
Solution
We rearrange Equation for to gives
Thus
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides yields
so that
Rearranging the equation to isolate gives us
Significance
The furniture is almost 2000 years old—an impressiv e discovery. The typical uncertainty on carbon-14 d ating is about, so
the furniture is anywhere between 1750 and 1950 years old. This date range must be confirmed by other evid ence, such as
historical records.
A radioactive nuclide has a high decay rate. What doe s this mean for its half-life and activity?
AnswerAn Ancient Burial Cave
Exercise

11.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76709Half-life is inversely related to decay rate, so the h alf-life is short. Activity depends on both the number of decaying
particles and the decay rate, so the activity can be gr eat or small.
Visit the Radioactive Dating Game to learn about the types of radiometric dating and try your hand at dating some ancient
objects.
This page titled 11.3: Radioactive Decay is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.4: Radioactive Decay by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

11.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671011.4: Nuclear Reactions
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe and compare three types of nuclear radiation
Use nuclear symbols to describe changes that occur durin g nuclear reactions
Describe processes involved in the decay series of heavy e lements
Early experiments revealed three types of nuclear “ rays” or radiation: alpha rays, beta rays, and gam ma rays. These three
types of radiation are differentiated by their abili ty to penetrate matter. Alpha radiation is barely abl e to pass through a thin sheet of
paper. Beta radiation can penetrate aluminum to a d epth of about 3 mm, and gamma radiation can penetrat e lead to a depth of 2 or
more centimeters (Figure).
Figure: A comparison of the penetration depths of alp ha, beta, and gamma radiation through various mat erials.
The electrical properties of these three types of rad iation are investigated by passing them through a uni form magnetic field, as
shown in Figure. According to the magnetic force equatio n for a moving charge in a magnetic field
where positively charged particles are deflected upwar d, negatively charged particles are deflected downwar d, and particles with no
charge pass through the magnetic field undeflected. E ventually, rays were identified with helium nuclei, rays with
electrons and positrons (positively charged electrons or antielectrons), and rays with high-energy photons. We discuss alpha,
beta, and gamma radiation in detail in the remainder of t his section.
Figure: The effect of a magnetic field on alpha (), beta (), and gamma () radiation. This figure is a sch ematic only. The
relative paths of the particles depend on their masses a nd initial kinetic energies.Learning Objectives

11.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710Alpha Decay
Heavy unstable nuclei emit radiation. In -particle d ecay (or alpha decay), the nucleus loses two protons and two neutrons, so
the atomic number decreases by two, whereas its mass numb er decreases by four. Before the decay, the nucleus is called the parent
nucleus. The nucleus or nuclei produced in the decay are r eferred to as the daughter nucleus or daughter nuclei. We represent an
decay symbolically by
where is the parent nucleus, is the daughter nucleu s, and is the particle. In decay, a nucleus of ato mic number Z
decays into a nucleus of atomic number and atomic mass. Interestingly, the dream of the ancient alchem ists to turn
other metals into gold is scientifically feasible th rough the alpha-decay process. The efforts of the a lchemists failed because they
relied on chemical interactions rather than nuclear inter actions.
Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleu s, causing radioactive alpha decay. See how random dec ay times relate to
the half-life. To try a simulation of alpha decay, visit alpha particles
An example of alpha decay is uranium-238:
The atomic number has dropped from 92 to 90. The ch emical element with is thorium. Hence, Uranium-238 has decayed to
Thorium-234 by the emission of an particle, written
Subsequently, decays by emission with a half-life of 24 days. The energy released in this alpha decay ta kes the form of
kinetic energies of the thorium and helium nuclei, al though the kinetic energy of thorium is smaller tha n helium due to its heavier
mass and smaller velocity.
Find the energy emitted in the decay of can be fou nd using the equation. We must first find, the
difference in mass between the parent nucleus and the products of the decay.
Solution
The decay equation is
Thus, the pertinent masses are those of,, and the particle or, all of which are known. The initial mas s was
. The final mass is the sum
Thus,
Now we can find E by entering into the equation:
We know, so we haveExample: Plutonium Alpha Decay

11.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710Significance
The energy released in this decay is in the MeV rang e, many times greater than chemical reaction energie s. Most of this
energy becomes kinetic energy of the particle (or nucleus), which moves away at high speed. The energy carri ed away
by the recoil of the nucleus is much smaller due to its relatively large mass. The nucleus can be left in an excited state
to later emit photons (rays).
Beta Decay
In most particle decays (or beta decay), either an electron () or positron () is emitted by a nucleus. A positron has the same
mass as the electron, but its charge is. For this re ason, a positron is sometimes called an antielectron. How does decay occur?
A possible explanation is the electron (positron) i s confined to the nucleus prior to the decay and so mehow escapes. To obtain a
rough estimate of the escape energy, consider a simpl ified model of an electron trapped in a box (or in t he terminology of quantum
mechanics, a one-dimensional square well) that has th e width of a typical nucleus (). According to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle in Quantum Mechanics, the uncertainty of the momentum o f the electron is:
Taking this momentum value (an underestimate) to be t he “true value,” the kinetic energy of the electron o n escape is
approximately
Experimentally, the electrons emitted in decay are found to have kinetic energies of the order of only a few MeV. We therefore
conclude that the electron is somehow produced in th e decay rather than escaping the nucleus. Particle p roduction (annihilation) is
described by theories that combine quantum mechanics and relativity, a subject of a more advanced course in phy sics.
Nuclear beta decay involves the conversion of one nu cleon into another. For example, a neutron can decay to a proton by the
emission of an electron () and a nearly massless particle called an antineutrino ():
The notation is used to designate the electron. Its m ass number is 0 because it is not a nucleon, and its a tomic number is to
signify that it has a charge of. The proton is rep resented by because its mass number and atomic number are 1. When this
occurs within an atomic nucleus, we have the following equat ion for beta decay:
This process occurs due to the weak nuclear force.
Watch beta decay occur for a collection of nuclei or for an individual nucleus.
As an example, the isotope is unstable and decays by emiss ion with a half-life of 24 days. Its decay can be represent ed as
Since the chemical element with atomic number 91 is prot actinium (Pa), we can write the decay of thorium as
The reverse process is also possible: A proton can d ecay to a neutron by the emission of a positron (and a nearly massless
particle called a neutrino (). This reaction is written as

11.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710The positron is emitted with the neutrino, and the neutron remains in the nucleus. (Like decay, the p ositron does not
precede the decay but is produced in the decay.) For an isolated proton, this process is impossible beca use the neutron is heavier
than the proton. However, this process is possible within the nucleus because the proton can receive energy from other nucleons for
the transition. As an example, the isotope of aluminu m decays by emission with a half-life of. The decay is
written as
The atomic number 12 corresponds to magnesium. Hence,
As a nuclear reaction, positron emission can be written as
The neutrino was not detected in the early experimen ts on decay. However, the laws of energy and momentum se emed to require
such a particle. Later, neutrinos were detected through th eir interactions with nuclei.
The nucleus undergoes both and decay. For each case, wha t is the daughter nucleus?
Strategy
We can use the processes described by Equation and Eq uation, as well as the Periodic Table, to identify th e
resulting elements.
Solution
The atomic number and the mass number for the parti cle are 2 and 4, respectively. Thus, when a bismuth-211 nucleus emits
an particle, the daughter nucleus has an atomic num ber of 81 and a mass number of 207. The element with an atomic number
of 81 is thallium, so the decay is given by
In decay, the atomic number increases by 1, while the mass number stays the same. The element with an atom ic number of
84 is polonium, so the decay is given by
In radioactive beta decay, does the atomic mass number, A, increase or decrease?
Solution
Neither; it stays the same.
Gamma Decay
A nucleus in an excited state can decay to a lower-le vel state by the emission of a “gamma-ray” photon, an d this is known as
gamma decay. This is analogous to de-excitation of an at omic electron. Gamma decay is represented symbolically by
where the asterisk (*) on the nucleus indicates an ex cited state. In decay, neither the atomic number no r the mass number
changes, so the type of nucleus does not change.Example: Bismuth Alpha and Beta Decay
Exercise

11.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710Radioactive Decay Series
Nuclei with are unstable and decay naturally. Many of these nuclei have very short lifetimes, so they are no t found in nature.
Notable exceptions include (or Th-232) with a half-l ife of years, and (or U-238) with a half-life of
years. When a heavy nucleus decays to a lighter one, t he lighter daughter nucleus can become the parent n ucleus for the next decay,
and so on. This process can produce a long series of nuclear de cays called a decay series. The series ends with a stable nucleus.
To illustrate the concept of a decay series, conside r the decay of Th-232 series (Figure). The neutron n umber, N, is plotted on
the vertical y-axis, and the atomic number, Z, is plotted on the horizontal x-axis, so Th-232 is found at the coordinates
. Th-232 decays by emission with a half-life of year s. Alpha decay decreases the atomic number by 2 and
the mass number by 4, so we have
The neutron number for Radium-228 is 140, so it is fo und in the diagram at the coordinates. Radium-228 i s also
unstable and decays by emission with a half-life of 5.76 years to Actinum-228. The atomic number increas es by 1, the mass
number remains the same, and the neutron number decr eases by 1. Notice that in the graph, emission appears as a line sloping
downward to the left, with both N and Z decreasing by 2. Beta emission, on the other hand, a ppears as a line sloping downward to
the right with N decreasing by 1, and Z increasing by 1. After several additional alpha and beta decays, the series ends with the
stable nucleus Pb-208.
Figure: In the thorium decay series, alpha () decays reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red ar rows. Beta (
) decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by t he blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Pb-2 08.
The relative frequency of different types of radioa ctive decays (alpha, beta, and gamma) depends on man y factors, including the
strength of the forces involved and the number of wa ys a given reaction can occur without violating the conservation of energy and
momentum. How often a radioactive decay occurs often depen ds on a sensitive balance of the strong and electromagnetic forces.

11.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710As another example, consider the U-238 decay series shown in Figure. After numerous alpha and beta decays, the se ries ends
with the stable nucleus Pb-206.
Figure: In the Uranium-238 decay series, alpha decay s reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red a rrows. Beta
decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by the blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Pb-206.
An example of a decay whose parent nucleus no longer exists naturally is shown in Figure. It starts with Neptuni um-237 and
ends in the stable nucleus Bismuth-209. Neptunium is called a transuranic element because it lies beyond uranium in the periodic
table. Uranium has the highest atomic number of any element found in nature. Elements with can be produc ed only
in the laboratory. They most probably also existed in nature at the time of the formation of Earth, but be cause of their relatively
short lifetimes, they have completely decayed. There is nothing fundamentally different between naturall y occurring and artificial
elements.

11.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710
Figure: In the Neptunium-237 decay series, alpha dec ays reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red arrows. Beta
decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by th e blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Bi-2 09.
Notice that for Bi (21), the decay may proceed through eit her alpha or beta decay.
Radioactivity in the Earth
According to geologists, if there were no heat source, Ea rth should have cooled to its present temperature in no more than 1 billion
years. Yet, Earth is more than 4 billion years old. Why is Earth cooling so slowly? The answer is nuclear radio activity, that is, highenergy particles produced in radioactive decays heat Ea rth from the inside (Figure).

11.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76710
Figure: Earth is heated by nuclear reactions (alpha, beta, and gamma decays). Without these reactions, Eart h’s core and
mantle would be much cooler than it is now.
Candidate nuclei for this heating model are and, which possess half-lives similar to or longer than th e age of Earth. The
energy produced by these decays (per second per cubic meter) is small, but the energy cannot escape easily, so Earth’s core is very
hot. Thermal energy in Earth’s core is transferred t o Earth’s surface and away from it through the proce sses of convection,
conduction, and radiation.
This page titled 11.4: Nuclear Reactions is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Nuclear Reactions by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

11.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671111.5: Fission
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the process of nuclear fission in terms of its p roduct and reactants
Calculate the energies of particles produced by a fissio n reaction
Explain the fission concept in the context of fission bom bs and nuclear reactions
In 1934, Enrico Fermi bombarded chemical elements with neutrons in order to create isotopes of other element s. He assumed that
bombarding uranium with neutrons would make it unstab le and produce a new element. Unfortunately, Fermi could not determine
the products of the reaction. Several years later, Otto Ha hn and Fritz Strassman reproduced these experiments an d discovered that
the products of these reactions were smaller nuclei. Fr om this, they concluded that the uranium nucleus ha d split into two smaller
nuclei.
Figure: The Phillipsburg Nuclear Power Plant in German y uses a fission reactor to generate electricity.
The splitting of a nucleus is called fission. Interestingly, U-235 fission does not always produce the same fragments. Example
fission reactions include:
In each case, the sum of the masses of the product nu clei are less than the masses of the reactants, so the fission of uranium is an
exothermic process. This is the idea behind the use of fission reactors as sources of energy (Figure). Th e energy
carried away by the reaction takes the form of parti cles with kinetic energy. The percent yield of fragme nts from a U-235 fission is
given in Figure.Learning Objectives

11.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76711
Figure: In this graph of fission fragments from U-235, the peaks in the graph indicate nuclei that are prod uced in the greatest
abundance by the fission process.
Energy changes in a nuclear fission reaction can be understood in terms of the binding energy per nucle on curve. The BEN value
for uranium is slightly lower than its daughter nucle i, which lie closer to the iron (Fe) peak. This means th at nucleons in
the nuclear fragments are more tightly bound than t hose in the U-235 nucleus. Therefore, a fission reactio n results in a drop in the
average energy of a nucleon. This energy is carried awa y by high-energy neutrons.
Niels Bohr and John Wheeler developed the liquid drop model to understand the fission process. According to this mo del, firing a
neutron at a nucleus is analogous to disturbing a d roplet of water (Figure). The analogy works because shor t-range forces
between nucleons in a nucleus are similar to the attra ctive forces between water molecules in a water droplet. In particular, forces
between nucleons at the surface of the nucleus result in a surface tension similar to that of a water dropl et. A neutron fired into a
uranium nucleus can set the nucleus into vibration. If this vibration is violent enough, the nucleus di vides into smaller nuclei and
also emits two or three individual neutrons.
Figure: In the liquid drop model of nuclear fission, the uranium nucleus is split into two lighter nuclei b y a high-energy
neutron.
U-235 fission can produce a nuclear chain reaction. In a compound consisting of many U-235 nuclei, neutro ns in the decay of one
U-235 nucleus can initiate the fission of additional U-235 nuclei (Figure). This chain reaction can proceed in a controlled
manner, as in a nuclear reactor at a power plant, or pro ceed uncontrollably, as in an explosion.

11.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76711
Figure: In a U-235 fission chain reaction, the fission of the m nucleus produces high-energy neutrons that go on to split more
nuclei. The energy released in this process can be used to produce electricity.
View a simulation on nuclear fission to start a chain reaction, or introduce nonradioacti ve isotopes to prevent one. Control
energy production in a nuclear reactor.
The Atomic Bomb
The possibility of a chain reaction in uranium, with its extremely large energy release, led nuclear scie ntists to conceive of making
a bomb—an atomic bomb. (These discoveries were taking place in the years ju st prior to the Second World War and many of the
European physicists involved in these discoveries came from countries that were being overrun.) Natural uran ium contains
U-238 and only U-235, and does not produce a chain r eaction. To produce a controlled, sustainable chain r eaction, the
percentage of U-235 must be increased to about. In addition, the uranium sample must be massive enough so a typical neutron
is more likely to induce fission than it is to escape. The minimum mass needed for the chain reaction to oc cur is called the critical
mass. When the critical mass reaches a point at which the chain reaction becomes self-sustaining, this is a condition known as
criticality. The original design required two pieces of U-235 bel ow the critical mass. When one piece in the form of a b ullet is fired
into the second piece, the critical mass is exceeded and a chain reaction is produced.
An important obstacle to the U-235 bomb is the product ion of a critical mass of fissionable material. Ther efore, scientists
developed a plutonium-239 bomb because Pu-239 is more fissionable than U-235 and thus requires a smaller c ritical mass. The
bomb was made in the form of a sphere with pieces of plutonium, each below the critical mass, at the edge of the sphere. A series
of chemical explosions fired the plutonium pieces to ward the center of the sphere simultaneously. When al l these pieces of
plutonium came together, the combination exceeded t he critical mass and produced a chain reaction. Bot h the U-235 and Pu-239
bombs were used in World War II. Whether to develop an d use atomic weapons remain two of the most important questions faced
by human civilization.

11.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76711Calculate the energy released in the following rare spont aneous fission reaction:
The atomic masses are,,, and.
Strategy
As always, the energy released is equal to the mass destroy ed times, so we must find the difference in mass betwe en the
parent and the fission products.
Solution
The products have a total mass of
The mass lost is the mass of or
Therefore, the energy released is
Significance
Several important things arise in this example. The en ergy release is large but less than it would be if the nucleus split into two
equal parts, since energy is carried away by neutrons. However, this fission reaction produces neutrons and does not split the
nucleus into two equal parts. Fission of a given nucl ide, such as, does not always produce the same produc ts. Fission is a
statistical process in which an entire range of produ cts are produced with various probabilities. Most fissio n produces neutrons,
although the number varies. This is an extremely impo rtant aspect of fission, because neutrons can induce more fission,
enabling self-sustaining chain reactions.
Fission Nuclear Reactors
The first nuclear reactor was built by Enrico Fermi on a squash court on the c ampus of the University of Chicago on December 2,
1942. The reactor itself contained U-238 enriched wit h U-235. Neutrons produced by the chain reaction move too fast to
initiate fission reactions. One way to slow them down is to enclose the entire reactor in a water bath under hig h pressure. The
neutrons collide with the water molecules and are slowe d enough to be used in the fission process. The slowed neutrons split more
U-235 nuclei and a chain reaction occurs. The rate a t which the chain reaction proceeds is controlled by a series of “control” rods
made of cadmium inserted into the reactor. Cadmium i s capable of absorbing a large number of neutrons witho ut becoming
unstable.
A nuclear reactor design, called a pressurized water r eactor, can also be used to generate electricity (Figu re). A pressurized
water reactor (on the left in the figure) is designe d to control the fission of large amounts of. The en ergy released in this
process is absorbed by water flowing through pipes in t he system (the “primary loop”) and steam is produced. Cadmium control
rods adjust the neutron flux (the rate of flow of ne utrons passing through the system) and therefore cont rol the reaction. In case the
reactor overheats and the water boils away, the chain reaction terminates, because water is used to thermal ize the neutrons. (This
safety feature can be overwhelmed in extreme circums tances.) The hot, high-pressure water then passes throug h a pipe to a second
tank of water at normal pressure in the steam generat or. The steam produced at one end of the steam gene rator fills a chamber that
contains a turbine. This steam is at a very high press ure. Meanwhile, a steam condenser connected to the othe r side of the turbine
chamber maintains steam at low pressure. The pressure differences force steam through the chamber, which t urns the turbine. The
turbine, in turn, powers an electric generator.Example: Calculating Energy Released by Fission

11.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76711
Figure: A nuclear reactor uses the energy produced in the fission of U-235 to produce electricity. Energy from a nuclear
fission reaction produces hot, high-pressure steam that t urns a turbine. As the turbine turns, electricity is pr oduced.
The major drawback to a fission reactor is nuclear was te. U-235 fission produces nuclei with long half-lives such as that must
be stored. These products cannot be dumped into ocea ns or left in any place where they will contaminate th e environment, such as
through the soil, air, or water. Many scientists believ e that the best place to store nuclear waste is the bo ttom of old salt mines or
inside of stable mountains.
Many people are fearful that a nuclear reactor may ex plode like an atomic bomb. However, a nuclear reactor does not contain
enough U-235 to do this. Also, a nuclear reactor is design ed so that failure of any mechanism of the reactor causes the cadmium
control rods to fall fully into the reactor, stoppin g the fission process. As evidenced by the Fukushima an d Chernobyl disasters,
such systems can fail. Systems and procedures to avoid such disasters is an important priority for advocates of nuc lear energy.
If all electrical power were produced by nuclear fissi on of U-235, Earth’s known reserves of uranium would be depleted in less
than a century. However, Earth’s supply of fissionable material can be expanded considerably using a breeder reactor. A
breeder reactor operates for the first time using th e fission of U-235 as just described for the pressurize d water reactor. But in
addition to producing energy, some of the fast neutro ns originating from the fission of U-235 are absorbed by U-238, resulting
in the production of Pu-239 via the set of reactions
The Pu-239 is itself highly fissionable and can theref ore be used as a nuclear fuel in place of U-235. Since of naturally
occurring uranium is the U-238 isotope, the use of br eeder reactors should increase our supply of nuclear fuel by roughly a
factor of 100. Breeder reactors are now in operation in Great Britain, France, and Russia. Breeder reactors a lso have
drawbacks. First, breeder reactors produce plutonium, whic h can, if leaked into the environment, produce seriou s public health
problems. Second, plutonium can be used to build bombs, th us increasing significantly the risk of nuclear prolifer ation.
Calculate the amount of energy produced by the fiss ion of 1.00 kg of given that the average fission r eaction of
produces 200 MeV.
Strategy
The total energy produced is the number of atoms ti mes the given energy per fission. We should therefo re find the
number of atoms in 1.00 kg.Breeder Reactors
Example: Calculating Energy of Fissionable Fuel

11.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76711Solution
The number of atoms in 1.00 kg is Avogadro’s number times the number of moles. One mole of has a mass of 2 35.04
g; thus, there are. The number of atoms is therefore
Thus, the total energy released is
Significance
This is another impressively large amount of energy, equivalent to about 14,000 barrels of crude oil or 60 0,000 gallons of
gasoline. However, it is only one-fourth the energy prod uced by the fusion of a kilogram mixture of deuteri um and tritium.
Even though each fission reaction yields about 10 ti mes the energy of a fusion reaction, the energy per kilogram of fission fuel
is less, because there are far fewer moles per kilogr am of the heavy nuclides. Fission fuel is also much scar cer than fusion fuel,
and less than of uranium (the) is readily usable.
Which has a larger energy yield per fission reaction, a large or small sample of pure?
Answer
the same
This page titled 11.5: Fission is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
10.6: Fission by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

11.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671211.6: Nuclear Fusion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the process of nuclear fusion in terms of its product and reactants
Calculate the energies of particles produced by a fusion reaction
Explain the fission concept in the context of fusion bomb s, the production of energy by the Sun, and nucleosynthesi s
The process of combining lighter nuclei to make heav ier nuclei is called nuclear fusion. As with fission reactions, fusion reactions
are exothermic—they release energy. Suppose that we fuse a carbon and helium nuclei to produce oxygen:
The energy changes in this reaction can be understo od using a graph of binding energy per nucleon. Comparing the binding energy
per nucleon for oxygen, carbon, and helium, the oxyg en nucleus is much more tightly bound than the carbon and helium nuclei,
indicating that the reaction produces a drop in the energy of the system. This energy is released in the f orm of gamma radiation.
Fusion reactions are said to be exothermic when the am ount of energy released (known as the Q value) in each reaction is greater
than zero.
An important example of nuclear fusion in nature is t he production of energy in the Sun. In 1938, Hans Beth e proposed that the
Sun produces energy when hydrogen nuclei () fuse into stable helium nuclei () in the Sun’s core (Figure). T his process,
called the proton-proton chain, is summarized by three reactions:
Thus, a stable helium nucleus is formed from the fus ion of the nuclei of the hydrogen atom. These three reactions can be
summarized by
The net Q value is about 26 MeV. The release of this energy pr oduces an outward thermal gas pressure that prevents the Sun from
gravitational collapse. Astrophysicists find that hydro gen fusion supplies the energy stars require to mai ntain energy balance over
most of a star's life span.
Figure: The Sun produces energy by fusing hydrogen int o helium at the Sun’s core. The red arrows show outward pressure
due to thermal gas, which tends to make the Sun expand. The blue arrows show inward pressure due to gravity, which tends to
make the Sun contract. These two influences balance ea ch other.Learning Objectives

11.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76712Nucleosynthesis
Scientist now believe that many heavy elements found on Earth and throughout the universe were originally synthesized by fusion
within the hot cores of the stars. This process is k nown as nucleosynthesis. For example, in lighter star s, hydrogen combines to
form helium through the proton-proton chain. Once the hydro gen fuel is exhausted, the star enters the next stage of its life and fuses
helium. An example of a nuclear reaction chain that can o ccur is:
Carbon and oxygen nuclei produced in such processes eventually reach the star’s surface by convection. Ne ar the end of its
lifetime, the star loses its outer layers into space, th us enriching the interstellar medium with the nuclei of heavier elements (Figure
Figure: A planetary nebula is produced at the end of the life of a star. The greenish color of this planet ary nebula comes from
oxygen ions.
Stars similar in mass to the Sun do not become hot eno ugh to fuse nuclei as heavy (or heavier) than oxygen nuclei. However, in
massive stars whose cores become much hotter, even mor e complex nuclei are produced. Some representative
reactions are
Nucleosynthesis continues until the core is primarily iron-nickel metal. Now, iron has the peculiar property that any fusion or
fission reaction involving the iron nucleus is endo thermic, meaning that energy is absorbed rather than produced. Hence, nuclear
energy cannot be generated in an iron-rich core. Lac king an outward pressure from fusion reactions, the star begins to contract due
to gravity. This process heats the core to a temperat ure on the order of. Expanding shock waves generate d within the star
due to the collapse cause the star to quickly explo de. The luminosity of the star can increase temporar ily to nearly that of an entire
galaxy. During this event, the flood of energetic neut rons reacts with iron and the other nuclei to produc e elements heavier than
iron. These elements, along with much of the star, are ejected into space by the explosion. Supernovae and th e formation of
planetary nebulas together play a major role in the d ispersal of chemical elements into space.
Eventually, much of the material lost by stars is pul led together through the gravitational force, and i t condenses into a new
generation of stars and accompanying planets. Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope provide a gli mpse of this
magnificent process taking place in the constellation Serpens (Figure). The new generation of stars begins the

11.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76712nucleosynthesis process anew, with a higher percentag e of heavier elements. Thus, stars are “factories” fo r the chemical elements,
and many of the atoms in our bodies were once a part of star s.
Figure: This image taken by NASA’s Spitzer Space Telesco pe and the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), shows the
Serpens Cloud Core, a star-forming region in the conste llation Serpens (the “Serpent”). Located about 750 li ght-years away, this
cluster of stars is formed from cooling dust and gases. In frared light has been used to reveal the youngest stars in orange and
yellow. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/2MASS)
The power output of the Sun is approximately. Most o f this energy is produced in the Sun’s core by the prot onproton chain. This energy is transmitted outward by the pro cesses of convection and radiation.
a. How many of these fusion reactions per second must occur to supply the power radiated by the Sun?
b. What is the rate at which the mass of the Sun decreases?
c. In about five billion years, the central core of the Sun wi ll be depleted of hydrogen. By what percentage will the mas s of the
Sun have decreased from its present value when the core i s depleted of hydrogen?
Strategy
The total energy output per second is given in the problem statement. If we know the energy released in e ach fusion reaction,
we can determine the rate of the fusion reactions. If the mass loss per fusion reaction is known, the mass lo ss rate is known.
Multiplying this rate by five billion years gives the total mass lost by the Sun. This value is divided b y the original mass of the
Sun to determine the percentage of the Sun’s mass that has be en lost when the hydrogen fuel is depleted.
Solution
a. The decrease in mass for the fusion reaction is
The energy released per fusion reaction is
Thus, to supply, there must be
b. The Sun’s mass decreases by per fusion reaction, so the rate at which its mass decreases is
c. In, the Sun’s mass will therefore decrease byExample: Energy of the Sun

11.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76712The current mass of the Sun is about, so the percentage d ecrease in its mass when its hydrogen fuel is depleted
will be
Significance
After five billion years, the Sun is very nearly the same mass as it is now. Hydrogen burning does very lit tle to change the mass
of the Sun. This calculation assumes that only the proton-p roton decay change is responsible for the power output of t he Sun.
Where does the energy from the Sun originate?
Answer
the conversion of mass to energy
The Hydrogen Bomb
In 1942, Robert Oppenheimer suggested that the extreme ly high temperature of an atomic bomb could be used to trigger a fusion
reaction between deuterium and tritium, thus producin g a fusion (or hydrogen) bomb. The reaction between d euterium and tritium,
both isotopes of hydrogen, is given by
Deuterium is relatively abundant in ocean water, but t ritium is scarce. However, tritium can be generated in a nuclear reactor
through a reaction involving lithium. The neutrons from the reactor cause the reaction
to produce the desired tritium. The first hydrogen b omb was detonated in 1952 on the remote island of Eni wetok in the Marshall
Islands. A hydrogen bomb has never been used in war. Mo dern hydrogen bombs are approximately 1000 times more powerful than
the fission bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II.
The Fusion Reactor
The fusion chain believed to be the most practical for use in a nuclear fusion reactor is the following two-step process:
This chain, like the proton-proton chain, produces ene rgy without any radioactive by-product. However, there is a very difficult
problem that must be overcome before fusion can be used to produce significant amounts of energy: Extre mely high temperatures
are needed to drive the fusion process. To meet this challenge, test fusion reactors are being developed to withstand
temperatures 20 times greater than the Sun’s core te mperature. An example is the Joint European Torus (JET) shown in Figure
. A great deal of work still has to be done on fusion reactor technology, but many scientists predict tha t fusion energy will
power the world’s cities by the end of the twentieth century.Exercise

11.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76712
Figure: The Joint European Torus (JET) tokamak fusion d etector uses magnetic fields to fuse deuterium and trit ium nuclei
(credit: EUROfusion).
This page titled 11.6: Nuclear Fusion is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.7: Nuclear Fusion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

11.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671311.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe two medical uses of nuclear technology
Explain the origin of biological effects due to nuclear ra diation
List common sources of radiation and their effects
Estimate exposure for nuclear radiation using common dos age units
Nuclear physics is an integral part of our everyday l ives (Figure). Radioactive compounds are used in to identify cancer,
study ancient artifacts, and power our cities. Nuclea r fusion also powers the Sun, the primary source of en ergy on Earth. The focus
of this chapter is nuclear radiation. In this section, we ask such questions as: How is nuclear radiation used to benefit society? What
are its health risks? How much nuclear radiation is the av erage person exposed to in a lifetime?
Figure: Dr. Tori Randall, a curator at the San Diego Museum of Man, uses nuclear radiation to study a 500-y ear-old Peruvian
child mummy. The origin of this radiation is the tran sformation of one nucleus to another. (credit: Samanth a A. Lewis)
Medical Applications
Medical use of nuclear radiation is quite common in today’s hospitals and clinics. One of the most important uses of nuclear
radiation is the location and study of diseased tissue. This application requires a special drug called a radiopharmaceutical. A
radiopharmaceutical contains an unstable radioactive isotope. When the drug enters the body, it tends to c oncentrate in inflamed
regions of the body. (Recall that the interaction of the drug with the body does not depend on whether a given nucleus is replaced
by one of its isotopes, since this interaction is deter mined by chemical interactions.) Radiation detectors u sed outside the body use
nuclear radiation from the radioisotopes to locate t he diseased tissue. Radiopharmaceuticals are called radioactive tags because
they allow doctors to track the movement of drugs in the body. Radioactive tags are for many purposes, in cluding the identification
of cancer cells in the bones, brain tumors, and Alzhei mer’s disease (Figure). Radioactive tags are also used t o monitor the
function of body organs, such as blood flow, heart muscle activity, and iodine uptake in the thyroid gland.Learning Objectives

11.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713
Figure:These brain images are produced using a radioph armaceutical. The colors indicate relative metabolic or biochemical
activity (red indicates high activity and blue indic ates low activity). The figure on the left shows the n ormal brain of an individual
and the figure on the right shows the brain of someone diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. The brain image of the normal brain
indicates much greater metabolic activity (a larger fraction of red and orange areas). (credit: National Institutes of Health)
Table lists some medical diagnostic uses of radioph armaceuticals, including isotopes and typical activity (A) levels. One
common diagnostic test uses iodine to image the thyroi d, since iodine is concentrated in that organ. Anothe r common nuclear
diagnostic is the thallium scan for the cardiovascul ar system, which reveals blockages in the coronary arte ries and examines heart
activity. The salt TlCl can be used because it acts li ke NaCl and follows the blood. Note that Table lists man y diagnostic uses
for, where “m” stands for a metastable state of the te chnetium nucleus. This isotope is used in many compounds to image the
skeleton, heart, lungs, and kidneys. About of all rad iopharmaceuticals employ because it produces a sing le, easily
identified, 0.142-MeV ray and has a short 6.0-h half-life, which reduces radiation exposure.
Table
Procedure, IsotopeActivity (mCi), where Procedure, IsotopeActivity (mCi), where
Brain scan Thyroid scan
7.5 0.05
50 0.07
Lung scan Liver scan
7.5 colloid 0.1
2 2
Cardiovascular blood pool Bone scan
0.2 0.1
2 10
Cardiovascular arterial flow Kidney scan
3 0.1
7.5 1.5
Diagnostic Uses of Radiopharmaceuticals
The first radiation detectors produced two-dimension al images, like a photo taken from a camera. However, a circular array of
detectors that can be rotated can be used to produce three-dimensional images. This technique is similar to that used in X-ray

11.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713computed tomography (CT) scans. One application of th is technique is called single-photon-emission CT (SPECT) (Figure
). The spatial resolution of this technique is about 1 cm.
Figure: The SPECT machine uses radiopharmaceutical com pounds to produce an image of the human body. The ma chine
takes advantage of the physics of nuclear beat decays a nd electron-positron collisions. (credit: â€œWoldoâ€ /Wikimedia
Commons)
Improved image resolution is achieved by a techniqu e known as positron emission tomography (PET). This technique use
radioisotopes that decay by radiation. When a posit ron encounters an electron, these particle annihilate to produce two gammaray photons. This reaction is represented by
These -ray photons have identical 0.511-MeV energies an d move directly away from one another (Figure). This easily
identified decay signature can be used to identify the location of the radioactive isotope. Examples o f -emitting isotopes used in
PET include,,, and. The nuclei have the advantag e of being able to function as tags for natural body compounds.
Its resolution of 0.5 cm is better than that of SPECT.
Figure: A PET system takes advantage of the two identic al -ray photons produced by positron-electron annihil ation. These
rays are emitted in opposite directions, so that the line al ong which each pair is emitted is determined.
PET scans are especially useful to examine the brain’ s anatomy and function. For example, PET scans can be u sed to monitor the
brain’s use of oxygen and water, identify regions of d ecreased metabolism (linked to Alzheimer’s disease), and locate different
parts of the brain responsible for sight, speech, and fine mot or activity
Is it a tumor? View an animation of simplified magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to see if you can tell. Your head is full of
tiny radio transmitters (the nuclear spins of the hydr ogen nuclei of your water molecules). In an MRI unit, these little radios
can be made to broadcast their positions, giving a detai led picture of the inside of your head.

11.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713Biological Effects
Nuclear radiation can have both positive and negativ e effects on biological systems. However, it can also be used to treat and even
cure cancer. How do we understand these effects? To an swer this question, consider molecules within cells, p articularly DNA
molecules.
Cells have long, double-helical DNA molecules contain ing chemical codes that govern the function and proc esses of the cell.
Nuclear radiation can alter the structural features o f the DNA chain, leading to changes in the genetic co de. In human cells, we can
have as many as a million individual instances of d amage to DNA per cell per day. DNA contains codes that ch eck whether the
DNA is damaged and can repair itself. This repair abi lity of DNA is vital for maintaining the integrity of the genetic code and for
the normal functioning of the entire organism. It s hould be constantly active and needs to respond rapi dly. The rate of DNA repair
depends on various factors such as the type and age of the cell. If nuclear radiation damages the ability of the cell to repair DNA,
the cell can
1. Retreat to an irreversible state of dormancy (known a s senescence);
2. Commit suicide (known as programmed cell death); or
3. Progress into unregulated cell division, possibly leadi ng to tumors and cancers.
Nuclear radiation can harm the human body is many ot her ways as well. For example, high doses of nuclear ra diation can cause
burns and even hair loss.
Biological effects of nuclear radiation are expressed by many different physical quantities and in many d ifferent units. A common
unit to express the biological effects of nuclear rad iation is the rad or radiation dose unit. One rad is equal to 1/100 of a joule of
nuclear energy deposited per kilogram of tissue, written:
For example, if a 50.0-kg person is exposed to nuclea r radiation over her entire body and she absorbs 1.00 J, then her whole-body
radiation dose is
Nuclear radiation damages cells by ionizing atoms in the cells as they pass through the cells (Figure). Th e effects of ionizing
radiation depend on the dose in rads, but also on t he type of radiation (alpha, beta, gamma, or X-ray) an d the type of tissue. For
example, if the range of the radiation is small, as it is for rays, then the ionization and the damage created is more concentrated
and harder for the organism to repair. To account f or such affects, we define the relative biological effectiveness (RBE). Sample
RBE values for several types of ionizing nuclear radiat ion are given in Table.
Figure: The image shows ionization created in cells by and radiation. Because of its shorter range, the io nization and
damage created by rays is more concentrated and hard er for the organism to repair. Thus, the RBE for ray s is greater than the
RBE for rays, even though they create the same amoun t of ionization at the same energy.
Table: Relative Biological Effectiveness

11.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713Type and Energy of Radiation RBE
X-rays 1
-rays 1
rays greater than 32 keV 1
rays less than 32 keV 1.7
Neutrons, thermal to slow (<20 keV) 2 - 5
Neutrons, fast (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
Protons (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
rays from radioactive decay 10–20
Heavy ions from accelerators 10–20
Values approximate. Difficult to determine.
A dose unit more closely related to effects in biolo gical tissue is called the roentgen equivalent man (rem) and is defined to be the
dose (in rads) multiplied by the relative biological effectiveness (RBE). Thus, if a person had a whole-bo dy dose of 2.00 rad of
radiation, the dose in rem would be rem for the whol e body. If the person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 ra d of
radiation, then the dose in rem would be rem for the whole body. The rays would have 20 times the effect
on the person than the rays for the same deposited energy. The SI equivalent of the rem, and the more st andard term, is the sievert
(Sv) is
The RBEs given in Table are approximate but reflec t an understanding of nuclear radiation and its inte raction with living
tissue. For example, neutrons are known to cause more da mage than rays, although both are neutral and have large ranges, due to
secondary radiation. Any dose less than 100 mSv (10 re m) is called a low dose, 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem) is called a moderate
dose, and anything greater than 1 Sv (100 rem) is called a high dose. It is difficult to determine if a person has been ex posed to less
than 10 mSv.
Biological effects of different levels of nuclear ra diation on the human body are given in Table The f irst clue that a person
has been exposed to radiation is a change in blood c ount, which is not surprising since blood cells are th e most rapidly reproducing
cells in the body. At higher doses, nausea and hair loss are observed, which may be due to interference wit h cell reproduction. Cells
in the lining of the digestive system also rapidly r eproduce, and their destruction causes nausea. When t he growth of hair cells
slows, the hair follicles become thin and break off. High doses cause significant cell death in all systems, bu t the lowest doses that
cause fatalities do so by weakening the immune system throu gh the loss of white blood cells.
Table: Immediate Effects of Radiation (Adults, Whole -Body, Single Exposure)[1]
[1]

11.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713Dose in Sv Effect
0–0.10 No observable effect.
0.1–1 Slight to moderate decrease in white blood cell c ounts.
0.5 Temporary sterility; 0.35 for women, 0.50 for men.
1–2Significant reduction in blood cell counts, brief nau sea and
vomiting. Rarely fatal.
2–5Nausea, vomiting, hair loss, severe blood damage, hemor rhage,
fatalities.
4.5Lethal to of the population within 32 days after exp osure if
not treated.
5–20Worst effects due to malfunction of small intestine and blood
systems. Limited survival.
>20 Fatal within hours due to collapse of central nervou s system.
Multiply by 100 to obtain dose in rem.
Sources of Radiation
Human are also exposed to many sources of nuclear rad iation. A summary of average radiation doses for diff erent sources by
country is given in Table. Earth emits radiation d ue to the isotopes of uranium, thorium, and potassium. Radiation levels
from these sources depend on location and can vary b y a factor of 10. Fertilizers contain isotopes of pota ssium and uranium, which
we digest in the food we eat. Fertilizers have more than 3000 Bq/kg radioactivity, compared to just 66 Bq/kg for Carbon -14.
Table: Background Radiation Sources and Average Doses
Source Dose (mSv/y)
Australia Germany US World
Natural radiation – external
Cosmic rays 0.30 0.28 0.30 0.39
Soil, building materials 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.48
Radon gas 0.90 1.1 2.0 1.2
Natural radiation – internal
,, 0.24 0.28 0.40 0.29
Artificial radiation
Medical and dental 0.80 0.90 0.53 0.40
TOTA L 2.6 3.0 3.5 2.8
Multiply by 100 to obtain does in mrem/y.
Medical visits are also a source of nuclear radiation. A sample of common nuclear radiation doses is given in Table. These
doses are generally low and can be lowered further wit h improved techniques and more sensitive detectors. Wi th the possible
exception of routine dental X-rays, medical use of nu clear radiation is used only when the risk-benefit is favorable. Chest X-rays
give the lowest doses—about 0.1 mSv to the tissue affec ted, with less than scattering into tissues that are n ot directly imaged.
Other X-ray procedures range upward to about 10 mSv in a CT scan, and about 5 mSv (0.5 rem) per dental X-ray, a gain both only
affecting the tissue imaged. Medical images with radio pharmaceuticals give doses ranging from 1 to 5 mSv, usually localized.[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]

11.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713Table: Typical Doses Received During Diagnostic X-Ray Exams
Procedure Effective Dose (mSv)
Chest 0.02
Dental 0.01
Skull 0.07
Leg 0.02
Mammogram 0.40
Barium enema 7.0
Upper GI 3.0
CT head 2.0
CT abdomen 10.0
The Chernobyl accident in Ukraine (formerly in the So viet Union) exposed the surrounding population to a l arge amount of
radiation through the decay of. The initial radioac tivity level was approximately. Calculate the total mass of
involved in this accident.
Strategy
The total number of nuclei, N, can be determined from the known half-life and act ivity of (30.2 y). The mass can be
calculated from N using the concept of a mole.
Solution
Solving the equation for N gives
Entering the given values yields
To convert from curies to becquerels and years to secon ds, we write
One mole of a nuclide has a mass of A grams, so that one mole of has a mass of 137 g. A mo le has nuclei.
Thus the mass of released was
\[m = \left(\frac{137 \, g}{6.02 \times 10^{23}\right)(3.1 \times 10^{26}) = 70 \times 10^3 \, g = 70 \, kg. \nonumbe r \]
Significance
The mass of involved in the Chernobyl accident is a small material compared to the typical amount of fu el used in a
nuclear reactor. However, approximately 250 people were admitted to local hospitals immediately after the acc ident, and
diagnosed as suffering acute radiation syndrome. They received external radiation dosages between 1 and 16 Sv. Referring to
biological effects in Table, these dosages are extre mely hazardous. The eventual death toll is estimated t o be around 4000
people, primarily due to radiation-induced cancer.Example: What Mass of Escaped Chernobyl?

11.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76713Radiation propagates in all directions from its sour ce, much as electromagnetic radiation from a light bulb. Is activity concept
more analogous to power, intensity, or brightness?
Answer
power
This page titled 11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuc lear Radiation by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

11.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671411.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
10.1. eight
10.2. harder
10.3. Half-life is inversely related to decay rate, so the half-life is short. Activity depends on both the numbe r of decaying
particles and the decay rate, so the activity can be gr eat or small.
10.4. Neither; it stays the same.
10.5. the same
10.6. the conversion of mass to energy
10.7. power
Conceptual Questions
1. The nucleus of an atom is made of one or more nucleo ns. A nucleon refers to either a proton or neutron. A nuclide is a
stable nucleus.
3. A bound system should have less mass than its component s because of energy-mass equivalence. If the energy
of a system is reduced, the total mass of the system i s reduced. If two bricks are placed next to one anot her, the attraction
between them is purely gravitational, assuming the bric ks are electrically neutral. The gravitational forc e between the bricks
is relatively small (compared to the strong nuclear force), so the mass defect is much too small to be o bserved. If the bricks
are glued together with cement, the mass defect is lik ewise small because the electrical interactions between the electrons
involved in the bonding are still relatively small.
5. Nucleons at the surface of a nucleus interact with fewer nucleons. This reduces the binding energy per nucleo n, which is
based on an average over all the nucleons in the nucleus.
7. That it is constant.
9. Gamma (γ) rays are produced by nuclear interactions and X-ra ys and light are produced by atomic interactions. Gamm a
rays are typically shorter wavelength than X-rays, and X- rays are shorter wavelength than light.
11. Assume a rectangular coordinate system with an xy-plane that corresponds to the plane of the paper. α α bends into the
page (trajectory parabolic in the xz-plane); bends into the page (trajectory parabolic i n the xz-plane); and is unbent.
13. Yes. An atomic bomb is a fission bomb, and a fission bomb occ urs by splitting the nucleus of atom.
15. Short-range forces between nucleons in a nucleus are analogous to the forces between water molecules in a wa ter droplet.
In particular, the forces between nucleons at the sur face of the nucleus produce a surface tension simila r to that of a water
droplet.
17. The nuclei produced in the fusion process have a lar ger binding energy per nucleon than the nuclei that are fused. That is,
nuclear fusion decreases average energy of the nucleons in the system. The energy difference is carried away as ra diation.
19. Alpha particles do not penetrate materials such as ski n and clothes easily. (Recall that alpha radiation i s barely able to
pass through a thin sheet of paper.) However, when produce inside the body, neighboring cells are vulnerable.

11.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76714Problems
21. Use the rule.
Atomic Number (Z) Neutron Number (N) Mass Number (A)
(a) 29 29 58
(b) 11 13 24
(c) 84 126 210
(d) 20 25 45
(e) 82 124 206
23. a.;
b.
25. side length =
27. 92.4 MeV
29.
31. a. 7.570 MeV;
b. graph’s value
33. The decay constant is equal to the negative value of the slope or. The half-life of the nuclei, and th us the material,
is million years.
35. a. The decay constant is
b. Since strontium-91 has an atomic mass of 90.90 g, the number of nuclei in a 1.00-g sample is initially
The initial activity for strontium-91 is
The activity at is
37.
39. a. 0.988 Ci;
b. The half-life of is more precisely known than it was when the Ci unit was established.
41. a.;
b.
43. a.;
b.
45. a. 4.273 MeV;
b.;
c. Since is a slowly decaying substance, only a very sm all number of nuclei decay on human timescales; ther efore,
although those nuclei that decay lose a noticeable fraction of their mass, the change in the total mass o f the sample is
not detectable for a macroscopic sample.

11.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671447. a.;
b. 0.546 MeV
49.
51. a.;
b. 0.862 MeV
53. a.;
b. 33.05 MeV
55. a. 177.1 MeV;
b. This value is approximately equal to the average BEN for heavy nuclei.
c.,
57. a.;
b. fissions/s;
c. 991 kg
59. i.
ii.
iii.
61. 26.73 MeV
63. a.;
b.;
This huge number is indicative of how rarely a neutrino int eracts, since large detectors observe very few per day.
65. a. The atomic mass of deuterium is 2.014102 u, while that of tritium is 3.016049 u, for a total of 5.032 151 u
per reaction. So a mole of reactants has a mass of 5.0 3 g, and in 1.00 kg, there are of
reactants. The number of reactions that take place is th erefore
The total energy output is the number of reactions tim es the energy per reaction:
b. Power is energy per unit time. One year has, so
We expect nuclear processes to yield large amounts of energy, and this is certainly the case here. The energy output of
from fusing 1.00 kg of deuterium and tritium is equiv alent to 2.6 million gallons of gasoline and about

11.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76714eight times the energy output of the bomb that destro yed Hiroshima. Yet the average backyard swimming pool has
about 6 kg of deuterium in it, so that fuel is plentiful if it can be utilized in a controlled manner.
67. \(\displaystyle G_y=\frac{Sv}{RBE}:
a. 0.01 Gy;
b. 0.0025 Gy;
c. 0.16 Gy
69. 1.24 MeV
71. 1.69 mm
73. For cancer: The risk each year of dying from induc ed cancer is 30 in a million. For genetic
defect: The chance each year of an induced genetic def ect is 10 in a million.
Additional Problems
75. atomic mass(Cl)=35.5g/mol
77. a.;
b. This mass is impossibly large; it is greater than the mass o f the entire Milky Way galaxy.
c. is not produced through natural processes operati ng over long times on Earth, but through artificial p rocesses in
a nuclear reactor.
79. If of rays are left after 2.00 cm, then only are left after 4.00 cm. This is much smaller than your lab
partner’s result ().
81. a.;
(b) From Appendix B, the energy released per decay is 4.27 MeV, so;
(c) The monetary value of the energy is
83. We know that and.
Thus, the age of the tomb is
Challenge Problems
85. a.;
b. 6.24 kW;
c. 5.67 kW
87. a. Due to the leak, the pressure in the turbine chamb er has dropped significantly. The pressure difference between the
turbine chamber and steam condenser is now very low.
b. A large pressure difference is required for steam to p ass through the turbine chamber and turn the turbine.
89. The energies are
Notice that most of the energy goes to the γγ ray.
This page titled 11.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671410.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

11.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671511.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
10.1 Properties of Nuclei
1. Define and make clear distinctions between the terms neutron, nucleon, nucleus, and nuclide.
2. What are isotopes? Why do isotopes of the same atom sha re the same chemical properties?
10.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
3. Explain why a bound system should have less mass than i ts components. Why is this not observed traditional ly, say, for a
building made of bricks?
4. Why is the number of neutrons greater than the num ber of protons in stable nuclei that have an A great er than about 40?
Why is this effect more pronounced for the heaviest nu clei?
5. To obtain the most precise value of the binding ener gy per nucleon, it is important to take into accoun t forces between
nucleons at the surface of the nucleus. Will surface effe cts increase or decrease estimates of BEN?
10.3 Radioactive Decay
6. How is the initial activity rate of a radioactive substan ce related to its half-life?
7. For the carbon dating described in this chapter, what important assumption is made about the time variat ion in the intensity
of cosmic rays?
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
8. What is the key difference and the key similarity bet ween beta () decay and alpha decay?
9. What is the difference between rays and characteristi c X-rays and visible light?
10. What characteristics of radioactivity show it to be nu clear in origin and not atomic?
11. Consider Figure 10.12. If the magnetic field is repl aced by an electric field pointed in toward the page, in which
directions will the, and rays bend?
12. Why is Earth’s core molten?
Fission
13. Should an atomic bomb really be called nuclear bomb?
14. Why does a chain reaction occur during a fission reaction?
15. In what way is an atomic nucleus like a liquid drop?
Nuclear Fusion
16. Explain the difference between nuclear fission and nucl ear fusion.
17. Why does the fusion of light nuclei into heavier nuclei release energy?
Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
18. Why is a PET scan more accurate than a SPECT scan?
19. Isotopes that emit radiation are relatively safe outsi de the body and exceptionally hazardous inside. Explain wh y.
20. Ionizing radiation can impair the ability of a cell to repair DNA. What are the three ways the cell can respond?
Problems

11.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671510.1 Properties of Nuclei
21. Find the atomic numbers, mass numbers, and neutron numbers fo r
(a),
(b),
(c),
(d), and
(e).
22. Silver has two stable isotopes. The nucleus,, has ato mic mass 106.905095 g/mol with an abundance of;
whereas has atomic mass 108.904754 g/mol with an abund ance of 48.17%. Find the atomic mass of the element
silver.
23. The mass (M) and the radius (r) of a nucleus can be expressed in terms of the mass number, A.
(a) Show that the density of a nucleus is independent of A.
(b) Calculate the density of a gold (Au) nucleus. Compar e your answer to that for iron (Fe).
24. A particle has a mass equal to 10 u. If this mass is converted completely into energy, how much energy is released?
Express your answer in mega-electron volts (MeV). (Recall th at.)
25. Find the length of a side of a cube having a mass of 1.0 kg and the density of nuclear matter.
26. The detail that you can observe using a probe is li mited by its wavelength. Calculate the energy of a p article that has a
wavelength of, small enough to detect details about one- tenth the size of a nucleon.
10.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
27. How much energy would be released if six hydrogen atoms and s ix neutrons were combined to form?
28. Find the mass defect and the binding energy for the helium- 4 nucleus.
29. is among the most tightly bound of all nuclides. It makes up more than of natural iron. Note that has even
numbers of protons and neutrons. Calculate the binding energy per nucleon for and compare it with the app roximate
value obtained from the graph in Figure 10.7.
30. is the heaviest stable nuclide, and its BEN is low compared with medium-mass nuclides. Calculate BEN for th is
nucleus and compare it with the approximate value obta ined from the graph in Figure 10.7.
31. (a) Calculate BEN for, the rarer of the two most common ur anium isotopes;
(b) Calculate BEN for. (Most of uranium is.)
32. The fact that BEN peaks at roughly implies that the range of the strong nuclear force is about the diamet er of this
nucleus.
(a) Calculate the diameter of nucleus.
(b) Compare BEN for and. The first is one of the m ost tightly bound nuclides, whereas the second is large r
and less tightly bound.
10.3 Radioactive Decay
33. A sample of radioactive material is obtained from a very old rock. A plot ln A verses t yields a slope value of
(see Figure 10.10(b)). What is the half-life of this mater ial?
34. Show that:.
35. The half-life of strontium-91, is 9.70 h. Find
(a) its decay constant and

11.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76715(b) for an initial 1.00-g sample, the activity after 15 h ours.
36. A sample of pure carbon-14 (has an activity of. Wha t is the mass of the sample?
37. A radioactive sample initially contains mol of a ra dioactive material whose half-life is 6.00 h. How many
moles of the radioactive material remain after 6.00 h? Aft er 12.0 h? After 36.0 h?
38. An old campfire is uncovered during an archaeological dig. Its charcoal is found to contain less than 1/10 00 the normal
amount of. Estimate the minimum age of the charcoal, noti ng that.
39. Calculate the activity, in curies of 1.00 g of.
(b) Explain why your answer is not exactly 1.00 Ci, giv en that the curie was originally supposed to be exact ly the
activity of a gram of radium.
40. Natural uranium consists of (percent abundance=0.7200%,) and (percent
abundance=99.27%,). What were the values for percent abundance of a nd when Earth formed
4.5×1094.5×109 years ago?
41. World War II aircraft had instruments with glowing r adium-painted dials. The activity of one such instru ment was
Bq when new.
(a) What mass of was present?
(b) After some years, the phosphors on the dials deter iorated chemically, but the radium did not escape. Wh at is the
activity of this instrument 57.0 years after it was made?
42. The source used in a physics laboratory is labeled as having an activity of on the date it was prepar ed. A
student measures the radioactivity of this source wit h a Geiger counter and observes 1500 counts per minu te. She notices that
the source was prepared 120 days before her lab. What fr action of the decays is she observing with her apparatus?
43. Armor-piercing shells with depleted uranium cores are fired by aircraft at tanks. (The high density of th e uranium makes
them effective.) The uranium is called depleted beca use it has had its removed for reactor use and is nearly pure.
Depleted uranium has been erroneously called nonradioa ctive. To demonstrate that this is wrong:
(a) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of pure.
(b) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of natural uranium, n eglecting the and all daughter nuclides.
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
44. undergoes alpha decay.
(a) Write the reaction equation.
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.
45. (a) Calculate the energy released in the decay of.
(b) What fraction of the mass of a single is destroyed in the decay? The mass of is 234.043593 u.
(c) Although the fractional mass loss is large for a si ngle nucleus, it is difficult to observe for an entir e macroscopic
sample of uranium. Why is this?
46. The particles emitted in the decay of (tritium) interact with matter to create light in a glow-in-the- dark exit sign.
At the time of manufacture, such a sign contains 15.0 Ci of.
(a) What is the mass of the tritium?
(b) What is its activity 5.00 y after manufacture?
47. (a) Write the complete decay equation for, a major was te product of nuclear reactors.
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.

11.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671548. Write a nuclear decay reaction that produces the nucleus. (Hint: The parent nuclide is a major waste product of
reactors and has chemistry similar to calcium, so that it is concentrated in bones if ingested.)
49. Write the complete decay equation in the complete notation for the beta () decay of (tritium), a ma nufactured
isotope of hydrogen used in some digital watch displays, an d manufactured primarily for use in hydrogen bombs.
50. If a 1.50-cm-thick piece of lead can absorb of the rays from a radioactive source, how many centimeters of lead are
needed to absorb all but of the rays?
51. An electron can interact with a nucleus through the beta-dec ay process:.
(a) Write the complete reaction equation for electron ca pture by.
(b) Calculate the energy released.
52. (a) Write the complete reaction equation for electron ca pture by.
(b) Calculate the energy released.
53. A rare decay mode has been observed in which emits a nucleus.
(a) The decay equation is. Identify the nuclide.
(b) Find the energy emitted in the decay. The mass of is 222.015353 u.
10.5 Fission
54. A large power reactor that has been in operation fo r some months is turned off, but residual activity in the core still
produces 150 MW of power. If the average energy per decay o f the fission products is 1.00 MeV, what is the core activity?
55. (a) Calculate the energy released in this rare neutro n-induced fission, given
and.
(b) This result is about 6 MeV greater than the result for spontaneous fission. Why? (c) Confirm that the total number
of nucleons and total charge are conserved in this reac tion.
56. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutron-i nduced fission reaction, given
and.
(b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and tota l charge are conserved in this reaction.
57. The electrical power output of a large nuclear react or facility is 900 MW. It has a efficiency in conve rting nuclear
power to electrical power.
(a) What is the thermal nuclear power output in megawatts?
(b) How many nuclei fission each second, assuming the avera ge fission produces 200 MeV?
(c) What mass of is fissioned in 1 year of full-power op eration?
58. Find the total energy released if 1.00 kg of were to underg o fission.
10.6 Nuclear Fusion
59. Verify that the total number of nucleons, and tota l charge are conserved for each of the following fus ion reactions in the
proton-proton chain.
(i),
(ii), and
(iii). (List the value of each of the conserved qua ntities before and after each of the
reactions.)
60. Calculate the energy output in each of the fusion re actions in the proton-proton chain, and verify the values determined in
the preceding problem.

11.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671561. Show that the total energy released in the proton-pro ton chain is 26.7 MeV, considering the overall effect i n
, and. Be sure to include the annihilation energy.
62. Two fusion reactions mentioned in the text are and. Both reactions release energy,
but the second also creates more fuel. Confirm that th e energies produced in the reactions are 20.58 and 2. 22 MeV,
respectively. Comment on which product nuclide is most t ightly bound, or.
63. The power output of the Sun is.
(a) If of this energy is supplied by the proton-proton chai n, how many protons are consumed per second?
(b) How many neutrinos per second should there be per square m eter at the surface of Earth from this process?
64. Another set of reactions that fuses hydrogen into heliu m in the Sun and especially in hotter stars is called the CNO cycle:
This process is
a “cycle” because appears at the beginning and end of these reactions. Write down the overall effect of t his cycle (as
done for the proton-proton chain in). Assume that the positrons annihilate electrons to form
more rays.
65. (a) Calculate the energy released by the fusion of a 1.00-kg mixture of deuterium and tritium, which pr oduces helium.
There are equal numbers of deuterium and tritium nuclei i n the mixture.
(b) If this process takes place continuously over a period o f a year, what is the average power output?
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
66. What is the dose in mSv for:
(a) a 0.1-Gy X-ray?
(b) 2.5 mGy of neutron exposure to the eye?
(c) 1.5m Gy of exposure?
67. Find the radiation dose in Gy for:
(a) A 10-mSv fluoroscopic X-ray series.
(b) 50 mSv of skin exposure by an emitter.
(c) 160 mSv of and rays from the in your body.
68. Find the mass of that has an activity of.
69. In the 1980s, the term picowave was used to describe foo d irradiation in order to overcome public resistanc e by playing
on the well-known safety of microwave radiation. Find the ener gy in MeV of a photon having a wavelength of a picometer.
70. What is the dose in Sv in a cancer treatment that exposes t he patient to 200 Gy of rays?
71. One half the γγ rays from are absorbed by a 0.170-m m-thick lead shielding. Half of the rays that pass th rough the
first layer of lead are absorbed in a second layer of equal thickness. What thickness of lead will absorb a ll but one in 1000 of
these rays?
72. How many Gy of exposure is needed to give a cancerous tumor a dose of 40 Sv if it is exposed to activity?
73. A plumber at a nuclear power plant receives a whole-bo dy dose of 30 mSv in 15 minutes while repairing a cru cial valve.
Find the radiation-induced yearly risk of death from cancer and the chance of genetic defect from this maximum allowable
exposure.
74. Calculate the dose in rem/y for the lungs of a weapo ns plant employee who inhales and retains an activity o f
in an accident. The mass of affected lung tissue is 2.00 kg and the plutonium decays by emission of a 5.23-M eV
particle. Assume a RBE value of 20.

11.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76715Additional Problems
75. The wiki-phony site states that the atomic mass of ch lorine is 40 g/mol. Check this result. Hint: The two, most common
stable isotopes of chlorine are: and. (The abundance of Cl-35 is, and the abundance of Cl-37 is.)
76. A particle physicist discovers a neutral particle with a ma ss of 2.02733 u that he assumes is two neutrons bound tog ether.
(a) Find the binding energy.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
77. A nuclear physicist finds of in a piece of uranium o re (.
(a) Use the decay law to determine how much would had to have been on Earth when it formed ago
for 1.0μg1.0μg to be left today.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) How is this unreasonable result resolved?
78. A group of scientists use carbon dating to date a piece of wood to be 3 billion years old. Why doesn’t this make se nse?
79. According to your lab partner, a 2.00-cm-thick sodiu m-iodide crystal absorbs all but of rays from a rad ioactive source
and a 4.00-cm piece of the same material absorbs all but? Is this result reasonable?
80. In the science section of the newspaper, an article r eports the efforts of a group of scientists to create a new nuclear
reactor based on the fission of iron (Fe). Is this a good id ea?
81. The ceramic glaze on a red-orange “Fiestaware” plate is and contains 50.0 grams of, but very little.
(a) What is the activity of the plate?
(b) Calculate the total energy that will be released by the decay.
(c) If energy is worth 12.0 cents per, what is the mon etary value of the energy emitted? (These brightly-c olored
ceramic plates went out of production some 30 years ago, but are still available as collectibles.)
82. Large amounts of depleted uranium () are available as a by-product of uranium processing for reactor f uel and
weapons. Uranium is very dense and makes good counter weights for aircraft. Suppose you have a 4000-kg block of.
(a) Find its activity.
(b) How many calories per day are generated by thermaliz ation of the decay energy?
(c) Do you think you could detect this as heat? Explain.
83. A piece of wood from an ancient Egyptian tomb is te sted for its carbon-14 activity. It is found to have an activity per
gram of carbon of. What is the age of the wood?
Challenge Problems
84. This problem demonstrates that the binding energy o f the electron in the ground state of a hydrogen ato m is much smaller
than the rest mass energies of the proton and electron.
(a) Calculate the mass equivalent in u of the 13.6- eV binding energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom, and compare
this with the known mass of the hydrogen atom.
(b) Subtract the known mass of the proton from the known mas s of the hydrogen atom.
(c) Take the ratio of the binding energy of the ele ctron (13.6 eV) to the energy equivalent of the elect ron’s mass (0.511
MeV). (d) Discuss how your answers confirm the stated purpose of this problem.
85. The Galileo space probe was launched on its long journey past Ve nus and Earth in 1989, with an ultimate goal of Jupi ter.
Its power source is 11.0 kg of, a by-product of nucl ear weapons plutonium production. Electrical energy is generated
thermoelectrically from the heat produced when the 5.59-MeV particles emitted in each decay crash to a halt inside the
plutonium and its shielding. The half-life of is 87.7 ye ars.

11.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76715(a) What was the original activity of the in becquerels?
(b) What power was emitted in kilowatts?
(c) What power was emitted 12.0 y after launch? You ma y neglect any extra energy from daughter nuclides an d any
losses from escaping rays.
86. Find the energy emitted in the decay of.
87. Engineers are frequently called on to inspect and, if necessary, repair equipment in nuclear power plan ts. Suppose that the
city lights go out. After inspecting the nuclear rea ctor, you find a leaky pipe that leads from the ste am generator to turbine
chamber.
(a) How do the pressure readings for the turbine chamber and steam condenser compare?
(b) Why is the nuclear reactor not generating electricity?
88. If two nuclei are to fuse in a nuclear reaction, the y must be moving fast enough so that the repulsive C oulomb force
between them does not prevent them for getting within of one another. At this distance or nearer, the att ractive
nuclear force can overcome the Coulomb force, and the nuclei are able to fuse.
(a) Find a simple formula that can be used to estimate the minimum kinetic energy the nuclei must have if they are to
fuse. To keep the calculation simple, assume the two nu clei are identical and moving toward one another with the same
speed v.
(b) Use this minimum kinetic energy to estimate the minimum temperature a gas of the nuclei must have be fore a
significant number of them will undergo fusion. Calc ulate this minimum temperature first for hydrogen an d then for
helium. (Hint: For fusion to occur, the minimum kinetic energy when the nuclei are far apart must be equal to the
Coulomb potential energy when they are a distance R apart.)
89. For the reaction,, find the amount of energy transfe rs to and (on the right side of the equation).
Assume the reactants are initially at rest. (Hint: Use conservation of momentum principle.)
90. Engineers are frequently called on to inspect and, if necessary, repair equipment in medical hospitals. Sup pose that the
PET system malfunctions. After inspecting the unit, yo u suspect that one of the PET photon detectors is misa ligned. To test
your theory you position one detector at the locatio n relative to a radioactive test sample at the cen ter of
the patient bed.
(a) If the second photon detector is properly aligned wh ere should it be located?
(b) What energy reading is expected?
This page titled 11.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

11.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671611.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)

11.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76716Key Terms
activity magnitude of the decay rate for radioactive nuclide s
alpha (α) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
alpha particles
alpha decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of an alpha
particle
antielectrons another term for positrons
antineutrino antiparticle of an electron’s neutrino in β−β− decay
atomic mass total mass of the protons, neutrons, and electrons in a single atom
atomic mass unitunit used to express the mass of an individual nucleus, w here
atomic nucleus tightly packed group of nucleons at the center of an atom
atomic number number of protons in a nucleus
becquerel (Bq)SI unit for the decay rate of a radioactive material, equal to 1
decay/second
beta (ββ) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
beta particles
beta decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of a beta
particle
binding energy (BE)energy needed to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and
neutrons
binding energy per nucleon (BEN) energy need to remove a nucleon from a nucleus
breeder reactor reactor that is designed to make plutonium
carbon-14 datingmethod to determine the age of formerly living tissue using the
ratio
chart of the nuclides graph comprising stable and unstable nuclei
critical massminimum mass required of a given nuclide in order for selfsustained fission to occur
criticality condition in which a chain reaction easily becomes sel f-sustaining
curie (Ci)unit of decay rate, or the activity of 1 g of, equ al to
daughter nucleus nucleus produced by the decay of a parent nucleus
decayprocess by which an individual atomic nucleus of an unst able atom
loses mass and energy by emitting ionizing particles
decay constantquantity that is inversely proportional to the half-l ife and that is
used in equation for number of nuclei as a function o f time
decay series series of nuclear decays ending in a stable nucleus
fission splitting of a nucleus
gamma (γγ) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
gamma particles

11.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76716gamma decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of gamma
radiation
half-lifetime for half of the original nuclei to decay (or h alf of the original
nuclei remain)
high dose dose of radiation greater than 1 Sv (100 rem)
isotopesnuclei having the same number of protons but differen t numbers of
neutrons
lifetime average time that a nucleus exists before decaying
liquid drop modelmodel of nucleus (only to understand some of its featur es) in
which nucleons in a nucleus act like atoms in a drop
low dose dose of radiation less than 100 mSv (10 rem)
mass defectdifference between the mass of a nucleus and the total mass of its
constituent nucleons
mass number number of nucleons in a nucleus
moderate dose dose of radiation from 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem)
neutrino subatomic elementary particle which has no net electri c charge
neutron number number of neutrons in a nucleus
nuclear fusion process of combining lighter nuclei to make heavier n uclei
nuclear fusion reactor nuclear reactor that uses the fusion chain to produce energy
nucleons protons and neutrons found inside the nucleus of an ato m
nucleosynthesisprocess of fusion by which all elements on Earth are bel ieved to
have been created
nuclide nucleus
parent nucleus original nucleus before decay
positron electron with positive charge
positron emission tomography (PET)tomography technique that uses emitters and detects th e two
annihilation rays, aiding in source localization
proton-proton chain combined reactions that fuse hydrogen nuclei to prod uce He nuclei
radiation dose unit (rad) ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of tissue
radioactive datingapplication of radioactive decay in which the age of a material is
determined by the amount of radioactivity of a part icular type that
occurs
radioactive decay lawdescribes the exponential decrease of parent nuclei in a radioactive
sample
radioactive tagsspecial drugs (radiopharmaceuticals) that allow doctor s to track
movement of other drugs in the body
radioactivity spontaneous emission of radiation from nuclei
radiopharmaceutical compound used for medical imaging

11.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76716radius of a nucleus radius of a nucleus is defined as
relative biological effectiveness (RBE)number that expresses the relative amount of damage th at a fixed
amount of ionizing radiation of a given type can in flict on
biological tissues
roentgen equivalent man (rem) dose unit more closely related to effects in biologica l tissue
sievert (Sv) SI equivalent of the rem
single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT) tomography performed with -emitting radiopharmaceut icals
strong nuclear force force that binds nucleons together in the nucleus
transuranic element element that lies beyond uranium in the periodic tab le
Key Equations
Atomic mass number
Standard format for expressing an isotope
Nuclear radius, where r is the radius of a single proton
Mass defect
Binding energy
Binding energy per nucleon
Radioactive decay rate
Radioactive decay law
Decay constant
Lifetime of a substance
Activity of a radioactive substance
Activity of a radioactive substance (linear form)
Alpha decay
Beta decay
Positron emission
Gamma decay
Summary
10.1 Properties of Nuclei
The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and neutron s.
The number of protons in the nucleus is given by the at omic number, Z. The number of neutrons in the nucleus is the
neutron number, N. The number of nucleons is mass number, A.
Atomic nuclei with the same atomic number, Z, but different neutron numbers, N, are isotopes of the same element.
The atomic mass of an element is the weighted average of the masses of its isotopes.0

11.S.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671610.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
The mass defect of a nucleus is the difference between the total mass of a nucleus and the sum of the masses of all i ts
constituent nucleons.
The binding energy (BE) of a nucleus is equal to the amo unt of energy released in forming the nucleus, or the mass defect
multiplied by the speed of light squared.
A graph of binding energy per nucleon (BEN) versus atomic number A implies that nuclei divided or combined release an
enormous amount of energy.
The binding energy of a nucleon in a nucleus is analogou s to the ionization energy of an electron in an atom.
10.3 Radioactive Decay
In the decay of a radioactive substance, if the decay cons tant (λλ) is large, the half-life is small, and vice versa.
The radioactive decay law,, uses the properties of radio active substances to estimate the age of a substance.
Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbo n, so it mixes into the ecosphere and eventually becomes part
of every living organism. By comparing the abundance o f in an artifact with the normal abundance in living ti ssue, it
is possible to determine the artifact’s age.
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
The three types of nuclear radiation are alpha () rays, beta () rays, and gamma () rays.
We represent αα decay symbolically by. There are two typ es of decay: either an electron () or a
positron () is emitted by a nucleus. decay is represen ted symbolically by.
When a heavy nucleus decays to a lighter one, the lighte r daughter nucleus can become the parent nucleus for the next
decay, and so on, producing a decay series.
10.5 Fission
Nuclear fission is a process in which the sum of the masses of t he product nuclei are less than the masses of the reacta nts.
Energy changes in a nuclear fission reaction can be un derstood in terms of the binding energy per nucleon curve.
The production of new or different isotopes by nuclear t ransformation is called breeding, and reactors designed for this
purpose are called breeder reactors.
10.6 Nuclear Fusion
Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two nuclei are combined to form a larger nucleus; energy is released when light
nuclei are fused to form medium-mass nuclei.
The amount of energy released by a fusion reaction is k nown as the Q value.
Nuclear fusion explains the reaction between deuterium and t ritium that produces a fusion (or hydrogen) bomb; fusion
also explains the production of energy in the Sun, the process of nucleosynthesis, and the creation of the heavy elem ents.
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
Nuclear technology is used in medicine to locate and study diseased tissue using special drugs called
radiopharmaceuticals. Radioactive tags are used to iden tify cancer cells in the bones, brain tumors, and Alzheimer’ s
disease, and to monitor the function of body organs, such a s blood flow, heart muscle activity, and iodine uptake in the
thyroid gland.
The biological effects of ionizing radiation are due t o two effects it has on cells: interference with cell repr oduction and
destruction of cell function.
Common sources of radiation include that emitted by Eart h due to the isotopes of uranium, thorium, and potassium;
natural radiation from cosmic rays, soils, and building m aterials, and artificial sources from medical and denta l diagnostic
tests.
Biological effects of nuclear radiation are expressed by many different physical quantities and in many differen t units,
including the rad or radiation dose unit.
This page titled 11.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.S.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7671610.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Atomic Structure
In this chapter, we use quantum mechanics to study th e structure and properties of atoms. This study intr oduces ideas and concepts
that are necessary to understand more complex system s, such as molecules, crystals, and metals. As we deepen o ur understanding
of atoms, we build on things we already know, such as Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom, Bohr’s model of the hydrogen
atom, and de Broglie’s wave hypothesis.
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
12.3: Electron Spin
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
12.6: Lasers
12.A: Atomic Structure (Answers)
12.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises)
12.S: Atomic Structure (Summary)
This page titled 12: Atomic Structure is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669612.1: The Hydrogen Atom
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the hydrogen atom in terms of wave function, prob ability density, total energy, and orbital angular momen tum
Identify the physical significance of each of the quantum numbers (n, l, m) of the hydrogen atom
Distinguish between the Bohr and Schrödinger models of the atom
Use quantum numbers to calculate important information ab out the hydrogen atom
In this chapter, we use quantum mechanics to study th e structure and properties of atoms. This study intr oduces ideas and concepts
that are necessary to understand more complex system s, such as molecules, crystals, and metals. As we deepen o ur understanding
of atoms, we build on things we already know, such as Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom, Bohr’s model of the hydrogen
atom, and de Broglie’s wave hypothesis.
Figure: NGC1763 is an emission nebula in the Large Mag ellanic Cloud, which is a satellite galaxy to our Mil ky Way Galaxy.
The colors we see can be explained by applying the id eas of quantum mechanics to atomic structure. (credit: NASA, ESA, and Josh
Lake)
Figure is NGC1763, an emission nebula in the small galax y known as the Large Magellanic Cloud, which is a satell ite of the
Milky Way Galaxy. Ultraviolet light from hot stars ion izes the hydrogen atoms in the nebula. As protons and e lectrons recombine,
radiation of different frequencies is emitted. The de tails of this process can be correctly predicted by qu antum mechanics and are
examined in this chapter.
The Hydrogen Atom
The hydrogen atom is the simplest atom in nature and, therefore, a good starting point to study atoms and atomic structure. The
hydrogen atom consists of a single negatively charg ed electron that moves about a positively charged pr oton (Figure). In
Bohr’s model, the electron is pulled around the proto n in a perfectly circular orbit by an attractive Co ulomb force. The proton is
approximately 1800 times more massive than the elect ron, so the proton moves very little in response to t he force on the proton by
the electron. (This is analogous to the Earth-Sun sy stem, where the Sun moves very little in response to th e force exerted on it by
Earth.) An explanation of this effect using Newton’s laws is given in Photons and Matter Waves.Learning Objectives

12.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696
Figure: A representation of the Bohr model of the hy drogen atom.
With the assumption of a fixed proton, we focus on the motion of the electron.
In the electric field of the proton, the potential energ y of the electron is
where and is the distance between the electron and t he proton. As we saw earlier, the force on an object is equal to the
negative of the gradient (or slope) of the potential energy function. For the special case of a hydrogen at om, the force between the
electron and proton is an attractive Coulomb force.
Notice that the potential energy function does not v ary in time. As a result, Schrödinger’s equation of the hydrogen atom
reduces to two simpler equations: one that depends on ly on space (x, y, z) and another that depends only on time (t). (The
separation of a wave function into space- and time-d ependent parts for time-independent potential energy functions is discussed in
Quantum Mechanics.) We are most interested in the space-dependent equatio n:
where is the three-dimensional wave function of the e lectron, meme is the mass of the electron, and is the total
energy of the electron. Recall that the total wave fu nction, is the product of the space-dependent wave f unction
and the time-dependent wave function.
In addition to being time-independent, is also sphe rically symmetrical. This suggests that we may solve Sc hrödinger’s
equation more easily if we express it in terms of the spherical coordinates () instead of rectangular co ordinates (). A
spherical coordinate system is shown in Figure. In sp herical coordinates, the variable is the radial coo rdinate, is the polar
angle (relative to the vertical z-axis), and is the azimuthal angle (relative to the x-axis). The relationship between spherical and
rectangular coordinates is,,.
Figure: The relationship between the spherical and re ctangular coordinate systems.

12.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696The factor is the magnitude of a vector formed by t he projection of the polar vector onto the xy-plane. Also, the coordinates
of x and y are obtained by projecting this vector onto the x- and y-axes, respectively. The inverse transformation gives
Schrödinger’s wave equation for the hydrogen atom in s pherical coordinates is discussed in more advanced c ourses in modern
physics, so we do not consider it in detail here. Howeve r, due to the spherical symmetry of, this equation r educes to three
simpler equations: one for each of the three coordinate s (,, and). Solutions to the time-independent wave function are written as
a product of three functions:
where is the radial function dependent on the radia l coordinate only; is the polar function dependent on the polar coordinate
only; and is the phi function of only. Valid solu tions to Schrödinger’s equation are labeled by the quantum numbers,
, and.
: principal quantum number
: angular momentum quantum number
: angular momentum projection quantum number
(The reasons for these names will be explained in th e next section.) The radial function depends only on and; the polar
function depends only on and; and the phi functi on depends only on. The dependence of each functi on on quantum
numbers is indicated with subscripts:
Not all sets of quantum numbers (,,) are possible. For example, the orbital angular quantum number can ne ver be greater or
equal to the principal quantum number. Specifically, we ha ve
Notice that for the ground state,,, and. In other words, there is only one quantum state with the wave f unction for
, and it is. However, for, we have
and
Therefore, the allowed states for the state are,,, and. Example wave functions for the hydrogen atom are
given in Table. Note that some of these expressions contain the letter, which represents. When probabil ities are
calculated, these complex numbers do not appear in the fin al answer.

12.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696: Wave Functions of the Hydrogen Atom
Physical Significance of the Quantum Numbers
Each of the three quantum numbers of the hydrogen atom (,,) is associated with a different physical quantity.
Principal Quantum Number
The principal quantum number is associated with the to tal energy of the electron,. According to Schrödinger’s equation:
where. Notice that this expression is identical to t hat of Bohr’s model. As in the Bohr model, the electro n in a
particular state of energy does not radiate.
For the hydrogen atom, how many possible quantum states correspond to the principal number? What are the energies of
these states?
Strategy
For a hydrogen atom of a given energy, the number of allowed states depends on its orbital angular moment um. We can count
these states for each value of the principal quantum number,. However, the total energy depends on the pr incipal
quantum number only, which means that we can use Equation and the number of states counted.
Solution
If, the allowed values of are 0, 1, and 2. If, (1 state). If, (3 states); and if,
(5 states). In total, there are 1 + 3 + 5 = 9 allo wed states. Because the total energy depends only on the principal
quantum number,, the energy of each of these states is
Significance
An electron in a hydrogen atom can occupy many differ ent angular momentum states with the very same energ y. As the orbital
angular momentum increases, the number of the allowed stat es with the same energy increases.
Angular Momentum Orbital Quantum Number
The angular momentum orbital quantum number is associated with the orbital angular momentum of the electron in a
hydrogen atom. Quantum theory tells us that when the hy drogen atom is in the state, the magnitude of its orbital angular
momentum is
where.Example: How Many Possible States?

12.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696This result is slightly different from that found with Bohr’s theory, which quantizes angular momentum acc ording to the rule,
where
Quantum states with different values of orbital angula r momentum are distinguished using spectroscopic notation (Table
). The designations s, p, d, and f result from early historical attempts to classify at omic spectral lines. (The letters stand
for sharp, principal, diffuse, and fundamental, respectiv ely.) After f, the letters continue alphabetically.
The ground state of hydrogen is designated as the 1 s state, where “1” indicates the energy level () and “ s” indicates the
orbital angular momentum state (). When, can be ei ther 0 or 1. The, state is designated “2 s.” The,
state is designated “2 p.” When, can be 0, 1, or 2, and the states are 3 s, 3p, and 3 d, respectively. Notation for other
quantum states is given in Table.
Table: Spectroscopic Notation and Orbital Angular Mo mentum
Orbital Quantum Number Angular Momentum State Spectrosco pic Name
0 0 s Sharp
1 p Principal
2 d Diffuse
3 f Fundamental
4 g
5 h
Angular Momentum Projection Quantum Number
The angular momentum projection quantum number is associated with the azimuthal angle (see Figure) and is
related to the z-component of orbital angular momentum of an electron i n a hydrogen atom. This component is given by
where.
The z-component of angular momentum is related to the magnitud e of angular momentum by
where is the angle between the angular momentum vecto r and the z-axis. Note that the direction of the z-axis is determined by
experiment - that is, along any direction, the exper imenter decides to measure the angular momentum. For example, the z-direction
might correspond to the direction of an external magn etic field. The relationship between and is given i n Figure.Spectroscopic Notation

12.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696
Figure: The z-component of angular momentum is quantized with its own quantum number m.
Table: Spectroscopic Description of Quantum States

1s
2s 2p
3s 3p 3d
4s 4p 4d 4f
5s 5p 5d 5f 5g
6s 6p 6d 6f 6g 6h
The quantization of is equivalent to the quantizatio n of. Substituting for and for into this equation, we find
Thus, the angle is quantized with the particular valu es
Notice that both the polar angle () and the projection of the angular momentum vector onto an arbitrary z-axis () are quantized.
The quantization of the polar angle for the state is shown in Figure. The orbital angular momentum vect or lies
somewhere on the surface of a cone with an opening an gle relative to the z-axis (unless, in which case and the
vector points are perpendicular to the z-axis).

12.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696
Figure: The quantization of orbital angular momentu m. Each vector lies on the surface of a cone with axi s along the z-axis.
A detailed study of angular momentum reveals that we cannot know all three components simultaneously. In t he previous section,
the z-component of orbital angular momentum has definite values that depend on the quantum number. This imp lies that we
cannot know both x- and y-components of angular momentum, and, with certain ty. As a result, the precise direction of the
orbital angular momentum vector is unknown.
Calculate the angles that the angular momentum vector can make with the z-axis for, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The component of a given angular momentum a long the z-axis (defined by the direction of a magne tic field) can
have only certain values. These are shown here for, f or which and. The direction of is quantized in th e
sense that it can have only certain angles relative to the z-axis.
StrategyExample: What Are the Allowed Directions?

12.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696The vectors and (in the z-direction) form a right triangle, where is the hypo tenuse and is the adjacent side. The ratio
of to | | is the cosine of the angle of interest. The mag nitudes and are given by
and
Solution
We are given, so can be +1, 0, or +1. Thus, has the value given by
The quantity can have three values, given by.
As you can see in Figure,, so for, we have
Thus,
Similarly, for, we find; this gives
Then for:
so that
Significance
The angles are consistent with the figure. Only the an gle relative to the z-axis is quantized. can point in any direction as lon g
as it makes the proper angle with the z-axis. Thus, the angular momentum vectors lie on cones, a s illustrated. To see how the
correspondence principle holds here, consider that th e smallest angle (in the example) is for the maximu m value of,
namely. For that smallest angle,
which approaches 1 as becomes very large. If, then. Furthermore, for large, there are many values of, so
that all angles become possible as gets very large.
Can the magnitude ever be equal to?
Answer
No. The quantum number. Thus, the magnitude of is a lways less than because Exercise

12.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696Using the Wave Function to Make Predictions
As we saw earlier, we can use quantum mechanics to make predictions about physical events by the use of proba bility statements.
It is therefore proper to state, “An electron is loca ted within this volume with this probability at this t ime,” but not, “An electron is
located at the position (x, y, z) at this time.” To determine the probability of fin ding an electron in a hydrogen atom in a particular
region of space, it is necessary to integrate the probab ility density \(|ψ_{nlm}|^2)_ over that region:
where is an infinitesimal volume element. If this inte gral is computed for all space, the result is 1, be cause the probability of the
particle to be located somewhere is 100% (the normalization condition). In a more advanced course on modern physi cs, you will
find that, where is the complex conjugate. This eli minates the occurrences in the above
calculation.
Consider an electron in a state of zero angular mom entum (). In this case, the electron’s wave function de pends only on the
radial coordinate. (Refer to the states and in T able.) The infinitesimal volume element corresponds to a spherical
shell of radius and infinitesimal thickness, written as
The probability of finding the electron in the region to (“at approximately r”) is
Here is called the radial probability density function (a probability per unit length). For an electron in the ground state of
hydrogen, the probability of finding an electron in the region to is
where angstroms. The radial probability density funct ion is plotted in Figure. The area under the curve between
any two radial positions, say and, gives the probabil ity of finding the electron in that radial range. T o find the most probable
radial position, we set the first derivative of this f unction to zero () and solve for. The most probable radial position is
not equal to the average or expectation value of the ra dial position because is not symmetrical about its peak v alue.
Figure: The radial probability density function for the ground state of hydrogen.
If the electron has orbital angular momentum (), the n the wave functions representing the electron depend on the angles and
; that is,. Atomic orbitals for three states with a nd are shown in Figure. An atomic orbital is
a region in space that encloses a certain percentage (usually 90%) of the electron probability. (Sometimes atomic orbitals are
referred to as “clouds” of probability.) Notice that these distributions are pronounced in certain direc tions. This directionality is
important to chemists when they analyze how atoms are bou nd together to form molecules.

12.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76696
Figure: The probability density distributions for thre e states with and. The distributions are directed alo ng the (a)
x-axis, (b) y-axis, and (c) z-axis.
A slightly different representation of the wave funct ion is given in Figure. In this case, light and dark regions indicate
locations of relatively high and low probability, resp ectively. In contrast to the Bohr model of the hydrog en atom, the electron does
not move around the proton nucleus in a well-defined path. Indeed, the uncertainty principle makes it imp ossible to know how the
electron gets from one place to another.
Figure: Probability clouds for the electron in the gr ound state and several excited states of hydrogen. The probability of
finding the electron is indicated by the shade of col or; the lighter the coloring, the greater the chanc e of finding the electron.
This page titled 12.1: The Hydrogen Atom is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.2: The Hydrogen Atom by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
8.1: Prelude to Atomic Structure by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

12.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669712.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain why the hydrogen atom has magnetic properties
Explain why the energy levels of a hydrogen atom associ ated with orbital angular momentum are split by an externa l
magnetic field
Use quantum numbers to calculate the magnitude and direct ion of the orbital magnetic dipole moment of a hydrogen atom
In Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom, the electron m oves in a circular orbit around the proton. The ele ctron passes by a particular
point on the loop in a certain time, so we can calcul ate a current. An electron that orbits a proton in a hydrogen atom is
therefore analogous to current flowing through a cir cular wire (Figure). In the study of magnetism, we saw th at a currentcarrying wire produces magnetic fields. It is theref ore reasonable to conclude that the hydrogen atom p roduces a magnetic field and
interacts with other magnetic fields.
Figure: (a) Current flowing through a circular wire is analogous to (b) an electron that orbits a proton in a hydrogen atom.
The orbital magnetic dipole moment is a measure of the strength of the magnetic field produced by the orbital angular momentum
of an electron. From Force and Torque on a Current Loop, the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole mome nt for a current loop
is
where is the current and is the area of the loop. (For brevity, we refer to this as the magnetic moment.) Th e current associated
with an electron in orbit about a proton in a hydrogen atom is
where e is the magnitude of the electron charge and is it s orbital period. If we assume that the electron trave ls in a perfectly
circular orbit, the orbital period is
where r is the radius of the orbit and v is the speed of the electron in its orbit. Given that the area of a circle is, the absolute
magnetic moment is
It is helpful to express the magnetic momentum μμ in t erms of the orbital angular momentum (). Because the e lectron
orbits in a circle, the position vector and the mome ntum vector form a right angle. Thus, the magnitude o f the orbital angular
momentum isLearning Objectives

12.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76697Combining these two equations, we have
In full vector form, this expression is written as
The negative sign appears because the electron has a negative charge. Notice that the direction of the m agnetic moment of the
electron is antiparallel to the orbital angular mom entum, as shown in Figure. In the Bohr model of th e atom, the relationship
between and in Equation is independent of the radiu s of the orbit.
The magnetic moment can also be expressed in terms of the orbital angular quantum number. Combining Eq uation and
Equation, the magnitude of the magnetic moment is
The z-component of the magnetic moment is
The quantity is a fundamental unit of magnetism ca lled the Bohr magneton, which has the value (J/T)
or. Quantization of the magnetic moment is the result of quantization of the orbital angular momentum.
As we will see in the next section, the total magnetic d ipole moment of the hydrogen atom is due to both the orbital motion of the
electron and its intrinsic spin. For now, we ignore the effe ct of electron spin.
What is the magnitude of the orbital dipole magneti c moment μ of an electron in the hydrogen atom in th e (a) s state, (b) p
state, and (c) d state? (Assume that the spin of the electron is zero.)
Strategy
The magnetic momentum of the electron is related to its orbital angular momentum L. For the hydrogen atom, this quantity is
related to the orbital angular quantum number l. The states are given in spectroscopic notation, which relates a letter (s, p, d,
etc.) to a quantum number.
Solution
The magnitude of the magnetic moment is given in Equat ion:
1. For the s state, so we have and.
2. For the p state, and we haveExample: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment

12.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76697where so
3. For the d state, and we obtain
where so
Significance
In the s state, there is no orbital angular momentum and ther efore no magnetic moment. This does not mean that th e electron is
at rest, just that the overall motion of the electro n does not produce a magnetic field. In the p state, the electron has a magnetic
moment with three possible values for the z-component of this magnetic moment; this means that magnetic moment can point
in three different polar directions—each antiparall el to the orbital angular momentum vector. In the d state, the electron has a
magnetic moment with five possible values for the z-component of this magnetic moment. In this case, the magnetic moment
can point in five different polar directions.
A hydrogen atom has a magnetic field, so we expect the hydrogen atom to interact with an external magnetic field—such as the
push and pull between two bar magnets. From Force and Torque on a Current Loop, we know that when a current loop interacts
with an external magnetic field, it experiences a torque given by
where I is the current, is the area of the loop, is the magnetic moment, and is the external magnetic fiel d. This torque acts to
rotate the magnetic moment vector of the hydrogen a tom to align with the external magnetic field. Becau se mechanical work is
done by the external magnetic field on the hydrogen atom, we can talk about energy transformations in th e atom. The potential
energy of the hydrogen atom associated with this magneti c interaction is given by Equation:
If the magnetic moment is antiparallel to the extern al magnetic field, the potential energy is large, but if the magnetic moment is
parallel to the field, the potential energy is small. Work done on the hydrogen atom to rotate the atom’s magnetic moment vector in
the direction of the external magnetic field is the refore associated with a drop in potential energy. Th e energy of the system is
conserved, however, because a drop in potential energ y produces radiation (the emission of a photon). The se energy transitions are
quantized because the magnetic moment can point in only ce rtain directions.
If the external magnetic field points in the positi ve z-direction, the potential energy associated with the orbital magnetic dipole
moment is
where is the Bohr magneton and m is the angular momentum projection quantum number (or magnetic orbital quantum
number), which has the values
For example, in the electron state, the total energy of the electron is split into three distinct energy levels corresponding to

12.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76697
Figure: The Zeeman effect refers to the splitting of spectral lines by an external magnetic field. In the left column, the energy
splitting occurs due to transitions from the state () to a lower energy state; and in the right column, ener gy splitting
occurs due to transitions from the state () to a lower- energy state. The separation of these lines is proportio nal to the
strength of the external magnetic field.
The splitting of energy levels by an external magne tic field is called the Zeeman effect. Ignoring the effects of electron spin,
transitions from the state to a common lower energy state produce three closely spaced spectral lines (Fi gure, left
column). Likewise, transitions from the state produce f ive closely spaced spectral lines (right column). The separation of these
lines is proportional to the strength of the extern al magnetic field. This effect has many applications. For example, the splitting of
lines in the hydrogen spectrum of the Sun is used to determine the strength of the Sun’s magnetic field. Ma ny such magnetic field
measurements can be used to make a map of the magnetic a ctivity at the Sun’s surface called a magnetogram (Figure).
Figure: A magnetogram of the Sun. The bright and da rk spots show significant magnetic activity at the surfa ce of the Sun.
This page titled 12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electro n is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.3: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

12.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669812.3: Electron Spin
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Express the state of an electron in a hydrogen atom in terms of five quantum numbers
Use quantum numbers to calculate the magnitude and direct ion of the spin and magnetic moment of an electron
Explain the fine and hyperfine structure of the hydrogen spectrum in terms of magnetic interactions inside the hydrogen
atom
In this section, we consider the effects of electron s pin. Spin introduces two additional quantum numbers to our model of the
hydrogen atom. Both were discovered by looking at th e fine structure of atomic spectra. Spin is a fundament al characteristic of all
particles, not just electrons, and is analogous to the intrinsic spin of extended bodies about their own axes, such as the daily rotation
of Earth.
Spin is quantized in the same manner as orbital angul ar momentum. It has been found that the magnitude of the intrinsic spin
angular momentum of an electron is given by
where is defined to be the spin quantum number. This is similar to the quantization of, except th at the only value allowed for
for an electron is. The electron is said to be a “ spin-half particle.” The spin projection quantum number is
associated with the z-components of spin, expressed by
In general, the allowed quantum numbers are
For the special case of an electron (),
Directions of intrinsic spin are quantized, just as th ey were for orbital angular momentum. The state is called the “spindown” state and has a z-component of spin,, the state is called the “spin-up ” state and has a z-component of
spin,. These states are shown in Figure.
Figure: The two possible states of electron spin.Learning Objectives

12.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76698The intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of an electron can also be expressed in terms of the spin quantum n umber. In analogy to
the orbital angular momentum, the magnitude of the elec tron magnetic moment is
According to the special theory of relativity, this va lue is low by a factor of 2. Thus, in vector form, the spin m agnetic moment is
The z-component of the magnetic moment is (from Equation)
The spin projection quantum number has just two values (), so the z-component of the magnetic moment also has just
two values:
where is one Bohr magneton. An electron is magnetic, s o we expect the electron to interact with other magne tic fields. We
consider two special cases: the interaction of a free electron with an external (nonuniform) magnetic fie ld, and an electron in a
hydrogen atom with a magnetic field produced by the orb ital angular momentum of the electron.
Electron in an External Field
The Stern-Gerlach experiment provides experimental evidence that electrons have spi n angular momentum. The experiment
passes a stream of silver (Ag) atoms through an exter nal, nonuniform magnetic field. The Ag atom has an or bital angular
momentum of zero and contains a single unpaired ele ctron in the outer shell. Therefore, the total angular momentum of the Ag
atom is due entirely to the spin of the outer electr on (). Due to electron spin, the Ag atoms act as tiny m agnets as they pass
through the magnetic field. These “magnets” have two possible orientations, which correspond to the spin-up and -down states of
the electron. The magnetic field diverts the spin up atoms in one direction and the spin-down atoms in a nother direction. This
produces two distinct bands on a screen (Figure).
Figure: In the Stern-Gerlach experiment, an externa l, nonuniform magnetic field diverts a beam of elect rons in two different
directions. This result is due to the quantization of sp in angular momentum.
According to classical predictions, the angular mome ntum (and, therefore, the magnetic moment) of the Ag atom can point in any
direction, so one expects, instead, a continuous smu dge on the screen. The resulting two bands of the Ster n-Gerlach experiment
provide startling support for the ideas of quantum mec hanics.

12.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76698Visit PhET Explorations: Stern-Gerlach Experiment to learn more about the Stern-Gerlach experiment.
A hydrogen atom in the ground state is placed in an external uniform magnetic field (). Determine the fr equency of
radiation produced in a transition between the spin-up and spin-down states of the electron.
Strategy
The spin projection quantum number is, so the z-component of the magnetic moment is
The potential energy associated with the interaction betwe en the electron magnetic moment and the external magnet ic field is
The frequency of light emitted is proportional to the ener gy () difference between these two states.
Solution
The energy difference between these states is, so the f requency of radiation produced is
Significance
The electron magnetic moment couples with the extern al magnetic field. The energy of this system is differ ent whether the
electron is aligned or not with the proton. The frequ ency of radiation produced by a transition between t hese states is
proportional to the energy difference. If we double the strength of the magnetic field, holding all othe r things constant, the
frequency of the radiation doubles and its wavelength is cut in half.
If the Stern-Gerlach experiment yielded four distinct bands instead of two, what might be concluded about t he spin quantum
number of the charged particle?
Answer
Spin-Orbit Coupling (Fine Structure)
In a hydrogen atom, the electron magnetic moment ca n interact with the magnetic field produced by the or bital angular momentum
of the electron, a phenomenon called spin-orbit coupling. The orbital angular momentum (), orbital magnetic moment (), spin
angular momentum (), and spin magnetic moment () vectors are shown together in Figure.
Just as the energy levels of a hydrogen atom can be split by an external magnetic field, so too are the energy levels of a h ydrogen
atom split by internal magnetic fields of the atom. If the magnetic moment of the electron and orbital magnetic moment of the
electron are antiparallel, the potential energy fro m the magnetic interaction is relatively high, but when these moments are parallel,
the potential energy is relatively small. Transition from each of these two states to a lower-energy level results in the emission of aExample: Electron Spin and Radiation in An external Magnetic field
Exercise

12.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76698photon of slightly different frequency. That is, the spin-orbit coupling “splits” the spectral line expect ed from a spin-less electron.
The fine structure of the hydrogen spectrum is explained by spin-orbit c oupling.
Figure: Spin-orbit coupling is the interaction of an electron’s spin magnetic moment with its orbital mag netic moment
Electron Spin-Nuclear Spin Coupling (Hyperfine Structure)
Just like an electron, a proton is spin 1/2 and has a magnetic moment. (According to nuclear theory, this moment is due to the
orbital motion of quarks within the proton.) The hype rfine structure of the hydrogen spectrum is explain ed by the interaction
between the magnetic moment of the proton and the ma gnetic moment of the electron, an interaction known as spin-spin coupling.
The energy of the electron-proton system is differen t depending on whether or not the moments are aligned. Transitions between
these states (spin-flip transitions) result in the emission of a photon with a wavelength of cm (in the radio range). The 21cm line in atomic spectroscopy is a “fingerprint” of hydrogen gas. Astronomers exploit this spectral line t o map the spiral arms of
galaxies, which are composed mostly of hydrogen (Figure).
Figure: The magnetic interaction between the electr on and proton in the hydrogen atom is used to map the spiral arms of the
Pinwheel Galaxy (NGC 5457). (a) The galaxy seen in vi sible light; (b) the galaxy seen in 21-cm hydrogen ra diation; (c) the
composite image of (a) and (b). Notice how the hydro gen emission penetrates dust in the galaxy to show the sp iral arms very
clearly, whereas the galactic nucleus shows up better i n visible light (credit a: modification of work by E SA & NASA; credit b:
modification of work by Fabian Walter).
A complete specification of the state of an electron in a hydrogen atom requires five quantum numbers: n, l, m, s, and. The
names, symbols, and allowed values of these quantum numbers are summarized in Table.
Table: Summary of Quantum Numbers of an Electron in a Hydrogen Atom
Name Symbol Allowed values
Principal quantum number n 1, 2, 3, …
Angular momentum l 0, 1, 2, … n – 1
Angular momentum projection m
Spin s 1/2 (electrons)
Spin projection

12.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76698Note that the intrinsic quantum numbers introduced in this section (and) are valid for many particles, no t just electrons. For
example, quarks within an atomic nucleus are also spin-half particles. As we will see later, quantum numbers help to classify
subatomic particles and enter into scientific models tha t attempt to explain how the universe works.
This page titled 12.3: Electron Spin is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.4: Electron Spin by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

12.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7669912.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the importance of Pauli’s exclusion principle to an understanding of atomic structure and molecular bond ing
Explain the structure of the periodic table in terms of the total energy, orbital angular momentum, and spin of i ndividual
electrons in an atom
Describe the electron configuration of atoms in the period ic table
So far, we have studied only hydrogen, the simplest che mical element. We have found that an electron in th e hydrogen atom can be
completely specified by five quantum numbers:
:principal quantum number
: angular momentum quantum number
: angular momentum projection quantum number
: spin quantum number
: spin projection quantum number
To construct the ground state of a neutral multi-elec tron atom, imagine starting with a nucleus of charge Ze (that is, a nucleus of
atomic number Z) and then adding Z electrons one by one. Assume that each electron moves in a spherically symmetrical electric
field produced by the nucleus and all other electron s of the atom. The assumption is valid because the el ectrons are distributed
randomly around the nucleus and produce an average electric field (and potential) that is spherically sy mmetrical. The electric
potential U(r) for each electron does not follow the simple form because of interactions between electrons, but it tu rns out
that we can still label each individual electron stat e by quantum numbers, (). (The spin quantum number is the same
for all electrons, so it will not be used in this section.)
The structure and chemical properties of atoms are e xplained in part by Pauli’s exclusion principle: No two electrons in an atom
can have the same values for all four quantum number s (). This principle is related to two properties of el ectrons: All
electrons are identical (“when you’ve seen one electro n, you’ve seen them all”) and they have half-integra l spin (). Sample
sets of quantum numbers for the electrons in an ato m are given in Table. Consistent with Pauli’s exclusi on principle, no two
rows of the table have the exact same set of quantum numbers.
Table: Electron States of AtomsBecause of Pauli’s exclu sion principle, no two electrons in an atom have the same set of four quantum
numbers.Learning Objectives

12.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76699Subshell symbolNo. of electrons:
subshellNo. of electrons:
shell
1 0 0 ½
1s 2 2
1 0 0 –½
2 0 0 ½
2s 2
82 0 0 –½
2 1 –1 ½
2p 62 1 –1 –½
2 1 0 ½
2 1 0 –½
2 1 1 ½
2 1 1 –½
3 0 0 ½
3s 2
183 0 0 –½
3 1 –1 ½
3p 63 1 –1 –½
3 1 0 ½
3 1 0 –½
3 1 1 ½
3 1 1 –½
3 2 –2 ½
3d 103 2 –2 –½
3 2 –1 ½
3 2 –1 –½
3 2 0 ½
3 2 0 –½
3 2 1 ½
3 2 1 –½
3 2 2 ½
3 2 2 –½
Electrons with the same principal quantum number n are said to be in the same shell, and those that have the same value of l are
said to occupy the same subshell. An electron in the state of a hydrogen atom is de noted 1 s, where the first digit indicates the
shell () and the letter indicates the subshell (cor respond to). Two electrons in the state are
denoted as, where the superscript indicates the num ber of electrons. An electron in the state with is d enoted 2 p. The
combination of two electrons in the and state, and t hree electrons in the and state is written as, and so

12.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76699on. This representation of the electron state is cal led the electron configuration of the atom. The electron configurations for
several atoms are given in Table. Electrons in the outer shell of an atom are called valence electrons. Chemical bonding
between atoms in a molecule are explained by the transfer a nd sharing of valence electrons.
Table: Electron Configurations of Electrons in an At om. The symbol (↑) indicates an unpaired electron in the outer shell, whereas the
symbol (↑↓) indicates a pair of spin-up and -down elec trons in an outer shell.
Element Electron Configuration Spin Alignment
H (↑)
He (↑↓)
Li (↑)
Be (↑↓)
B (↑↓)(↑)
C (↑↓)(↑)(↑)
N (↑↓)(↑)(↑)(↑)
O (↑↓)(↑↓)(↑)(↑)
F (↑↓)(↑↓)(↑↓)(↑)
Ne (↑↓)(↑↓)(↑↓)(↑↓)
Na (↑)
Mg (↑↓)
Al (↑↓)(↑)
The maximum number of electrons in a subshell depen ds on the value of the angular momentum quantum num ber, l. For a given a
value l, there are orbital angular momentum states. However, ea ch of these states can be filled by two electrons (sp in up and
down, ↑↓). Thus, the maximum number of electrons in a subsh ell is
In the 2 s () subshell, the maximum number of electrons is 2. I n the 2 p () subshell, the maximum number of electrons is 6.
Therefore, the total maximum number of electrons in the shell (including both the and 1 subshells) is or 8. In
general, the maximum number of electrons in the nth shell is.
How many subshells are in the shell? Identify each sub shell and calculate the maximum number of electrons that will fill
each. Show that the maximum number of electrons that fill a n atom is.
Strategy
Subshells are determined by the value of l; thus, we first determine which values of l are allowed, and then we apply the
equation “maximum number of electrons that can be in a)” to find the number of electrons in each subshell.
Solution
Because, we know that l can be 0, 1, or 2; thus, there are three possible su bshells. In standard notation, they are labeled
the 3 s, 3p, and 3 d subshells. We have already seen that two electrons ca n be in an s state, and six in a p state, but let us use the
equation “maximum number of electrons that can be in a
subshell ” to calculate the maximum number in each:
has; thus, Example: Subshells and Totals for

12.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76699 has; thus,
has; thus,
(in the shell).
The equation “maximum number of electrons that can be i n a shell = ” gives the maximum number in the shell to be
Maximum number of electrons.
Significance
The total number of electrons in the three possible subshells is thus the same as the formula. In standar d (spectroscopic)
notation, a filled shell is denoted as. Shells do n ot fill in a simple manner. Before the shell is com pletely
filled, for example, we begin to find electrons in the shell.
The structure of the periodic table (Figure) can be understood in terms of shells and s ubshells, and, ultimately, the total
energy, orbital angular momentum, and spin of the el ectrons in the atom. A detailed discussion of the per iodic table is left to a
chemistry course—we sketch only its basic features h ere. In this discussion, we assume that the atoms are elect rically neutral; that
is, they have the same number of electrons and proton s. (Recall that the total number of protons in an at omic nucleus is called the
atomic number, Z.)
First, the periodic table is arranged into columns an d rows. The table is read left to right and top to bot tom in the order of
increasing atomic number \(Z\). Atoms that belong to the same column or chemical group share many of the same chemical
properties. For example, the Li and Na atoms (in the fi rst column) bond to other atoms in a similar way. Th e first row of the table
corresponds to the 1 s () shell of an atom.
Consider the hypothetical procedure of adding elect rons, one by one, to an atom. For hydrogen (H) (upper left), the 1 s shell is filled
with either a spin up or down electron (↑ or ↓). This l one electron is easily shared with other atoms, so hyd rogen is chemically
active. For helium (He) (upper right), the 1 s shell is filled with both a spin up and a spin down (↑↓) electron. This “fills” the 1 s
shell, so a helium atom tends not to share electrons with other atoms. The helium atom is said to be che mically inactive, inert, or
noble; likewise, helium gas is said to be an inert gas or no ble gas.
Build an atom by adding and subtracting protons, neu trons, and electrons. How does the element, charge, and mass change?
Visit PhET Explorations: Build an Atom to explore the answers to these questions.

12.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76699
Figure: The periodic table of elements, showing the st ructure of shells and subshells.
The second row corresponds to the 2 s and 2 p subshells. For lithium (Li) (upper left), the 1 s shell is filled with a spin-up and spindown electron (↑↓) and the 2 s shell is filled with either a spin-up or -down electr on (↑or↓). Its electron configuration is therefore
or [He]2 s, where [He] indicates a helium core. Like hydrogen, t he lone electron in the outermost shell is easily sha red with
other atoms. For beryllium (Be), the 2 s shell is filled with a spin-up and -down electron (↑↓), and has the electron configuration
[He].
Next, we look at the right side of the table. For boron (B), the 1 s and 2 s shells are filled and the 2 p () shell contains either a
spin up or down electron (↑or↓). From carbon (C) to n eon (N), we the fill the 2 p shell. The maximum number of electrons in the 2 p
shells is. For neon (Ne), the 1 s shell is filled with a spin-up and spin-down electron (↑↓), and the 2 p shell is
filled with six electrons (↑↓↑↓↑↓). This “fills” the 1 s, 2s, and 2 p subshells, so like helium, the neon atom tends not to share
electrons with other atoms.
The process of electron filling repeats in the thir d row. However, beginning in the fourth row, the patter n is broken. The actual
order of order of electron filling is given by
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 6s, 4f, 5d, 6p, 7s,...
Notice that the 3 d, 4d, 4f, and 5 d subshells (in bold) are filled out of order; this o ccurs because of interactions between electrons in
the atom, which so far we have neglected. The transition metals are elements in the gap between the first two column s and the last
six columns that contain electrons that fill the d () subshell. As expected, these atoms are arranged in
columns. The structure of the periodic table can be understood in terms of the quantization of the total energy (n), orbital angular
momentum (l), and spin (s). The first two columns correspond to the s () subshell, the next six columns correspond to the p (
) subshell, and the gap between these columns corresponds to the d () subshell.
The periodic table also gives information on molecu lar bonding. To see this, consider atoms in the left-m ost column (the so-called
alkali metals including: Li, Na, and K). These atoms co ntain a single electron in the 2 s subshell, which is easily donated to other

12.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76699atoms. In contrast, atoms in the second-to-right colu mn (the halogens: for example, Cl, F, and Br) are rela tively stingy in sharing
electrons. These atoms would much rather accept an elect ron, because they are just one electron shy of a fil led shell (“of being
noble”).
Therefore, if a Na atom is placed in close proximity to a Cl atom, t he Na atom freely donates its 2 s electron and the Cl atom eagerly
accepts it. In the process, the Na atom (originally a ne utral charge) becomes positively charged and the Cl (originally a neutral
charge) becomes negatively charged. Charged atoms a re called ions. In this case, the ions are and, whe re the superscript
indicates charge of the ion. The electric (Coulomb) attraction between these atoms forms a NaCl (salt) mo lecule. A chemical bond
between two ions is called an ionic bond. There are many kinds of chemical bonds. For example, in an oxygen molecule
electrons are equally shared between the atoms. The bonding of oxygen atoms is an example of a covalent bond.
This page titled 12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.5: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

12.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670012.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the absorption and emission of radiation in terms of atomic energy levels and energy differences
Use quantum numbers to estimate the energy, frequency, an d wavelength of photons produced by atomic transitions in
multi-electron atoms
Explain radiation concepts in the context of atomic fluor escence and X-rays
The study of atomic spectra provides most of our kno wledge about atoms. In modern science, atomic spectra ar e used to identify
species of atoms in a range of objects, from distant galaxies t o blood samples at a crime scene.
The theoretical basis of atomic spectroscopy is the tr ansition of electrons between energy levels in atoms. For example, if an
electron in a hydrogen atom makes a transition from th e to the shell, the atom emits a photon with a waveleng th
where is energy carried away by the photon and. Afte r this radiation passes through a
spectrometer, it appears as a sharp spectral line on a screen. The Bohr model of this process is shown in Figur e. If the
electron later absorbs a photon with energy, the elect ron returns to the shell (we examined the Bohr model previously).
Figure: An electron transition from the to the shel l of a hydrogen atom.
To understand atomic transitions in multi-electron atoms, it is necessary to consider many effects, includ ing the Coulomb repulsion
between electrons and internal magnetic interactions (spin-orbit and spin-spin couplings). Fortunately, ma ny properties of these
systems can be understood by neglecting interactions between electrons and representing each electron by its own single-particle
wavefunction.
Atomic transitions must obey selection rules. These rules follow from principles of quantum mechani cs and symmetry. Selection
rules classify transitions as either allowed or forbid den. (Forbidden transitions do occur, but the probab ility of the typical forbidden
transition is very small.) For a hydrogen-like atom, ato mic transitions that involve electromagnetic interac tions (the emission and
absorption of photons) obey the following selection rule:
where is associated with the magnitude of orbital angula r momentum,
For multi-electron atoms, similar rules apply. To il lustrate this rule, consider the observed atomic tran sitions in hydrogen (H),
sodium (Na), and mercury (Hg) (Figure). The horizontal lines in this diagram correspond to atomic energy le vels, and theLearning Objectives

12.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700transitions allowed by this selection rule are shown by lines drawn between these levels. The energies of the se states are on the
order of a few electron volts, and photons emitted in t ransitions are in the visible range. Technically, ato mic transitions can violate
the selection rule, but such transitions are uncommon.
Figure: Energy-level diagrams for (a) hydrogen, (b) sodium, and (c) mercury. For comparison, hydrogen ener gy levels are
shown in the sodium diagram.
The hydrogen atom has the simplest energy-level dia gram. If we neglect electron spin, all states with the same value of n have the
same total energy. However, spin-orbit coupling splits the states into two angular momentum states (s and p) of slightly
different energies. (These levels are not vertically displaced, because the energy splitting is too small t o show up in this diagram.)
Likewise, spin-orbit coupling splits the states into three angular momentum states (s, p, and d).
The energy-level diagram for hydrogen is similar to sodium, because both atoms have one electron in the outer shell. The valence
electron of sodium moves in the electric field of a nucleus shielded by electrons in the inner shells, so i t does not experience a
simple 1/ r Coulomb potential and its total energy depends on b oth n and l. Interestingly, mercury has two separate energy-level
diagrams; these diagrams correspond to two net spin states of its 6s (valence) electrons.
The spectrum of sodium is analyzed with a spectromete r. Two closely spaced lines with wavelengths 589.00 nm an d 589.59 nm
are observed.
a. If the doublet corresponds to the excited (valence) el ectron that transitions from some excited state down to t he 3s state,
what was the original electron angular momentum?
b. What is the energy difference between these two excite d states?
Strategy
Sodium and hydrogen belong to the same column or chem ical group of the periodic table, so sodium is “hydr ogen-like.” The
outermost electron in sodium is in the 3 s () subshell and can be excited to higher energy le vels. As for hydrogen,
subsequent transitions to lower energy levels must obey th e selection rule (Equation):
We must first determine the quantum number of the i nitial state that satisfies the selection rule. Then, we can use this number
to determine the magnitude of orbital angular momentum of the initial state.Example: The Sodium Doublet

12.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700Solution
1. Allowed transitions must obey the selection rule. If the quantum number of the initial state is, the transition is
forbidden because. If the quantum number of the initi al state is the transition is forbidden because
. Therefore, the quantum of the initial state must be. The orbital angular momentum of the initial state is
2. Because the final state for both transitions is the same (3s), the difference in energies of the photons is equal to th e
difference in energies of the two excited states. Using th e equation
we have
Significance
To understand the difficulty of measuring this ener gy difference, we compare this difference with the av erage energy of the two
photons emitted in the transition. Given an average wave length of 589.30 nm, the average energy of the photons i s
The energy difference is about 0.1% (1 part in 1000) of this average energy. However, a sensitive spectro meter can
measure the difference.
Atomic Fluorescence
Fluorescence occurs when an electron in an atom is exc ited several steps above the ground state by the abso rption of a high-energy
ultraviolet (UV) photon. Once excited, the electron “d e-excites” in two ways. The electron can drop back to the ground state,
emitting a photon of the same energy that excited it, or it can drop in a series of smaller steps, emittin g several low-energy photons.
Some of these photons may be in the visible range. Flu orescent dye in clothes can make colors seem bright er in sunlight by
converting UV radiation into visible light. Fluorescen t lights are more efficient in converting electrica l energy into visible light than
incandescent filaments (about four times as efficie nt). Figure shows a scorpion illuminated by a UV lamp. Pr oteins near the
surface of the skin emit a characteristic blue light.
Figure: A scorpion glows blue under a UV lamp. (credi t: Ken Bosma)
X-rays
The study of atomic energy transitions enables us to understand X-rays and X-ray technology. Like all electr omagnetic radiation,
X-rays are made of photons. X-ray photons are produced when electrons in the outermost shells of an atom dro p to the inner shells.

12.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700(Hydrogen atoms do not emit X-rays, because the electron energy levels are too closely spaced together to pe rmit the emission of
high-frequency radiation.) Transitions of this kind a re normally forbidden because the lower states are al ready filled. However, if
an inner shell has a vacancy (an inner electron is m issing, perhaps from being knocked away by a high-spee d electron), an electron
from one of the outer shells can drop in energy to f ill the vacancy. The energy gap for such a transitio n is relatively large, so
wavelength of the radiated X-ray photon is relatively short.
X-rays can also be produced by bombarding a metal ta rget with high-energy electrons, as shown in Figure. In the figure,
electrons are boiled off a filament and accelerated by an electric field into a tungsten target. Accordin g to the classical theory of
electromagnetism, any charged particle that accelerates emits radiation. Thus, when the electron strikes the tungsten target, and
suddenly slows down, the electron emits braking radiation (often the term in German is used: Bremsstrahlung). Braking
radiation refers to radiation produced by any charge d particle that is slowed by a medium. In this case, b raking radiation contains a
continuous range of frequencies, because the electrons will collide with the target atoms in slightly different ways.
Braking radiation is not the only type of radiation produced in this interaction. In some cases, an electron collides with another
inner-shell electron of a target atom, and knocks the electron out of the atom—billiard ball style. The em pty state is filled when an
electron in a higher shell drops into the state (drop in e nergy level) and emits an X-ray photon.
Figure: A sketch of an X-ray tube. X-rays are emitted from the tungsten target.
Historically, X-ray spectral lines were labeled with le tters (K, L, M, N, …). These letters correspond to the atomic shells (
). X-rays produced by a transition from any higher sh ell to the K () shell are labeled as K X-rays. X-rays
produced in a transition from the L () shell are called X-rays; X-rays produced in a transi tion from the M () shell are
called X-rays; X-rays produced in a transition from th e N () shell are called X-rays; and so forth. Transition s from
higher shells to L and M shells are labeled similarly. These transitions are re presented by an energy-level diagram in Figure.
Figure: X-ray transitions in an atom.
The distribution of X-ray wavelengths produced by stri king metal with a beam of electrons is given in Figure. X-ray
transitions in the target metal appear as peaks on top of the braking radiation curve. Photon frequencies corresponding to the spikes
in the X-ray distribution are called characteristic frequencies, because they can be used to identify t he target metal. The sharp cutoff

12.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700wavelength (just below the peak) corresponds to an el ectron that loses all of its energy to a single photo n. Radiation of shorter
wavelengths is forbidden by the conservation of energy.
Figure: X-ray spectrum from a silver target. The peak s correspond to characteristic frequencies of X-rays emi tted by silver
when struck by an electron beam.
Estimate the characteristic energy and frequency of the X-ray for aluminum ().
Strategy
A X-ray is produced by the transition of an electron in the L () shell to the K () shell. An electron in the L shell
“sees” an effective charge, because one electron in the K shell shields the nuclear charge. (Recall, two
electrons are not in the K shell because the other electron state is vacant.) The frequency of the emitted photon can be
estimated from the energy difference between the L and K shells.
Solution
The energy difference between the L and K shells in a hydrogen atom is 10.2 eV. Assuming that ot her electrons in the L shell
or in higher-energy shells do not shield the nuclear charge, the energy difference between the L and K shells in an atom with
is approximately
Based on the relationship, the frequency of the X-ray i s
Significance
The wavelength of the typical X-ray is 0.1–10 nm. In this case, the wavelength is:
Hence, the transition L→K in aluminum produces X-ray radiation.
X-ray production provides an important test of quantu m mechanics. According to the Bohr model, the energy of a X-ray
depends on the nuclear charge or atomic number, Z. If Z is large, Coulomb forces in the atom are large, ener gy differences ()
are large, and, therefore, the energy of radiated pho tons is large. To illustrate, consider a single electr on in a multi-electron atom.
Neglecting interactions between the electrons, the allowed energy levels areExample: X-Rays from Aluminum

12.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700where n = 1, 2, …and Z is the atomic number of the nucleus. However, an elect ron in the L () shell “sees” a charge,
because one electron in the K shell shields the nuclear charge. (Recall that there is only one electron in the K shell because the
other electron was “knocked out.”) Therefore, the appr oximate energies of the electron in the L and K shells are
The energy carried away by a photon in a transition fro m the L shell to the K shell is therefore
where Z is the atomic number. In general, the X-ray photon energ y for a transition from an outer shell to the K shell is
or
where is the frequency of a X-ray. This equation is Moseley’s law. For large values of, we have approximately
This prediction can be checked by measuring for a v ariety of metal targets. This model is supported if a plot of Z versus data
(called a Moseley plot) is linear. Comparison of model predictions and exper imental results, for both the K and L series, is shown
in Figure. The data support the model that X-rays are produced when an outer shell electron drops in energ y to fill a vacancy
in an inner shell.
Figure: A Moseley plot. These data were adapted from Moseley’s original data (H. G. J. Moseley, Philos. Mag. (6) 77:703,
1914).

12.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700X-rays are produced by bombarding a metal target with high-energy electrons. If the target is replaced by a nother with two
times the atomic number, what happens to the frequency of X-rays?
Answer
frequency quadruples
Calculate the approximate energy of a X-ray from a tungst en anode in an X-ray tube.
Strategy
Two electrons occupy a filled K shell. A vacancy in this shell would leave one elec tron, so the effective charge for an electron
in the L shell would be Z − 1 rather than Z. For tungsten, Z=74, so the effective charge is 73. Th is number can be used to
calculate the energy-level difference between the L and K shells, and, therefore, the energy carried away by a ph oton in the
transition L→K.
Solution
The effective Z is 73, so the X-ray energy is given by
where
and
Thus,
Significance
This large photon energy is typical of X-rays. X-ray en ergies become progressively larger for heavier eleme nts because their
energy increases approximately as. An acceleration voltage of more than 50,000 volts is needed to “knoc k out” an inner
electron from a tungsten atom.
X-ray Technology
X-rays have many applications, such as in medical di agnostics (Figure), inspection of luggage at airports (Figure), and
even detection of cracks in crucial aircraft compon ents. The most common X-ray images are due to shadows. Bec ause X-ray
photons have high energy, they penetrate materials that are opaque to visible light. The more energy an X-ray photon has, the more
material it penetrates. The depth of penetration is related to the density of the material, as well as t o the energy of the photon. The
denser the material, the fewer X-ray photons get thro ugh and the darker the shadow. X-rays are effective at identifying bone breaks
and tumors; however, overexposure to X-rays can damage cells i n biological organisms.Exercise
Example: Characteristic X-Ray Energy

12.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700
Figure: (a) An X-ray image of a person’s teeth. (b) A typical X-ray machine in a dentist’s office produces relatively lowenergy radiation to minimize patient exposure. (cred it a: modification of work by “Dmitry G”/Wikimedia Commons)
Figure: An X-ray image of a piece of luggage. The d enser the material, the darker the shadow. Object col ors relate to material
composition—metallic objects show up as blue in this ima ge. (credit: “IDuke”/Wikimedia Commons)
A standard X-ray image provides a two-dimensional vie w of the object. However, in medical applications, this view does not often
provide enough information to draw firm conclusions. For example, in a two-dimensional X-ray image of the b ody, bones can
easily hide soft tissues or organs. The CAT (computed axial tomography) scanner addresses this problem by collecting numerous
X-ray images in “slices” throughout the body. Comple x computer-image processing of the relative absorpt ion of the X-rays, in
different directions, can produce a highly detailed three- dimensional X-ray image of the body.
X-rays can also be used to probe the structures of ato ms and molecules. Consider X-rays incident on the surfac e of a crystalline
solid. Some X-ray photons reflect at the surface, and others reflect off the “plane” of atoms just below t he surface. Interference
between these photons, for different angles of incid ence, produces a beautiful image on a screen (Figure). The interaction of
X-rays with a solid is called X-ray diffraction. The m ost famous example using X-ray diffraction is the disco very of the doublehelix structure of DNA.

12.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76700
Figure: X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a prot ein (hen egg lysozyme) produced this interference pat tern. Analysis of the
pattern yields information about the structure of the protein. (credit: “Del45”/Wikimedia Commons)
This page titled 12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.6: Atomic Spectra and X-rays by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

12.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670112.6: Lasers
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the physical processes necessary to produce laser light
Explain the difference between coherent and incoherent li ght
Describe the application of lasers to a CD and Blu-Ray player
A laser is device that emits coherent and monochromatic lig ht. The light is coherent if photons that compose the light are in-phase,
and monochromatic if the photons have a single frequency (color). Whe n a gas in the laser absorbs radiation, electrons are
elevated to different energy levels. Most electrons r eturn immediately to the ground state, but others li nger in what is called a
metastable state. It is possible to place a majority of these atoms in a m etastable state, a condition called a population inversion.
Figure: The physics of a laser. An incident photon of frequency f causes a cascade of photons of the same freq uency.
When a photon of energy disturbs an electron in a m etastable state (Figure), the electron drops to the lower-energy level and
emits an addition photon, and the two photons proceed off together. This process is called stimulated emission. It occurs with
relatively high probability when the energy of the i ncoming photon is equal to the energy difference bet ween the excited and “deexcited” energy levels of the electron (). Hence, the incoming photon and the photon produced by de-excit ation have the
same energy, hf. These photons encounter more electrons in the met astable state, and the process repeats. The result is a cascade or
chain reaction of similar de-excitations. Laser light is coherent because all light waves in laser light sh are the same frequency
(color) and the same phase (any two points of along a line perpendicular to the direction of motion are o n the “same part” of the
wave”). A schematic diagram of coherent and incoherent lig ht wave pattern is given in Figure.
Figure: A coherent light wave pattern contains light wav es of the same frequency and phase. An incoherent light wa ve pattern
contains light waves of different frequencies and phase s.
Lasers are used in a wide range of applications, such as in communication (optical fiber phone lines), entert ainment (laser light
shows), medicine (removing tumors and cauterizing ves sels in the retina), and in retail sales (bar code r eaders). Lasers can also be
produced by a large range of materials, including s olids (for example, the ruby crystal), gases (heliu m-gas mixture), and liquids
(organic dyes). Recently, a laser was even created us ing gelatin—an edible laser! Below we discuss two practi cal applications in
detail: CD players and Blu-Ray Players.Learning Objectives

12.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76701CD Player
A CD player reads digital information stored on a comp act disc (CD). A CD is 6-inch diameter disc made of pl astic that contains
small “bumps” and “pits” nears its surface to encod e digital or binary data (Figure). The bumps and pi ts appear along a very
thin track that spirals outwards from the center of t he disc. The width of the track is smaller than 1/20th the width of a human hair,
and the heights of the bumps are even smaller yet.
Figure: A compact disc is a plastic disc that uses bumps n ear its surface to encode digital information. The sur face of the disc
contains multiple layers, including a layer of alumin um and one of polycarbonate plastic.
A CD player uses a laser to read this digital information. Lase r light is suited to this purpose, because coherent l ight can be focused
onto an incredibly small spot and therefore distingu ish between bumps and pits in the CD. After processing b y player components
(including a diffraction grating, polarizer, and col limator), laser light is focused by a lens onto the CD surface. Light that strikes a
bump (“land”) is merely reflected, but light that strik es a “pit” destructively interferes, so no light retur ns (the details of this process
are not important to this discussion). Reflected ligh t is interpreted as a “1” and unreflected light is i nterpreted as a “0.” The
resulting digital signal is converted into an analog signal, and the analog signal is fed into an amplif ier that powers a device such as
a pair of headphones. The laser system of a CD player is shown in Figure.
Figure: A CD player and its laser component.
Blu-Ray Player
Like a CD player, a Blu-Ray player reads digital information (video or audio) stored on a disc, and a laser is used to record this
information. The pits on a Blu-Ray disc are much sm aller and more closely packed together than for a CD, so much more
information can be stored. As a result, the resolving p ower of the laser must be greater. This is achieved us ing short wavelength (
) blue laser light—hence, the name “Blu-” Ray. (CDs an d DVDs use red laser light.) The different pit sizes and playerhardware configurations of a CD, DVD, and Blu-Ray player are shown in Figure. The pit sizes of a Blu-Ray disk are more
than twice as small as the pits on a DVD or CD. Unlike a C D, a Blu-Ray disc store data on a polycarbonate laye r, which places the
data closer to the lens and avoids readability problems. A hard coating is used to protect the data since it is so close t o the surface.

12.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76701
Figure: Comparison of laser resolution in a CD, DVD, a nd Blu-Ray Player.
This page titled 12.6: Lasers is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
8.7: Lasers by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

12.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670212.A: Atomic Structure (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
8.1. No. The quantum number. Thus, the magnitude of is a lways less than L because
8.2.
8.3. frequency quadruples
Conceptual Questions
1. n (principal quantum number) → total energy
(orbital angular quantum number) → total absolute magn itude of the orbital angular momentum
(orbital angular projection quantum number) → z-compo nent of the orbital angular momentum
3. The Bohr model describes the electron as a particle that moves around the proton in well-defined orbits. Schrödinger’s
model describes the electron as a wave, and knowledge about the position of the electron is restricted to probability
statements. The total energy of the electron in the ground state (and all excited states) is the same fo r both models. However,
the orbital angular momentum of the ground state is different for these models. In Bohr’s model,, and in
Schrödinger’s model,.
5. a, c, d; The total energy is changed (Zeeman split ting). The work done on the hydrogen atom rotates the atom, so the zcomponent of angular momentum and polar angle are affe cted. However, the angular momentum is not affected.
7. Even in the ground state, a hydrogen atom has magnet ic properties due the intrinsic (internal) electron sp in. The
magnetic moment of an electron is proportional to its sp in.
9. For all electrons, and. As we will see, not all parti cles have the same spin quantum number. For example,
a photon as a spin 1 (), and a Higgs boson has spin 0 ().
11. An electron has a magnetic moment associated with its intrinsic (internal) spin. Spin-orbit coupling occurs when this
interacts with the magnetic field produced by the orbit al angular momentum of the electron.
13. Elements that belong in the same column in the peri odic table of elements have the same fillings of the ir outer shells, and
therefore the same number of valence electrons. For exam ple:
Li: (one valence electron in the shell)
Na: (one valence electron in the shell)
Both, Li and Na belong to first column.
15. Atomic and molecular spectra are said to be “discrete,” because only certain spectral lines are observed. In contrast,
spectra from a white light source (consisting of many photon frequencies) are continuous because a continu ous “rainbow” of
colors is observed.
17. UV light consists of relatively high frequency (short wa velength) photons. So the energy of the absorbed pho ton and the
energy transition () in the atom is relatively larg e. In comparison, visible light consists of relatively lower-frequency
photons. Therefore, the energy transition in the atom and t he energy of the emitted photon is relatively small.
19. For macroscopic systems, the quantum numbers are very large, so the energy difference () between adjacent energy
levels (orbits) is very small. The energy released in transitions between these closely space energy level s is much too small to
be detected.
21. Laser light relies on the process of stimulated emissi on. In this process, electrons must be prepared in an e xcited (upper)
metastable state such that the passage of light through the system produces de-excitations and, therefore, additional light.

12.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670223. A Blu-Ray player uses blue laser light to probe the bumps and pits of the disc and a CD player uses red l aser light. The
relatively short-wavelength blue light is necessary t o probe the smaller pits and bumps on a Blu-ray dis c; smaller pits and
bumps correspond to higher storage densities.
Problems
25..
27. are possible
29. 18
31.
33. (1, 1, 1)
35. For the orbital angular momentum quantum number, l, the allowed values of:
With the exception of, the total number is just 2l because the number of states on either side of is just l.
Including, the total number of orbital angular mom entum states for the orbital angular momentum quantum
number, l, is:. Later, when we consider electron spin, the tot al number of angular momentum states will be found
to twice this value because each orbital angular mome ntum states is associated with two states of electron spin: spin up
and spin down).
37. The probability that the 1s electron of a hydrogen atom is found outside of the Bohr radius is
39. For (1 state), and (3 states). The total is 4.
41. The 3p state corresponds to. Therefore,
43. The ratio of their masses is 1/207, so the ratio o f their magnetic moments is 207. The electron’s magn etic moment is more
than 200 times larger than the muon.
45. a. The 3d state corresponds to. So,
b. The maximum torque occurs when the magnetic momen t and external magnetic field vectors are at right angles
. In this case:
47. A 3p electron is in the state and. The minimum torque m agnitude occurs when the magnetic moment and
external magnetic field vectors are most parallel (anti parallel). This occurs when. The torque magnitude is g iven by
Where
For, we have:
49. An infinitesimal work dW done by a magnetic torque to rotate the magnetic mom ent through an angle:
where. Work done is interpreted as a drop in potential e nergy U, so

12.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76702The total energy change is determined by summing over i nfinitesimal changes in the potential energy:
51. Spin up (relative to positive z-axis):
Spin down (relative to positive z-axis):
53. The spin projection quantum number is, so the z-compone nt of the magnetic moment is
The potential energy associated with the interaction betwe en the electron and the external magnetic field is
The energy difference between these states is, so the wa velength of light produced is
55. It is increased by a factor of 2.
57. a. 32;
b.
ℓ (2ℓ+1)
0 s 2(0+1) =2
1 p 2(2+1) =6
2 d 2(4+1) =10
3 f 2(6+1) =14
59. a. and e. are allowed; the others are not allowed.
b. not allowed for.
c. Cannot have three electrons in s subshell because.
d. Cannot have seven electrons in p subshell (max of 6).
61.
63. a. The minimum value of is to have nine electrons in it.
b..
65.
67. For, one electron “orbits” a nucleus with two protons and two neutrons (). Ionization energy refers to the
energy required to remove the electron from the ato m. The energy needed to remove the electron in the ground state of
He+He+ ion to infinity is negative the value of the ground s tate energy, written:
Thus, the energy to ionize the electron is.
Similarly, the energy needed to remove an electron i n the first excited state of ion to infinity is ne gative the value
of the first excited state energy, written:

12.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76702.
The energy to ionize the electron is 30.6 eV.
69. The wavelength of the laser is given by:
where is the energy of the photon and is the magnit ude of the energy difference. Solving for the latter, we g et:
The negative sign indicates that the electron lost ener gy in the transition.
71..
73. According to the conservation of the energy, the pot ential energy of the electron is converted completel y into kinetic
energy. The initial kinetic energy of the electron is zero (the electron begins at rest). So, the kinetic energy of the electron just
before it strikes the target is:
If all of this energy is converted into braking radia tion, the frequency of the emitted radiation is a maximu m, therefore:
When the emitted frequency is a maximum, then the emitte d wavelength is a minimum, so:
75. A muon is 200 times heavier than an electron, but the minimum wavelength does not depend on mass, so the r esult is
unchanged.
77.
79. 72.5 keV
81. The atomic numbers for Cu and Au are and 79, respectively. The X-ray photon frequency for gold is g reater than
copper by a factor:
Therefore, the X-ray wavelength of Au is about eight time s shorter than for copper.
83. a. If flesh has the same density as water, then we used phot ons.
b. 2.52 MW
Additional Problems
85. The smallest angle corresponds to and. Therefore).
87. a. According to Equation 8.1, when, and when. The form er result suggests that the
electron can have an infinite negative potential en ergy. The quantum model of the hydrogen atom avoids this possibility
because the probability density at is zero.
89. A formal solution using sums is somewhat complicated. However, the answer easily found by studying the mathemati cal
pattern between the principal quantum number and the total number of orbital angular momentum states.
For, the total number of orbital angular momentum s tates is 1; for, the total number is 4; and, when,
the total number is 9, and so on. The pattern sugges ts the total number of orbital angular momentum sta tes for the nth
shell is.
(Later, when we consider electron spin, the total numbe r of angular momentum states will be found to be, b ecause
each orbital angular momentum states is associated with two states of electron spin; spin up and spin down).

12.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670291. 50
93. The maximum number of orbital angular momentum elec tron states in the nth shell of an atom is. Each of these states
can be filled by a spin up and spin down electron. So, the m aximum number of electron states in the nth shell is.
95. a., c., and e. are allowed; the others are not allowed.
b. is not allowed.
d.
97.
99. The atomic numbers for Cu and Ag are and 47, respec tively. The X-ray photon frequency for silver is grea ter than
copper by the following factor:
Therefore, the X-ray wavelength of Ag is about three time s shorter than for copper.
101. a. 3.24;
b. is not an integer. c. The wavelength must not be correct. Because, the assumption that the line was fr om the
Balmer series is possible, but the wavelength of the l ight did not produce an integer value for. If the wavelength is
correct, then the assumption that the gas is hydrogen is no t correct; it might be sodium instead.
This page titled 12.A: Atomic Structure (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.A: Atomic Structure (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

12.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670312.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
8.1 The Hydrogen Atom
1. Identify the physical significance of each of the quantum n umbers of the hydrogen atom.
2. Describe the ground state of hydrogen in terms of wave fun ction, probability density, and atomic orbitals.
3. Distinguish between Bohr’s and Schrödinger’s model of the hydrogen atom. In particular, compare the energ y and orbital
angular momentum of the ground states.
8.2 Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
4. Explain why spectral lines of the hydrogen atom are s plit by an external magnetic field. What determines the number and
spacing of these lines?
5. A hydrogen atom is placed in a magnetic field. Which of t he following quantities are affected?
(a) total energy;
(b) angular momentum;
(c) z-component of angular momentum;
(d) polar angle.
6. On what factors does the orbital magnetic dipole moment o f an electron depend?
8.3 Electron Spin
7. Explain how a hydrogen atom in the ground state can inte ract magnetically with an external magnetic field.
8. Compare orbital angular momentum with spin angular mome ntum of an electron in the hydrogen atom.
9. List all the possible values of s and for an electron. Are there particles for which these v alues are different?
10. Are the angular momentum vectors and necessarily al igned?
11. What is spin-orbit coupling?
8.4 The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
12. What is Pauli’s exclusion principle? Explain the im portance of this principle for the understanding of atomic structure
and molecular bonding.
13. Compare the electron configurations of the elements in the same column of the periodic table.
14. Compare the electron configurations of the elements that be long in the same row of the periodic table of elements.
8.5 Atomic Spectra and X-rays
15. Atomic and molecular spectra are discrete. What does discrete mean, and how are discrete spectra related to the
quantization of energy and electron orbits in atoms and m olecules?
16. Discuss the process of the absorption of light by matter in terms of the atomic structure of the absorbing medium.
17. NGC1763 is an emission nebula in the Large Magellanic Cloud just outside our Milky Way Galaxy. Ultraviolet lig ht
from hot stars ionize the hydrogen atoms in the nebu la. As protons and electrons recombine, light in the v isible range is
emitted. Compare the energies of the photons involved in these two transitions.
18. Why are X-rays emitted only for electron transitions to inner shells? What type of photon is emitted fo r transitions
between outer shells?
19. How do the allowed orbits for electrons in atoms differ fro m the allowed orbits for planets around the sun?

12.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/767038.6 Lasers
20. Distinguish between coherent and monochromatic light.
21. Why is a metastable state necessary for the production of laser light?
22. How does light from an incandescent light bulb differ from la ser light?
23. How is a Blu-Ray player able to read more information that a CD player?
24. What are the similarities and differences between a CD player and a Blu-Ray player?
Problems
8.1 The Hydrogen Atom
25. The wave function is evaluated at rectangular coordi nates =(2, 1, 1) in arbitrary units. What are the sphe rical
coordinates of this position?
26. If an atom has an electron in the state with, what are the possible values of l?
27. What are the possible values of m for an electron in the state?
28. What, if any, constraints does a value of place on the oth er quantum numbers for an electron in an atom?
29. How many possible states are there for the l = 4 state?
30. (a) How many angles can L make with the z-axis for an electron?
(b) Calculate the value of the smallest angle.
31. The force on an electron is “negative the gradient of the potential energy function.” Use this knowledge a nd Equation 8.1
to show that the force on the electron in a hydrogen ato m is given by Coulomb’s force law.
32. What is the total number of states with orbital angular mo mentum? (Ignore electron spin.)
33. The wave function is evaluated at spherical coordina tes, where the value of the radial coordinate
is given in arbitrary units. What are the rectangular co ordinates of this position?
34. Coulomb’s force law states that the force between two ch arged particles is:. Use this expression to determi ne
the potential energy function.
35. Write an expression for the total number of states with orbital angular momentum l.
36. Consider hydrogen in the ground state,.
(a) Use the derivative to determine the radial position fo r which the probability density,, is a maximum.
(b) Use the integral concept to determine the averag e radial position. (This is called the expectation value of the
electron’s radial position.) Express your answers int o terms of the Bohr radius,. Hint: The expectation value is the
just average value.
(c) Why are these values different?
37. What is the probability that the 1s electron of a hydrogen atom is found outside the Bohr radius?
38. How many polar angles are possible for an electron in the state?
39. What is the maximum number of orbital angular momen tum electron states in the shell of a hydrogen ato m?
(Ignore electron spin.)
40. What is the maximum number of orbital angular momen tum electron states in the shell of a hydrogen ato m?
(Ignore electron spin.)
8.2 Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
41. Find the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole mo ment of the electron in in the 3p state. (Express your answer in
terms of)

12.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670342. A current of flows through a square-shaped wire with 2- cm side lengths. What is the magnetic moment of the
wire?
43. Estimate the ratio of the electron magnetic moment to the muon magnetic moment for the same state of orbital angular
momentum. (Hint:)
44. Find the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole mo ment of the electron in in the 4d state. (Express your answer in
terms of μB.μB.)
45. For a 3d electron in an external magnetic field of, find (a) the current associated with the orbital angular
momentum, and (b) the maximum torque.
46. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in the state. Find the smallest angle the magnetic moment makes with th e
z-axis. (Express your answer in terms of.)
47. Find the minimum torque magnitude that acts on the orbital magnetic dipole of a 3 p electron in an external magnetic
field of.
48. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in 3 p state. Find the smallest angle the magnetic moment makes with the z-axis.
(Express your answer in terms of.)
49. Show that. (Hint: An infinitesimal amount of work is done to align the magnetic moment with the external
field. This work rotates the magnetic moment vector th rough an angle (toward the positive z-direction), wh ere is a
positive angle change.)
8.3 Electron Spin
50. What is the magnitude of the spin momentum of an electron? (Express you answer in terms of.)
51. What are the possible polar orientations of the spin momen tum vector for an electron?
52. For, write all the possible sets of quantum numbers.
53. A hydrogen atom is placed in an external uniform mag netic field (). Calculate the wavelength of light pro duced
in a transition from a spin up to spin down state.
54. If the magnetic field in the preceding problem is qu adrupled, what happens to the wavelength of light prod uced in a
transition from a spin up to spin down state?
55. If the magnetic moment in the preceding problem is doubled, what happens to the frequency of light produ ced in a
transition from a spin-up to spin-down state?
56. For, write all the possible sets of quantum numbers.
8.4 The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
57. (a) How many electrons can be in the shell?
(b) What are its subshells, and how many electrons can b e in each?
58. (a) What is the minimum value of l for a subshell that contains 11 electrons?
(b) If this subshell is in the shell, what is the spectrosco pic notation for this atom?
59. Unreasonable result. Which of the following spectroscopic notations are not al lowed?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
State which rule is violated for each notation that is no t allowed.

12.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670360. Write the electron configuration for potassium.
61. Write the electron configuration for iron.
62. The valence electron of potassium is excited to a 5d sta te.
(a) What is the magnitude of the electron’s orbital ang ular momentum?
(b) How many states are possible along a chosen direction?
63. (a) If one subshell of an atom has nine electrons in it, what is the minimum value of l?
(b) What is the spectroscopic notation for this atom, if th is subshell is part of the shell?
64. Write the electron configuration for magnesium.
65. Write the electron configuration for carbon.
66. The magnitudes of the resultant spins of the electr ons of the elements B through Ne when in the ground sta te are:
and 0, respectively. Argue that these spins are consistent with Hund’s rule.
8.5 Atomic Spectra and X-rays
67. What is the minimum frequency of a photon required to i onize:
(a) a ion in its ground state?
(b) A ion in its first excited state?
68. The ion makes an atomic transition from an state to an s tate.
(a) What is the energy of the photon emitted during the transition?
(b) What is the wavelength of the photon?
69. The red light emitted by a ruby laser has a wavelength of 694.3 nm. What is the difference in energy betwee n the initial
state and final state corresponding to the emission of the l ight?
70. The yellow light from a sodium-vapor street lamp is produced by a transition of sodium atoms from a 3 p state to a 3 s
state. If the difference in energies of those two states is 2.10 eV, what is the wavelength of the yellow light?
71. Estimate the wavelength of the X-ray from calcium.
72. Estimate the frequency of the X-ray from cesium.
73. X-rays are produced by striking a target with a beam of electrons. Prior to striking the target, the electron s are accelerated
by an electric field through a potential energy dif ference:, where e is the charge of an electron and is the
voltage difference. If volts, what is the minimum wavelen gth of the emitted radiation?
74. For the preceding problem, what happens to the minimum wavelength if the voltage across the X-ray tube is double d?
75. Suppose the experiment in the preceding problem is condu cted with muons. What happens to the minimum wavelength?
76. An X-ray tube accelerates an electron with an applied voltage of 50 kV toward a metal target.
(a) What is the shortest-wavelength X-ray radiation gene rated at the target?
(b) Calculate the photon energy in eV.
(c) Explain the relationship of the photon energy to the appl ied voltage.
77. A color television tube generates some X-rays when it s electron beam strikes the screen. What is the shorte st wavelength
of these X-rays, if a 30.0-kV potential is used to ac celerate the electrons? (Note that TVs have shielding to prevent these Xrays from exposing viewers.)
78. An X-ray tube has an applied voltage of 100 kV.
(a) What is the most energetic X-ray photon it can produc e? Express your answer in electron volts and joules.

12.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76703(b) Find the wavelength of such an X-ray.
79. The maximum characteristic X-ray photon energy come s from the capture of a free electron into a K shell vacancy. What
is this photon energy in keV for tungsten, assuming that the free electron has no initial kinetic energy?
80. What are the approximate energies of the and X-ray s for copper?
81. Compare the X-ray photon wavelengths for copper and gold.
82. The approximate energies of the and X-rays for cop per are and, respectively.
Determine the ratio of X-ray frequencies of gold to c opper, then use this value to estimate the correspo nding energies of
and X-rays for gold.
8.6 Lasers
83. A carbon dioxide laser used in surgery emits infrare d radiation with a wavelength of. In 1.00 ms, this las er raised
the temperature of of flesh to and evaporated it.
(a) How many photons were required? You may assume that fle sh has the same heat of vaporization as water.
(b) What was the minimum power output during the flash?
84. An excimer laser used for vision correction emits UV radia tion with a wavelength of 193 nm.
(a) Calculate the photon energy in eV.
(b) These photons are used to evaporate corneal tissue, which is very similar to water in its properties. Cal culate the
amount of energy needed per molecule of water to mak e the phase change from liquid to gas. That is, divide the heat of
vaporization in kJ/kg by the number of water molecules in a k ilogram.
(c) Convert this to eV and compare to the photon energy. Di scuss the implications.
Additional Problems
85. For a hydrogen atom in an excited state with princip al quantum number n, show that the smallest angle tha t the orbital
angular momentum vector can make with respect to the z-axis is.
86. What is the probability that the 1 s electron of a hydrogen atom is found between and?
87. Sketch the potential energy function of an electron i n a hydrogen atom.
(a) What is the value of this function at? in the limit t hat?
(b) What is unreasonable or inconsistent with the former r esult?
88. Find the value of, the orbital angular momentum quantum number, for the Moon around Earth.
89. Show that the maximum number of orbital angular mome ntum electron states in the nth shell of an atom is. (Ignore
electron spin.) (Hint: Make a table of the total number of orbital angular momentum states for each shell and find the
pattern.)
90. What is the magnitude of an electron magnetic moment?
91. What is the maximum number of electron states in the she ll?
92. A ground-state hydrogen atom is placed in a unifor m magnetic field, and a photon is emitted in the tr ansition from a spinup to spin-down state. The wavelength of the photon is. W hat is the strength of the magnetic field?
93. Show that the maximum number of electron states in the nth sh ell of an atom is.
94. The valence electron of chlorine is excited to a 3 p state.
(a) What is the magnitude of the electron’s orbital ang ular momentum?
(b) What are possible values for the z-component of angular measurement?

12.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670395. Which of the following notations are allowed (that i s, which violate none of the rules regarding values o f quantum
numbers)?
(a);
(b);
(c);
(d);
(e)
96. The ion makes an atomic transition from an state to an s tate.
(a) What is the energy of the photon emitted during the transition?
(b) What is the wavelength of the photon?
97. The maximum characteristic X-ray photon energy comes from the capture of a free electron into a K shell vacancy. What
is this photon frequency for tungsten, assuming that the free electron has no initial kinetic energy?
98. Derive an expression for the ratio of X-ray photon frequen cy for two elements with atomic numbers and.
99. Compare the X-ray photon wavelengths for copper and silve r.
100. (a) What voltage must be applied to an X-ray tube to obtain 0.0100-fm-wavelength X-rays for use in explor ing the
details of nuclei?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
101. A student in a physics laboratory observes a hydrogen spectrum with a diffraction grating for the purpose o f measuring
the wavelengths of the emitted radiation. In the spectrum, she observes a yellow line and finds its wavelength to be 589 nm.
(a) Assuming that this is part of the Balmer series, determ ine, the principal quantum number of the initial state.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
This page titled 12.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

12.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/7670412.S: Atomic Structure (Summary)

12.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76704Key Terms
angular momentum orbital quantum number (l)quantum number associated with the orbital angular mom entum of
an electron in a hydrogen atom
angular momentum projection quantum number (m)quantum number associated with the z-component of the orbital
angular momentum of an electron in a hydrogen atom
atomic orbitalregion in space that encloses a certain percentage (usu ally 90%) of
the electron probability
Bohr magnetonmagnetic moment of an electron, equal to or
braking radiationradiation produced by targeting metal with a high-e nergy electron
beam (or radiation produced by the acceleration of any charged
particle in a material)
chemical groupgroup of elements in the same column of the periodic table that
possess similar chemical properties
coherent light light that consists of photons of the same frequency and phase
covalent bondchemical bond formed by the sharing of electrons betwe en two
atoms
electron configurationrepresentation of the state of electrons in an atom, su ch as
for lithium
fine structuredetailed structure of atomic spectra produced by spin- orbit
coupling
fluorescenceradiation produced by the excitation and subsequent, gradual deexcitation of an electron in an atom
hyperfine structuredetailed structure of atomic spectra produced by spin- orbit
coupling
ionic bondchemical bond formed by the electric attraction bet ween two
oppositely charged ions
laser coherent light produced by a cascade of electron de- excitations
magnetic orbital quantum numberanother term for the angular momentum projection qu antum
number
magnetogrampictoral representation, or map, of the magnetic act ivity at the
Sun’s surface
metastable state state in which an electron “lingers” in an excited stat e
monochromatic light that consists of photons with the same frequency
Moseley plotplot of the atomic number versus the square root of X- ray
frequency
Moseley’s lawrelationship between the atomic number and X-ray phot on
frequency for X-ray production
orbital magnetic dipole momentmeasure of the strength of the magnetic field produce d by the
orbital angular momentum of the electron
Pauli’s exclusion principleno two electrons in an atom can have the same values f or all four
quantum numbers

12.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76704population inversioncondition in which a majority of atoms contain elect rons in a
metastable state
principal quantum number (n)quantum number associated with the total energy of an electron in
a hydrogen atom
radial probability density functionfunction use to determine the probability of a elect ron to be found
in a spatial interval in r
selection rulesrules that determine whether atomic transitions are all owed or
forbidden (rare)
spin projection quantum number ()quantum number associated with the z-component of the spin
angular momentum of an electron
spin quantum number (s)quantum number associated with the spin angular momentu m of
an electron
spin-flip transitionsatomic transitions between states of an electron-proton system in
which the magnetic moments are aligned and not align ed
spin-orbit couplinginteraction between the electron magnetic moment an d the
magnetic field produced by the orbital angular mome ntum of the
electron
stimulated emissionwhen a photon of energy triggers an electron in a me tastable state
to drop in energy emitting an additional photon
transition metalelement that is located in the gap between the first two columns
and the last six columns of the table of elements that contains
electrons that fill the d subshell
valence electronelectron in the outer shell of an atom that particip ates in chemical
bonding
Zeeman effect splitting of energy levels by an external magnetic fi eld
Key Equation
Orbital angular momentum
z-component of orbital angular momentum
Radial probability density function
Spin angular momentum
z-component of spin angular momentum
Electron spin magnetic moment
Electron orbital magnetic dipole moment
Potential energy associated with the magnetic interact ion between
the orbital magnetic dipole moment and an external magnetic field
Maximum number of electrons in a subshell of a hydroge n atom
Selection rule for atomic transitions in a hydrogen-li ke atom
Moseley’s law for X-ray production

12.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76704Summary
8.1 The Hydrogen Atom
A hydrogen atom can be described in terms of its wave fun ction, probability density, total energy, and orbital an gular
momentum.
The state of an electron in a hydrogen atom is specifie d by its quantum numbers (n, l, m).
In contrast to the Bohr model of the atom, the Schrödinger model makes predictions based on probability statements.
The quantum numbers of a hydrogen atom can be used to calc ulate important information about the atom.
8.2 Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
A hydrogen atom has magnetic properties because the mo tion of the electron acts as a current loop.
The energy levels of a hydrogen atom associated with orbit al angular momentum are split by an external magnetic f ield
because the orbital angular magnetic moment interacts wit h the field.
The quantum numbers of an electron in a hydrogen atom ca n be used to calculate the magnitude and direction of t he
orbital magnetic dipole moment of the atom.
8.3 Electron Spin
The state of an electron in a hydrogen atom can be expr essed in terms of five quantum numbers.
The spin angular momentum quantum of an electron is =. The spin angular momentum projection quantum number is
\(\displaystyle m =+½\) or (spin up or spin down).
The fine and hyperfine structures of the hydrogen spectru m are explained by magnetic interactions within the atom.
8.4 The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
Pauli’s exclusion principle states that no two electrons in a n atom can have all the same quantum numbers.
The structure of the periodic table of elements can b e explained in terms of the total energy, orbital angu lar momentum,
and spin of electrons in an atom.
The state of an atom can be expressed by its electron co nfiguration, which describes the shells and subshells th at are filled
in the atom.
8.5 Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Radiation is absorbed and emitted by atomic energy-level transitions.
Quantum numbers can be used to estimate the energy, fre quency, and wavelength of photons produced by atomic
transitions.
Atomic fluorescence occurs when an electron in an atom is excited several steps above the ground state by the absorpt ion
of a high-energy ultraviolet (UV) photon.
X-ray photons are produced when a vacancy in an inner shell of an atom is filled by an electron from the outer shell of
the atom.
The frequency of X-ray radiation is related to the atomic number Z of an atom.
8.6 Lasers
Laser light is coherent (monochromatic and “phase link ed”) light.
Laser light is produced by population inversion and subse quent de-excitation of electrons in a material (solid, liq uid, or
gas).
CD and Blu-Ray players uses lasers to read digital infor mation stored on discs.
This page titled 12.S: Atomic Structure (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.S: Atomic Structure (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.s

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76498Some Equations and Constants
1 Physical Constants
Table B.1: Physical constants
Name Symbol Value
Speed of light
Elementary charge
Electron mass
Proton mass
Gravitational constant
Gravitational acceleration
Boltzmann's Constant
Planck's Constant
2 Moments of Inertia
Table B.2: Moments of inertia, all about axes of symme try through the center of mass.
Object Moment of Inertia
Thin stick (length L)
Ring of hollow cylinder (radius R)
Disk or solid cylinder (radius R)
Hollow sphere (radius R)
Solid sphere (radius R)
Rectangle (size), perpendicular axis
Rectangle (size), axis parallel to side b
3 Solar System Objects
Table B.3: Characteristics of the Sun, Earth and Moon.
Sun Earth Moon
Mass (kg)
Mean radius (m)
Orbital period (s)(200 My) (365.25 days) (27.3 days)
Mean orbital radius (m)
Mean density (kg/m)
Table B.4: Properties of a number of solar system objec ts. Equatorial radii and masses are compared to those of Earth (see Table B.3). Orbital
properties are around primary (the sun for (dwarf) pl anets, the planet for moons). Orbital radii and perio ds for planets again compared to Earth,
for moons in kilograms and days. Rotation period for a ll objects in days. Inclination and axial tilt in deg rees. Data from NASA planetary fact
sheets [31].3

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76498Name SymbolEquatorial
radiusMassMean
orbit
radiusOrbital
periodInclinatio
nOrbital
eccentricit
yRotation
periodConfirme
d moonsAxial tilt
Mercury 0.382 0.06 0.39 0.24 3.38 0.206 58.64 0 0.04
Venus 0.949 0.82 0.72 0.62 3.86 0.007 -243.02 0 177.36
Earth 1 1 1 1 7.25 0.017 1 1 23.44
Moon 0.272 0.0123 384399 27.3215818.2928.580.0549 27.32158 0 6.68
Mars 0.532 0.107 1.52 1.88 5.65 0.093 1.03 2 25.19
Ceres 0.0742 0.00016 2.766 4.599 10.59 0.08 0.3781 0 4
Jupiter 11.209 317.8 5.2 11.86 6.09 0.048 0.41 69 3.13
Io 0.285 0.015 421600 1.769 0.04 0.0041 1.769 0 0
Europa 0.246 0.008 670900 3.551 0.47 0.009 3.551 0 0
Ganymed
e0.423 0.025 1070400 7.155 1.85 0.0013 7.155 0 0
Callisto 0.378 0.018 1882700 16.689 0.2 0.0074 16.689 0 0
Saturn 9.449 95.2 9.54 29.46 5.51 0.054 0.43 62 26.73
Titan 0.404 0.023 1221870 15.945 0.33 0.0288 15.945 0 0
Uranus 4.007 14.6 19.22 84.01 6.48 0.047 -0.72 27 97.77
Oberon 0.119 0.00051 583519 13.46 0.1 0.0014 13.46 0 0
Neptune 3.883 17.2 30.06 164.8 6.43 0.009 0.67 14 28.32
Triton 0.212 0.00358 354759 5.877 157 0.00002 5.877 0 0
Pluto 0.186 0.0022 39.482 247.9 17.14 0.25 6.39 5 119.59
Charon 0.095 0.00025 17536 6.387 0.001 0.0022 6.387 0 unknow n
Haumea 0.13 0.0007 43.335 285.4 28.19 0.19 0.167 2 unknown
Makemak
e0.11 unknown 45.792 309.9 28.96 0.16 unknown 1 unknown
Eris 0.18 0.0028 67.668 557 44.19 0.44 unknown 1 unknown
4 Equations
4.1 B.4.1 Vector Derivatives
Gradient:
Divergence:

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76498Curl:
4.2 B.4.2 Special Relativity
Lorentz transformations for the coordinates of a frame S' that moves with a spee d u in the positive x-direction of frame S:
Velocity addition in a relativistic system:
16.B: Some Equations and Constants by Timon Idema is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://textbooks.open.tudelft.nl/textbooks/catalog/bo ok/14.

Index
A
Absolute Value Function
1.9.11: Functions
acceleration
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
accommodation
9.8: The Eye
activity
11.3: Radioactive Decay
acute otitis media
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
adjacent side
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
adjacent to
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
algebraic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
alpha (α) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
alpha decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
ammeter
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
amount of change
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
Ampère’s law
6.6: Ampère’s Law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
ampere (unit)
4.1: Electrical Current
Ampere' law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
Ampere's law
6.6: Ampère’s Law
angle of depression
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angle of elevation
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angular magnification
9.7: Optical Instruments
angular momentum orbital quantum
number (l)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
angular momentum projection quantum
number (m)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
antiderivative
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
antielectrons
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
antineutrino
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
apparent depth
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
arc length with regards to a circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometryarea vector
2.7: Electric Flux
associative
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
astigmatism
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
atomic mass
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic mass unit
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic nucleus
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic orbital
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
auricle
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
average rate of change
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
B
back EMF
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
base quantities
1.4: Units and Standards
base quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
base unit
1.4: Units and Standards
Base units
1.4: Units and Standards
BCS theory
4.6: Superconductors
becquerel (Bq)
11.3: Radioactive Decay
beta (β) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
beta decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
binding energy (nuclear)
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
binding energy per nucleon (BEN)
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
birefringence
8.3: Polarization
Bohr magneton
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
Bragg planes
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction
braking radiation
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
breeder reactor
11.5: Fission
bremsstrahlung
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Brewster’s angle
8.3: PolarizationBrewster’s law
8.3: Polarization
C
candela
9.8.2: A_Vision
capacitance
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
capacitor
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
capacitors in parallel
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
capacitors in series
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
center of gravity
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
center of mass
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
cerumen impaction
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
charging by induction
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
chart of the nuclides
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
chemical group
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
circadian
9.8.2: A_Vision
circuit
4.1: Electrical Current
circumference of a circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
coaxial cable
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
coherent light
12.6: Lasers
coherent waves
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
color constancy
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
comets
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
Commutative
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
composite function
1.9.11: Functions
concave down
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
concave up
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
Concavity
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
concavity test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
conduction electron
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction

conductive hearing loss
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
conductor
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
cone
9.8.2: A_Vision
conjunctiva
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
conjunctivitis
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
constant multiple rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Constant Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Continuous Charge Distribution
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
conventional current
4.1: Electrical Current
conversion factor
1.5: Unit Conversion
Cooper pairs
4.6: Superconductors
cornea
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
corner reflector
9.2: The Law of Reflection
cosecant
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosine
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosmic rays
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
cotangent
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Coulomb force
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Coulomb’s constant
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Coulomb's law
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
covalent bond
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
Cramer’s rule
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
critical mass
11.5: Fission
critical temperature
4.6: Superconductors
criticality
11.5: Fission
cubic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
curie (Ci)
11.3: Radioactive Decay
current density
4.2: Model of Conduction in MetalsCyclotron
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
cylindrical symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
D
daughter nucleus
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
decay
11.3: Radioactive Decay
decay constant
11.3: Radioactive Decay
decay series
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
decreasing on the interval I
1.9.11: Functions
dees
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
degree
1.9.12: Basic Functions
density function
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
dependent variable
1.9.11: Functions
derivative function
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
derived quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
derived unit
1.4: Units and Standards
derived units
1.4: Units and Standards
destructive interference for a single slit
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
determinants
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
diamagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
dielectric
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
dielectric constant
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
Difference Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Differentiable function
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
differentiable on S
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
diffraction
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
diffraction grating
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
diffraction limit
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
dimensional analysis
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionally consistent
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionless
1.6: Dimensional Analysisdiode
4.4: Ohm's Law
dipole
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
direction angle
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
direction of polarization
8.3: Polarization
discriminant
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
displacement
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Displacement current
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
Distance Formula
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
distributive
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
domain
1.9.11: Functions
dot product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
double angle formula, trigonometric
identity
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
drift velocity
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
E
eddy current
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
electric field
2.5: Electric Field
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
Electric Field inside a Conductors
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
electric flux
2.7: Electric Flux
Electric Generator
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
electric potential
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
electric potential difference
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
Electric potential energy
3.1: Electric Potential Energy
electrical conductivity
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
electrical current
4.1: Electrical Current
electrical energy
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
electrical power
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
electromagnetic energy
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
electromagnetic induction
7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction

Electromagnetic Momentum
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
electromagnetic spectrum
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
electromagnetic waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
electromotive force (emf)
5.1: Electromotive Force
electron configuration
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
electrostatic precipitators
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
electrostatics
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
Eletrical power
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
energy density
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
energy stored in an inductor
7.6: Inductance
English units
1.4: Units and Standards
equal vectors
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
equation in two variables
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
equipotential line
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
Equipotential Surfaces
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
equivalent resistance
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
even function
1.9.11: Functions
exponent
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
extraocular muscles
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
F
far point
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
Faraday’s Law
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
farsightedness
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
ferromagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
Fine structure
12.3: Electron Spin
First Derivative Test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
first focus or object focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
fission
11.5: Fission
fluorescence
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-raysflux
2.7: Electric Flux
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
fovea
9.8.2: A_Vision
free electrons
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
fringes
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
function
1.9.11: Functions
G
gamma (γ) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
Gamma decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
gamma ray
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
gauss (unit)
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
Gauss's law
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
Gaussian surface
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
geometric optics
9.1: The Propagation of Light
graph in two variables
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
graph of a function
1.9.11: Functions
grounding
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
Gudermannian
1.9.21: Integrals
H
Hall effect
6.12: The Hall Effect
hard drives
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
helical motion
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
henry
7.6: Inductance
high dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
hologram
10.11: Holography
holography
10.11: Holography
Hooke’s law
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
horizontally polarized
8.3: Polarization
hues
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
Huygens’s principle
9.3: Huygens’s Principlehydrostatic pressure
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
hyperbolic functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
hyperfine structure
12.3: Electron Spin
hyperopia
9.8: The Eye
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
hypotenuse
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
hysteresis
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
I
image distance
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
image focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
incoherent
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
increasing on the interval I
1.9.11: Functions
indefinite integral
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
independent variable
1.9.11: Functions
index of refraction
9.1: The Propagation of Light
9.4: Refraction
Induced Electric Fields
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
induced emf
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
inductance
7.6: Inductance
inductor
7.6: Inductance
infinite plane
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
infinite straight wire
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
inflection point
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
infrared radiation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
initial value problem
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
Ink Jet Printers
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
insulator
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
Integration by Parts
1.9.21: Integrals
intercepts
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
interference
10.3: Mathematics of Interference

interference order
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
interferometer
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
internal resistance
5.1: Electromotive Force
inverse hyperbolic functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
ion tail
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
ionic bond
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
iridescence
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
Iris
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
isotopes
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
J
Josephson effect
4.6: Superconductors
Josephson junction
4.6: Superconductors
K
kilogram
1.4: Units and Standards
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff's junction rule
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff's loop rule
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Klein bottle
2.8: Gauss’s Law
L
lacrimal duct
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
laser
12.6: Lasers
Laser Printers
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
laser vision correction
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
law
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
law of reflection
9.2: The Law of Reflection
law of refraction
9.4: Refraction
lens
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
lifetime
11.3: Radioactive Decay
light
9.1: The Propagation of Lightlinear charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
linear function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
liquid drop model
11.5: Fission
Logarithmic Function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Lorentz force
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
low dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
M
magnetic damping
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
magnetic dipole
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnetic dipole moment
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
magnetic domains
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
magnetic field
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and
Fields
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
magnetic field lines
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
magnetic flux
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
magnetic foce
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
Magnetic force
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
magnetic forces
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and
Fields
magnetic monopole
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
magnetic orbital quantum number
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
magnetic susceptibility
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
Magnetic torque
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
magnetogram
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnification
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
magnifying glass
9.7: Optical Instruments
magnitude
1.8.3: Scalars and VectorsMalus’s law
8.3: Polarization
marginal cost
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
marginal profit
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
marginal revenue
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
mass defect
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
mass number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Mass Spectrometer
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
mathematical model
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Maxwell's equations
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
Meissner effect
4.6: Superconductors
metals
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
metastable state
12.6: Lasers
meter
1.4: Units and Standards
metric system
1.4: Units and Standards
Michelson interferometer
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
microwaves
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Midpoint Formula
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
missing order
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction
model
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
moderate dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
moments of inertia
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
monochromatic
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
12.6: Lasers
Moseley plot
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Moseley’s law
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Motion of charged particle
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
Motional Emf
7.2: Motional Emf
mutual inductance
7.6: Inductance

myopia
9.8: The Eye
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
N
natural exponential function
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
natural logarithm
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
near point
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
nearsightedness
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
neutrino
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
neutron number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Newton’s rings
10.5: Interference in Thin Films
nonohmic
4.4: Ohm's Law
north magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
nuclear binding energy
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
nuclear fusion
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nuclear fusion reactor
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nucleons
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
nucleosynthesis
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nuclide
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
null vector
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
number e
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Numerical Aperture (NA)
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
O
object distance
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
object focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
odd function
1.9.11: Functions
ohm
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
Ohm’s law
4.4: Ohm's Law
ohmic
4.4: Ohm's Law
opposite
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
opposite side
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometryoptic nerve
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
optical power
9.8: The Eye
optically active
8.3: Polarization
orbital magnetic dipole moment
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
order
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
order of magnitude
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
orthogonal vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Oscar Had A Heap Of Apples
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
otitis externa
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
ototoxic medications
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
P
parallel circuit
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel combination
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
parallel lines
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
parallel postulate
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
parallel vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
paramagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
parent nucleus
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
Pauli’s exclusion principle
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
peak emf
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
periodic function
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
permeability of free space
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law
permittivity of free space
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
permittivity of vacuum
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
physical quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
physics
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
planar symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
plane mirror
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
plane waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
points of inflection
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graphpolarization
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
8.3: Polarization
polarized
8.3: Polarization
polynomial function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
population growth rate
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
population inversion
12.6: Lasers
Positron
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
positron emission tomography (PET)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
potential difference
5.1: Electromotive Force
potential drop
5.1: Electromotive Force
power function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
power rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
poynting vector
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
presbycusis
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
presbyopia
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
principal maximum
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
principal quantum number (n)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
principle of superposition
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
product rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
pupil
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
pyramid
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
pythagorean identities, trigonometric
identities
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
Pythagorean Theorem
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
Q
Q value
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
quadratic formula
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
quadratic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
quotient rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules

R
radar
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radial density
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
radial probability density function
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
Radians
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
radiation dose unit (rad)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radiation pressure
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
radio tower
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
radio waves
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radioactive dating
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radioactive decay law
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radioactive tags
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radioactivity
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radiopharmaceutical
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radius of a nucleus
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
radius of gyration
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
range
1.9.11: Functions
rational function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
ray
9.1: The Propagation of Light
Rayleigh criterion
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
RC circuit
5.6: RC Circuits
real image
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
refraction
9.4: Refraction
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
resistance
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
resistivity
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
Resistors in Parallel
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistors in series
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resolution
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolutionresultant
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
resultant vector
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
retina
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
retinex
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
retinex theory of color vision
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
Retroreflectors
9.2: The Law of Reflection
rhodopsin
9.8.2: A_Vision
right triangle
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
right triangle trigonometry, applied
problems
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
rod
9.8.2: A_Vision
rods and cones
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
roentgen equivalent man (rem)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
root function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
S
scalar components
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
scalar equation
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
scalar field
2.5: Electric Field
scalar product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
schematic
4.1: Electrical Current
sclera
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
secant
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
second
1.4: Units and Standards
second derivative test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
second focus or image focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
secondary maximum
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
selection rules
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
sensorineural hearing loss
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
series circuit
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
series combination
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallelshock hazard
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
SI units
1.4: Units and Standards
sievert (Sv)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
Simple Magnifer
9.7: Optical Instruments
simplified theory of color vision
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
sine
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
slope
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Snell’s law of refraction
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
9.4: Refraction
Snellen chart
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
SohCahToa
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Solenoids
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
south magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
spectroscopic dispersion
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
speed
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
spherical symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
spin projection quantum number
12.3: Electron Spin
spin projection quantum number (msms)
12.3: Electron Spin
spin quantum number (s)
12.3: Electron Spin
SQUID
4.6: Superconductors
stimulated emission
12.6: Lasers
strong nuclear force
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Sum Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
superconductors
4.6: Superconductors
superior colliculus
9.8.2: A_Vision
superposition
2.5: Electric Field
suprachiasmatic nucleus
9.8.2: A_Vision
surface charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
symmetry about the origin
1.9.11: Functions

T
table of values
1.9.11: Functions
tangent
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
terminal voltage
5.1: Electromotive Force
tesla (unit)
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
Thales
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
the component form of a vector
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
The Dot Product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
The Scalar Product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
Theory
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
thermal agitation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermal hazard
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
tinnitus
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
tonic activity
9.8.2: A_Vision
Toroids
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
transcendental function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
transformation of a function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
transition metal
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
transmission hologram
10.11: Holography
transuranic element
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
transversal
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurementstransverse wave
8.3: Polarization
tree, how tall
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
trigonometric functions
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
trigonometric identity
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
tympanic membrane
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
U
ultraviolet radiation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
unit circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
Unit vector
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Units
1.4: Units and Standards
unpolarized
8.3: Polarization
V
valence electron
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
Van de Graaff generator
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
vector components
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
vector equation
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
vector field
2.5: Electric Field
vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equationsvertical line test
1.9.11: Functions
vertically polarized
8.3: Polarization
vertigo
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
vestibulocochlear nerve
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
virtual image
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
visible light
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
vision
9.8.2: A_Vision
voltage
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
voltmeter
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
volume charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
W
wave optics
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
work
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
X
xerography
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
Y
Young double slit
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Z
Zeeman effect
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
zeros of a function
1.9.11: Functions

Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76497Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: GSU-TM-Physics II (2212)
Webpages: 205
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 70.2% (144 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 17.1% (35 pages)
Undeclared: 9.3% (19 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 1.5% (3 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 1.5% (3 pages)
CC BY 3.0: 0.5% (1 page)
By Page
GSU-TM-Physics II (2212) - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
The Fabric of Physics - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Physics, Measurements and
Mathematics Tools - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant
Figures - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.4: Units and Standards - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.5: Unit Conversion - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.6: Dimensional Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.8: Vectors - Undeclared
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.6: Products of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.01.9: Math Review of Other Topics - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.1: Geometrical Shapes - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.2: Triangles - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines - CC BYNC-SA 3.0
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs - CC BY 4.0
1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations - CC BY 4.0
1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations
Using The Substitution Method - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations
Using the Elimination Method - Undeclared
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule - CC BY 4.0
1.9.11: Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.12: Basic Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.15: Derivatives - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/764971.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima
and Minima, Optimization - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals - CC BY-SA
4.0
1.9.21: Integrals - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments
of Inertia - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.25: Table of Integrals - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.26: Further Vector Topics - Undeclared
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential
equations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2: Electrostatics - Charges, Forces and Fields - CC BY
4.0
2.1: Unit Learning Outcomes - Undeclared
2.2: Electrical Charge - CC BY 4.0
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction - CC BY 4.0
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law - CC BY 4.0
2.5: Electric Field - CC BY 4.0
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions - CC BY 4.0
2.7: Electric Flux - CC BY 4.0
2.8: Gauss’s Law - CC BY 4.0
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law - CC BY 4.0
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium - CC
BY 4.0
2.11: Summary - CC BY 4.0
2.12: Practice - CC BY 4.0
2.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer) - CC BY
4.0
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Electric Potential Energy - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference - CC
BY 4.0
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors - CC BY
4.0
3.4: Determining Field from Potential - CC BY 4.0
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics - CC BY 4.0
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel - CC BY 4.0
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor - CC BY 4.0
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric - CC BY 4.0
3.E: Practice - CC BY 4.0
3.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
4: Current and Resistance - CC BY 4.04.1: Electrical Current - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals - CC BY 4.0
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance - CC BY 4.0
4.4: Ohm's Law - CC BY 4.0
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power - CC BY 4.0
4.6: Superconductors - CC BY 4.0
4.7: Practice - CC BY 4.0
4.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
4.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
5: Resistive Networks - CC BY 4.0
5.1: Electromotive Force - CC BY 4.0
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules - CC BY 4.0
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety - CC BY
4.0
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments - CC BY 4.0
5.6: RC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
5.7: Practice - CC BY 4.0
5.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and Fields CC BY 4.0
6.1: Introduction to Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter CC BY 4.0
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines - CC BY 4.0
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law - CC BY 4.0
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop - CC BY 4.0
6.6: Ampère’s Law - CC BY 4.0
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids - CC BY 4.0
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
- CC BY 4.0
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields - CC
BY 4.0
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor - CC BY 4.0
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop - CC BY
4.0
6.12: The Hall Effect - CC BY 4.0
6.13: Magnetism in Matter - CC BY 4.0
6.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary) - CC BY
4.0
1.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary) - CC
BY 4.0
7: Electromagnetic Induction - CC BY 4.0
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws - CC BY 4.0
7.2: Motional Emf - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Induced Electric Fields - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping - CC BY
4.0

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/764977.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf - CC BY 4.0
7.6: Inductance - CC BY 4.0
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction - CC
BY 4.0
7.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current - CC
BY 4.0
7.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers) - CC BY
4.0
7.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and
Electrical Technologies (Exercise) - CC BY 4.0
7.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary) - CC BY
4.0
8: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
- CC BY 4.0
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves - CC
BY 4.0
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure - CC BY 4.0
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum - CC BY 4.0
8.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) - CC BY 4.0
8.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
8.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
9: Geometrical Optics - CC BY 4.0
9.1: The Propagation of Light - CC BY 4.0
9.2: The Law of Reflection - CC BY 4.0
9.3: Huygens’s Principle - CC BY 4.0
9.4: Refraction - CC BY 4.0
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction - CC BY 4.0
9.7: Optical Instruments - CC BY 4.0
9.8: The Eye - CC BY 4.0
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts - CC BY-SA 4.0
9.8.2: A_Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.3: Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.4: Vision_Correction - CC BY 4.0
9.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information - CC BY 3.0
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light Undeclared
9.8.8: Biology of vision - Undeclared
9.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Answers) - CC BY 4.0
9.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Exercises) - CC BY 4.09.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Summary) - CC BY 4.0
10: Physical Optics - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Interference and Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.3: Mathematics of Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.5: Interference in Thin Films - CC BY 4.0
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.8: Diffraction Gratings - CC BY 4.0
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution - CC BY 4.0
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.11: Holography - CC BY 4.0
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer - CC BY 4.0
10.A: Interference (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Diffraction (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
10.E: Interference (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
10.S: Interference (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Diffraction (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
11: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
11.1: Properties of Nuclei - CC BY 4.0
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy - CC BY 4.0
11.3: Radioactive Decay - CC BY 4.0
11.4: Nuclear Reactions - CC BY 4.0
11.5: Fission - CC BY 4.0
11.6: Nuclear Fusion - CC BY 4.0
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation - CC BY 4.0
11.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
11.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
12: Atomic Structure - CC BY 4.0
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom - CC BY 4.0
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron - CC BY 4.0
12.3: Electron Spin - CC BY 4.0
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
- CC BY 4.0
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays - CC BY 4.0
12.6: Lasers - CC BY 4.0
12.A: Atomic Structure (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
12.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
12.S: Atomic Structure (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/76497Some Equations and Constants - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Detailed Licensing - UndeclaredDetailed Licensing - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/87805Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: GSU-TM-Physics II (2212)
Webpages: 205
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 70.2% (144 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 17.1% (35 pages)
Undeclared: 9.3% (19 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 1.5% (3 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 1.5% (3 pages)
CC BY 3.0: 0.5% (1 page)
By Page
GSU-TM-Physics II (2212) - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
The Fabric of Physics - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Physics, Measurements and
Mathematics Tools - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.3: Measurements, Uncertainty and Significant
Figures - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.4: Units and Standards - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.5: Unit Conversion - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.6: Dimensional Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.8: Vectors - Undeclared
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.8.6: Products of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.01.9: Math Review of Other Topics - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.1: Geometrical Shapes - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.2: Triangles - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.9.4: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines - CC BYNC-SA 3.0
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs - CC BY 4.0
1.9.6: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations - CC BY 4.0
1.9.8: Solving a System of Linear Equations
Using The Substitution Method - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.9: Solving a System of Linear Equations
Using the Elimination Method - Undeclared
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule - CC BY 4.0
1.9.11: Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.12: Basic Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.15: Derivatives - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/878051.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima
and Minima, Optimization - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.20: Anti derivatives and integrals - CC BY-SA
4.0
1.9.21: Integrals - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments
of Inertia - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.25: Table of Integrals - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.9.26: Further Vector Topics - Undeclared
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential
equations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2: Electrostatics - Charges, Forces and Fields - CC BY
4.0
2.1: Unit Learning Outcomes - Undeclared
2.2: Electrical Charge - CC BY 4.0
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction - CC BY 4.0
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law - CC BY 4.0
2.5: Electric Field - CC BY 4.0
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions - CC BY 4.0
2.7: Electric Flux - CC BY 4.0
2.8: Gauss’s Law - CC BY 4.0
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law - CC BY 4.0
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium - CC
BY 4.0
2.11: Summary - CC BY 4.0
2.12: Practice - CC BY 4.0
2.13: Electric Charges and Fields (Answer) - CC BY
4.0
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Electric Potential Energy - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference - CC
BY 4.0
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors - CC BY
4.0
3.4: Determining Field from Potential - CC BY 4.0
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics - CC BY 4.0
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel - CC BY 4.0
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor - CC BY 4.0
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric - CC BY 4.0
3.E: Practice - CC BY 4.0
3.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
4: Current and Resistance - CC BY 4.04.1: Electrical Current - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals - CC BY 4.0
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance - CC BY 4.0
4.4: Ohm's Law - CC BY 4.0
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power - CC BY 4.0
4.6: Superconductors - CC BY 4.0
4.7: Practice - CC BY 4.0
4.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
4.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
5: Resistive Networks - CC BY 4.0
5.1: Electromotive Force - CC BY 4.0
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules - CC BY 4.0
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety - CC BY
4.0
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments - CC BY 4.0
5.6: RC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
5.7: Practice - CC BY 4.0
5.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and Fields CC BY 4.0
6.1: Introduction to Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter CC BY 4.0
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines - CC BY 4.0
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law - CC BY 4.0
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop - CC BY 4.0
6.6: Ampère’s Law - CC BY 4.0
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids - CC BY 4.0
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
- CC BY 4.0
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields - CC
BY 4.0
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor - CC BY 4.0
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop - CC BY
4.0
6.12: The Hall Effect - CC BY 4.0
6.13: Magnetism in Matter - CC BY 4.0
6.S: Magnetic Forces and Fields (Summary) - CC BY
4.0
1.S: Sources of Magnetic Fields (Summary) - CC
BY 4.0
7: Electromagnetic Induction - CC BY 4.0
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws - CC BY 4.0
7.2: Motional Emf - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Induced Electric Fields - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping - CC BY
4.0

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/878057.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf - CC BY 4.0
7.6: Inductance - CC BY 4.0
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction - CC
BY 4.0
7.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current - CC
BY 4.0
7.A: Electromagnetic Induction (Answers) - CC BY
4.0
7.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and
Electrical Technologies (Exercise) - CC BY 4.0
7.S: Electromagnetic Induction (Summary) - CC BY
4.0
8: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
- CC BY 4.0
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves - CC
BY 4.0
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure - CC BY 4.0
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum - CC BY 4.0
8.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) - CC BY 4.0
8.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
8.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
9: Geometrical Optics - CC BY 4.0
9.1: The Propagation of Light - CC BY 4.0
9.2: The Law of Reflection - CC BY 4.0
9.3: Huygens’s Principle - CC BY 4.0
9.4: Refraction - CC BY 4.0
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction - CC BY 4.0
9.7: Optical Instruments - CC BY 4.0
9.8: The Eye - CC BY 4.0
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts - CC BY-SA 4.0
9.8.2: A_Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.3: Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.4: Vision_Correction - CC BY 4.0
9.8.5: Processing_Visual_Information - CC BY 3.0
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision - CC BY 4.0
9.8.7: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light Undeclared
9.8.8: Biology of vision - Undeclared
9.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Answers) - CC BY 4.0
9.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Exercises) - CC BY 4.09.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Summary) - CC BY 4.0
10: Physical Optics - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Interference and Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.3: Mathematics of Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
10.5: Interference in Thin Films - CC BY 4.0
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.8: Diffraction Gratings - CC BY 4.0
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution - CC BY 4.0
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
10.11: Holography - CC BY 4.0
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer - CC BY 4.0
10.A: Interference (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Diffraction (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
10.E: Interference (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
10.S: Interference (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Diffraction (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
11: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
11.1: Properties of Nuclei - CC BY 4.0
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy - CC BY 4.0
11.3: Radioactive Decay - CC BY 4.0
11.4: Nuclear Reactions - CC BY 4.0
11.5: Fission - CC BY 4.0
11.6: Nuclear Fusion - CC BY 4.0
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation - CC BY 4.0
11.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
11.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
12: Atomic Structure - CC BY 4.0
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom - CC BY 4.0
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron - CC BY 4.0
12.3: Electron Spin - CC BY 4.0
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
- CC BY 4.0
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays - CC BY 4.0
12.6: Lasers - CC BY 4.0
12.A: Atomic Structure (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
12.E: Atomic Structure (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
12.S: Atomic Structure (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/87805Some Equations and Constants - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Detailed Licensing - UndeclaredDetailed Licensing - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared

Index
A
Absolute Value Function
1.9.11: Functions
acceleration
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
accommodation
9.8: The Eye
activity
11.3: Radioactive Decay
acute otitis media
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
adjacent side
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
adjacent to
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
algebraic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
alpha (α) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
alpha decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
ammeter
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
amount of change
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
Ampère’s law
6.6: Ampère’s Law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
ampere (unit)
4.1: Electrical Current
Ampere' law
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
Ampere's law
6.6: Ampère’s Law
angle of depression
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angle of elevation
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angular magnification
9.7: Optical Instruments
angular momentum orbital quantum
number (l)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
angular momentum projection quantum
number (m)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
antiderivative
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
antielectrons
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
antineutrino
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
apparent depth
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
arc length with regards to a circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometryarea vector
2.7: Electric Flux
associative
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
astigmatism
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
atomic mass
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic mass unit
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic nucleus
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
atomic orbital
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
auricle
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
average rate of change
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
B
back EMF
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
base quantities
1.4: Units and Standards
base quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
base unit
1.4: Units and Standards
Base units
1.4: Units and Standards
BCS theory
4.6: Superconductors
becquerel (Bq)
11.3: Radioactive Decay
beta (β) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
beta decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
binding energy (nuclear)
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
binding energy per nucleon (BEN)
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
birefringence
8.3: Polarization
Bohr magneton
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
Bragg planes
10.10: X-Ray Diffraction
braking radiation
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
breeder reactor
11.5: Fission
bremsstrahlung
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Brewster’s angle
8.3: PolarizationBrewster’s law
8.3: Polarization
C
candela
9.8.2: A_Vision
capacitance
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
capacitor
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
capacitors in parallel
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
capacitors in series
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
center of gravity
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
center of mass
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
cerumen impaction
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
charging by induction
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
chart of the nuclides
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
chemical group
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
circadian
9.8.2: A_Vision
circuit
4.1: Electrical Current
circumference of a circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
coaxial cable
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
coherent light
12.6: Lasers
coherent waves
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
color constancy
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
comets
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
Commutative
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
composite function
1.9.11: Functions
concave down
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
concave up
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
Concavity
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
concavity test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
conduction electron
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction

conductive hearing loss
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
conductor
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
cone
9.8.2: A_Vision
conjunctiva
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
conjunctivitis
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
constant multiple rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Constant Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Continuous Charge Distribution
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
conventional current
4.1: Electrical Current
conversion factor
1.5: Unit Conversion
Cooper pairs
4.6: Superconductors
cornea
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
corner reflector
9.2: The Law of Reflection
cosecant
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosine
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosmic rays
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
cotangent
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Coulomb force
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Coulomb’s constant
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
Coulomb's law
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
covalent bond
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
Cramer’s rule
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
critical mass
11.5: Fission
critical temperature
4.6: Superconductors
criticality
11.5: Fission
cubic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
curie (Ci)
11.3: Radioactive Decay
current density
4.2: Model of Conduction in MetalsCyclotron
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
cylindrical symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
D
daughter nucleus
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
decay
11.3: Radioactive Decay
decay constant
11.3: Radioactive Decay
decay series
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
decreasing on the interval I
1.9.11: Functions
dees
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
degree
1.9.12: Basic Functions
density function
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
dependent variable
1.9.11: Functions
derivative function
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
derived quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
derived unit
1.4: Units and Standards
derived units
1.4: Units and Standards
destructive interference for a single slit
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
determinants
1.9.10: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
diamagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
dielectric
3.6: Capacitors and Capacitance
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
dielectric constant
3.9: Capacitor with a Dielectric
Difference Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
Differentiable function
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
differentiable on S
1.9.16: The Derivative as a Function
diffraction
10.6: Single-Slit Diffraction
diffraction grating
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
diffraction limit
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
dimensional analysis
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionally consistent
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionless
1.6: Dimensional Analysisdiode
4.4: Ohm's Law
dipole
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
direction angle
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
direction of polarization
8.3: Polarization
discriminant
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
displacement
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Displacement current
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
Distance Formula
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
distributive
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
domain
1.9.11: Functions
dot product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
double angle formula, trigonometric
identity
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
drift velocity
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
E
eddy current
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
electric field
2.5: Electric Field
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
Electric Field inside a Conductors
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
electric flux
2.7: Electric Flux
Electric Generator
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
electric potential
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
3.4: Determining Field from Potential
electric potential difference
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
Electric potential energy
3.1: Electric Potential Energy
electrical conductivity
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
electrical current
4.1: Electrical Current
electrical energy
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
electrical power
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
electromagnetic energy
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
electromagnetic induction
7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction

Electromagnetic Momentum
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
electromagnetic spectrum
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
electromagnetic waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
electromotive force (emf)
5.1: Electromotive Force
electron configuration
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
electrostatic precipitators
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
electrostatics
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
Eletrical power
4.5: Electrical Energy and Power
energy density
3.8: Energy Stored in a Capacitor
energy stored in an inductor
7.6: Inductance
English units
1.4: Units and Standards
equal vectors
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
equation in two variables
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
equipotential line
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
Equipotential Surfaces
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
equivalent resistance
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
even function
1.9.11: Functions
exponent
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
extraocular muscles
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
F
far point
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
Faraday’s Law
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
farsightedness
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
ferromagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
Fine structure
12.3: Electron Spin
First Derivative Test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
first focus or object focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
fission
11.5: Fission
fluorescence
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-raysflux
2.7: Electric Flux
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
fovea
9.8.2: A_Vision
free electrons
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
fringes
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
function
1.9.11: Functions
G
gamma (γ) rays
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
Gamma decay
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
gamma ray
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
gauss (unit)
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
Gauss's law
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
3: Electric Potential and Capacitance
Gaussian surface
2.8: Gauss’s Law
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
geometric optics
9.1: The Propagation of Light
graph in two variables
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
graph of a function
1.9.11: Functions
grounding
3.3: Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
Gudermannian
1.9.21: Integrals
H
Hall effect
6.12: The Hall Effect
hard drives
7.7: Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
helical motion
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
henry
7.6: Inductance
high dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
hologram
10.11: Holography
holography
10.11: Holography
Hooke’s law
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
horizontally polarized
8.3: Polarization
hues
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
Huygens’s principle
9.3: Huygens’s Principlehydrostatic pressure
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
hyperbolic functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
hyperfine structure
12.3: Electron Spin
hyperopia
9.8: The Eye
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
hypotenuse
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
hysteresis
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
I
image distance
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
image focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
incoherent
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
increasing on the interval I
1.9.11: Functions
indefinite integral
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
independent variable
1.9.11: Functions
index of refraction
9.1: The Propagation of Light
9.4: Refraction
Induced Electric Fields
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
induced emf
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
7.3: Induced Electric Fields
inductance
7.6: Inductance
inductor
7.6: Inductance
infinite plane
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
infinite straight wire
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
inflection point
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
infrared radiation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
initial value problem
1.9.22: Anti-derivatives
Ink Jet Printers
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
insulator
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
Integration by Parts
1.9.21: Integrals
intercepts
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
interference
10.3: Mathematics of Interference

interference order
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
interferometer
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
internal resistance
5.1: Electromotive Force
inverse hyperbolic functions
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
ion tail
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
ionic bond
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
iridescence
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
Iris
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
isotopes
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
J
Josephson effect
4.6: Superconductors
Josephson junction
4.6: Superconductors
K
kilogram
1.4: Units and Standards
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff's junction rule
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff's loop rule
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
5.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
Klein bottle
2.8: Gauss’s Law
L
lacrimal duct
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
laser
12.6: Lasers
Laser Printers
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
laser vision correction
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
law
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
law of reflection
9.2: The Law of Reflection
law of refraction
9.4: Refraction
lens
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
lifetime
11.3: Radioactive Decay
light
9.1: The Propagation of Lightlinear charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
linear function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
liquid drop model
11.5: Fission
Logarithmic Function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Lorentz force
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
low dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
M
magnetic damping
7.4: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
magnetic dipole
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnetic dipole moment
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
magnetic domains
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
magnetic field
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and
Fields
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
magnetic field lines
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
magnetic flux
7.1: Faraday and Lenz’s Laws
magnetic foce
6.5: Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
Magnetic force
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
6.10: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
magnetic forces
6: Sources of Magnetism, Magnetic Forces and
Fields
magnetic monopole
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
magnetic orbital quantum number
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
magnetic susceptibility
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
Magnetic torque
6.11: Force and Torque on a Current Loop
magnetogram
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
magnification
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
magnifying glass
9.7: Optical Instruments
magnitude
1.8.3: Scalars and VectorsMalus’s law
8.3: Polarization
marginal cost
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
marginal profit
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
marginal revenue
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
mass defect
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
mass number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Mass Spectrometer
6.9: Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
mathematical model
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Maxwell's equations
8.1: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
Meissner effect
4.6: Superconductors
metals
4.2: Model of Conduction in Metals
metastable state
12.6: Lasers
meter
1.4: Units and Standards
metric system
1.4: Units and Standards
Michelson interferometer
10.12: The Michelson Interferometer
microwaves
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Midpoint Formula
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
missing order
10.7: Double-Slit Diffraction
model
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
moderate dose
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
moments of inertia
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
monochromatic
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
12.6: Lasers
Moseley plot
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Moseley’s law
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
Motion of charged particle
6.8: Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
Field
Motional Emf
7.2: Motional Emf
mutual inductance
7.6: Inductance

myopia
9.8: The Eye
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
N
natural exponential function
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
natural logarithm
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
near point
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
nearsightedness
9.8: The Eye
9.8.4: Vision_Correction
neutrino
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
neutron number
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Newton’s rings
10.5: Interference in Thin Films
nonohmic
4.4: Ohm's Law
north magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
nuclear binding energy
11.2: Nuclear Binding Energy
nuclear fusion
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nuclear fusion reactor
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nucleons
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
nucleosynthesis
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
nuclide
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
null vector
1.8.5: Algebra of Vectors
number e
1.9.14: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Numerical Aperture (NA)
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
O
object distance
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
object focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
odd function
1.9.11: Functions
ohm
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
Ohm’s law
4.4: Ohm's Law
ohmic
4.4: Ohm's Law
opposite
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
opposite side
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometryoptic nerve
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
optical power
9.8: The Eye
optically active
8.3: Polarization
orbital magnetic dipole moment
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
order
10.3: Mathematics of Interference
order of magnitude
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
orthogonal vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Oscar Had A Heap Of Apples
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
otitis externa
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
ototoxic medications
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
P
parallel circuit
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel combination
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
parallel lines
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
parallel postulate
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurements
parallel vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
paramagnetic materials
6.13: Magnetism in Matter
parent nucleus
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
Pauli’s exclusion principle
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
peak emf
7.5: Electric Generators and Back Emf
periodic function
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
permeability of free space
6.4: The Biot-Savart Law
permittivity of free space
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
permittivity of vacuum
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
physical quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
physics
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
planar symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
plane mirror
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
plane waves
8.2: Electromagnetic Waves
points of inflection
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graphpolarization
2.3: Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction
2.10: Conductors in Electrostatic Equilibrium
8.3: Polarization
polarized
8.3: Polarization
polynomial function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
population growth rate
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
population inversion
12.6: Lasers
Positron
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
positron emission tomography (PET)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
potential difference
5.1: Electromotive Force
potential drop
5.1: Electromotive Force
power function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
power rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
poynting vector
8.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
presbycusis
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
presbyopia
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
principal maximum
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
principal quantum number (n)
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
principle of superposition
2.4: Electrostatic Force - Coulomb's Law
product rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
pupil
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
pyramid
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
pythagorean identities, trigonometric
identities
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
Pythagorean Theorem
1.9.5: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
Q
Q value
11.6: Nuclear Fusion
quadratic formula
1.9.7: Solving Quadratic Equations
quadratic function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
quotient rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules

R
radar
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radial density
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
radial probability density function
12.1: The Hydrogen Atom
Radians
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
radiation dose unit (rad)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radiation pressure
8.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
radio tower
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
radio waves
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radioactive dating
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radioactive decay law
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radioactive tags
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radioactivity
11.3: Radioactive Decay
radiopharmaceutical
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radius of a nucleus
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
radius of gyration
1.9.24: Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of
Inertia
range
1.9.11: Functions
rational function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
ray
9.1: The Propagation of Light
Rayleigh criterion
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolution
RC circuit
5.6: RC Circuits
real image
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
refraction
9.4: Refraction
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
resistance
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
resistivity
4.3: Resistivity and Resistance
Resistors in Parallel
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistors in series
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resolution
10.9: Circular Apertures and Resolutionresultant
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
resultant vector
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
retina
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
9.8.2: A_Vision
retinex
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
retinex theory of color vision
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
Retroreflectors
9.2: The Law of Reflection
rhodopsin
9.8.2: A_Vision
right triangle
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
right triangle trigonometry, applied
problems
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
rod
9.8.2: A_Vision
rods and cones
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
roentgen equivalent man (rem)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
root function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
S
scalar components
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
scalar equation
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
scalar field
2.5: Electric Field
scalar product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
schematic
4.1: Electrical Current
sclera
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
secant
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
second
1.4: Units and Standards
second derivative test
1.9.17: Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph
second focus or image focus
9.6: Images Formed by Refraction
secondary maximum
10.4: Multiple-Slit Interference
selection rules
12.5: Atomic Spectra and X-rays
sensorineural hearing loss
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
series circuit
5.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
series combination
3.7: Capacitors in Series and in Parallelshock hazard
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
SI units
1.4: Units and Standards
sievert (Sv)
11.7: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
Simple Magnifer
9.7: Optical Instruments
simplified theory of color vision
9.8.6: Color_and_Color_Vision
sine
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
slope
1.9.12: Basic Functions
Snell’s law of refraction
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
9.4: Refraction
Snellen chart
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
SohCahToa
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Solenoids
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
south magnetic pole
6.2: Magnets, Electromagnets and Magnetic Matter
spectroscopic dispersion
10.8: Diffraction Gratings
speed
1.9.19: Applications- Rates of Change, Linear
Approximation, Calculating Uncertainty, Maxima and
Minima, Optimization
spherical symmetry
2.9: Applying Gauss’s Law
spin projection quantum number
12.3: Electron Spin
spin projection quantum number (msms)
12.3: Electron Spin
spin quantum number (s)
12.3: Electron Spin
SQUID
4.6: Superconductors
stimulated emission
12.6: Lasers
strong nuclear force
11.1: Properties of Nuclei
Sum Rule
1.9.18: Differentiation Rules
superconductors
4.6: Superconductors
superior colliculus
9.8.2: A_Vision
superposition
2.5: Electric Field
suprachiasmatic nucleus
9.8.2: A_Vision
surface charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
symmetry about the origin
1.9.11: Functions

T
table of values
1.9.11: Functions
tangent
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
terminal voltage
5.1: Electromotive Force
tesla (unit)
6.3: Magnetic Fields and Lines
Thales
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
the component form of a vector
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
The Dot Product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
The Scalar Product
1.8.6: Products of Vectors
Theory
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
thermal agitation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermal hazard
5.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
tinnitus
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
tonic activity
9.8.2: A_Vision
Toroids
6.7: Solenoids and Toroids
transcendental function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
transformation of a function
1.9.12: Basic Functions
transition metal
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Tabl e
transmission hologram
10.11: Holography
transuranic element
11.4: Nuclear Reactions
transversal
1.9.3: Finding Angle Measurementstransverse wave
8.3: Polarization
tree, how tall
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
trigonometric functions
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
trigonometric identity
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
tympanic membrane
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
U
ultraviolet radiation
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
unit circle
1.8.1: Review of Trigonometry
1.8.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
1.9.13: Trigonometric Functions
Unit vector
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
Units
1.4: Units and Standards
unpolarized
8.3: Polarization
V
valence electron
12.4: The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
Van de Graaff generator
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
vector components
1.8.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
vector equation
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
vector field
2.5: Electric Field
vectors
1.8.3: Scalars and Vectors
1.9.27: Math-vector basics and diffrential equationsvertical line test
1.9.11: Functions
vertically polarized
8.3: Polarization
vertigo
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
vestibulocochlear nerve
9.8.1: Ear Basic Concepts
virtual image
9.5: Images Formed by Mirrors
visible light
8.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
vision
9.8.2: A_Vision
voltage
3.2: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
voltmeter
5.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
volume charge density
2.6: Calculating Electric Fields of Charge
Distributions
W
wave optics
9.3: Huygens’s Principle
work
1.9.23: Physical Applications of Integration
X
xerography
3.5: Applications of Electrostatics
Y
Young double slit
10.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Z
Zeeman effect
12.2: Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron
zeros of a function
1.9.11: Functions

Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1